Housing Programs Extension Act of 1994 - Directs the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development to offer owners 24-month extensions of expiring section 8 assistance contracts.
Authorizes tenant displacement assistance in cases of unextended contracts.
Authorizes appropriations.
Amends the United States Housing Act of 1937 to: include Rockland County, New York, as a special median income area; reduce disaster and emergency modernization funding set-asides; and set aside specified modernization funds for anti-crime activities.
Amends the Housing and Community Development Act of 1987 to extend set-aside grant authority through FY 1995 for low-income housing preservation and homeownership acquisition grants and technical assistance and capacity building.
Amends the National Housing Act to authorize appropriations through FY 1995 for the flexible subsidy program.
Amends the Housing and Urban Development Act of 1968 to authorize appropriations through FY 1995 for specified housing counseling services.
Amends the United States Housing Act of 1937 to extend set-aside authority through FY 1995 for public housing reconstruction for disabled families.
Provides for: assistance conversion of certain projects in Michigan and Pennsylvania; rehabilitation compliance for certain projects in New Jersey; and eligibility of certain public housing for demolition in Texas.
(Sec.
Amends the Housing Act of 1949 with regard to rural housing to: extend the underserved area set-aside through FY 1995; eliminate the termination date for the multifamily housing loan insurance program, and make such loan available for a 50-year period; extend the set-aside through FY 1995 for rental housing funds for nonprofit entities; make certain properties in North Carolina eligible for rural homeownership loans; and consider South Tucson, Arizona, a rural area.
(Sec.
Amends the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 to extend the multifamily housing mortgage risk-sharing program through FY 1995.
(Sec.
Amends the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act to extend through FY 1995 community development block grant (CDBG) set-asides for colonias.
Amends the Housing and Community Development Act of 1994 to: extend through FY 1995 CDBG public services limitations; and provide certain cities in California with a 20 percent CDBG public services use limit.
Authorizes Pittsburgh and Wilkes-Barre, Pennsylvania, to retain and use certain urban development action grant funds.
Directs the Secretary to cancel certain housing and related debts for Richmond, Virginia, and Lockport Township, Illinois.
Amends the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 to extend through FY 1995 insurance authority and authorization of appropriations (including mortgage and community development assistance) for the New Towns Demonstration Program for Los Angeles, California.
Amends the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 to authorize appropriations for the Earth Conservancy in Luzerne County, Pennsylvania, to reclaim coal mining-damaged land.
(Sec.
Amends Federal law to permit qualifying State agencies to be treated as sureties.