TABLE OF CONTENTS: Title I: Congressional Exemptions Title II: Congressional Perks Title III: Miscellaneous Citizen Representative Reform Act Stop Special Treatment Provision - Title I: Congressional Exemptions - Makes applicable to the Congress the following Federal laws, to the extent that they relate to the terms and conditions of employment, the health and safety of employees, and the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees: Social Security Act; National Labor Relations Act; Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938; Civil Rights Act of 1964; Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967; Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970; title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972; Rehabilitation Act of 1973; Privacy Act of 1974; Age Discrimination Act of 1975; Ethics in Government Act of 1978 and Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Makes applicable to the Congress the Freedom of Information Act and specified provisions of Federal law relating to the independent counsel.
Title II: Congressional Perks - Directs all Members of Congress to pay full market value for all medical services, medical tests, and medications provided by the Office of the Attending Physician.
Establishes the Office of Attending Physician Revolving Fund in the Treasury (within the contingent fund of the House of Representatives) for deposit of such payments and monies received from any other source.
Orders the closing of all beauty and barber shops on the premises of any property belonging to the House of Representatives.
Expresses the sense of the House of Representatives that: Members of Congress should be charged rates comparable to those in other parking facilities at Washington National Airport; and records of such expenses should be made accessible to the public.
Directs all Members of the House to pay full market value for the use of the health facilities on the premises of the Capitol or any House office building.
Expresses the sense of the House of Representatives that the Federal Government shall not bear any of the cost of health insurance for its Members.
Directs the General Accounting Office to: identify and report to the Congress on all benefits that accrue to Members of the House; and determine the market value or a close approximation of each of those benefits and to what extent tax dollars are used to pay for them.
Title III: Miscellaneous - Requires the House and the Senate to promulgate rules and regulations to carry out this Act.