Asthma Awareness, Education and Treatment Act of 1999 - Authorizes the Secretary of Health and Human Services to make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for carrying out projects to provide for individuals in low-income communities: screenings and referrals regarding asthma, allergies, and related respiratory problems; information and education regarding such conditions; and workshops regarding such conditions for specified individuals who serve in supervisory roles of children in such communities.
Outlines requirements for such projects.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 2000 through 2004.
Authorizes the Secretary to award contracts for a national media campaign to provide to the public and health care providers information on such conditions, with priority given to the occurrence of such conditions in children.
Authorizes appropriations.
Amends the Internal Revenue Code to provide a tax credit, effective as of January 1, 2000, to providers of pest control or climate control services who donate such services in any public housing or low-income multifamily residential rental property.
Directs the Secretary to conduct research to determine whether and to what extent there is a causal relationship between air pollutants and the occurrence of such conditions, requiring priority to be given to clinical evaluations of low-income individuals.
Requires the Director of the National Heart, Blood, and Lung Institute to: identify all Federal programs that carry out asthma-related activities; develop a Federal plan for responding to asthma; and submit recommendations to Congress on strengthening the coordination of Federal asthma-related activities.
Authorizes appropriations.
Requires the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to: conduct local asthma surveillance activities in order to collect asthma prevalence, severity, and management data; and compile and annually publish data on the prevalence of children suffering from asthma in each State, as well as the childhood asthma mortality rate nationally and in each State.