Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1997 - Authorizes the Architect of the Capitol (AOC), under the direction of the US Capitol Preservation Commission (Commission), to: plan, construct, furnish and equip the Capitol Visitor Center (Center) under the East Plaza of the Capitol; and reconstruct the East Plaza and its environs to enhance its attractiveness, safety, and security.
Requires the design of the Center to be substantially in accordance with the Final Design Report dated November 10, 1995, submitted by the AOC to specified congressional committees.
Specifies entities responsible for Center exhibits, security systems, and management.
Directs the Commission to: establish a special committee to implement and oversee the Center project; and develop and submit to specified congressional committees a detailed plan for financing the project at the lowest net cost to the Government.
Establishes in the Treasury the United States Capitol Visitor Center Revolving Fund for the collection of deposits received under the financing plan.
Directs the Capitol Police Board to study and report to specified congressional committees on the security cost savings and other cost benefits associated with the construction and operation of the Center.
Authorizes the AOC to establish competitive procedures for work to carry out the project by the use of prequalification standards, and to award contracts on the basis of contractor qualifications as well as price.
States that such procedures and contract awards shall be final and conclusive upon all officers of the Government.
Directs the Capitol Visitor Center Board to: establish Center operations, tour, exhibit, and education policies; and establish and operate the Capitol Visitor Center Gift Shop.
Amends the Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 to: direct the Commission to carry out functions assigned under this Act; provide increased Commission staff support from specified congressional offices; authorize the Commission to delegate any of its functions to one or more special committees as long as membership of such committees is drawn equally from both Houses of Congress; and provide fund transfer authority.
Renames the Capitol Guide Board the Capitol Visitor Board.
Repeals provisions of title III of the National Visitor Center Facilities Act of 1968 to the extent that such provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.