Amends the Elwha River Ecosystem and Fisheries Restoration Act to direct the Secretary of the Interior, as soon as sums are appropriated, to acquire the Elwha and Glines Canyon Projects (Clallam County, Washington, hydroelectric power projects) for a purchase price of $295 million.
Conditions such acquisition on a release of the owners and local industrial consumer from liability to the United States arising from such Projects.
Prohibits the United States from assuming or satisfying the liability of such owners or consumer to any federally recognized Indian tribe.
Directs the Secretary: after acquiring the Elwha Project, to remove the Elwha dam, taking necessary action to ensure the continued availability of current water quality and quantity to specified areas and users; for a period of 12 years during such removal, to thoroughly evaluate the removal's impact on fish runs; and to pay specified compensation to the Clallam County Board of Commissioners for revenues lost due to such removal (with a specified condition).
Directs the Secretary to continue operation of, and not commence removal of, the Glines Canyon dam for a period of 12 years after the Elwha dam has been removed.
Authorizes the Secretary, after such period, to remove the Glines Project if the benefit to fisheries and natural restoration of the Elwha River exceeds the value of power and the desirability of the lake by a margin sufficient to warrant the expenditure of the removal cost.
Directs the Secretary to: complete a Glines Canyon engineering and design study concerning the reconfiguration of Canyon transmission lines and dam operational controls during the 12-year period; and evaluate the impact that managing such Project for fisheries restoration will have on future hydropower operations.
Directs the Secretary to develop and implement a comprehensive fish enhancement plan with the Elwha Citizens Commission, the Lower Elwha Klallam tribe, the National Marine Fisheries Service, the Washington Department of Fish and Wildlife, and other entities directly affected by management decisions on the Elwha River.
Prohibits, unless specifically authorized by an Act of Congress, any Federal or State agency from taking any action that would impair or reduce the flood control facilities, power generation capabilities, reservoir levels, and related components within the Columbia-Snake River basin.
Prohibits any action above Columbia River mile 106 that would reduce the congressionally required minimum 14-foot navigation channel and navigation lock sill clearance at minimum regulated flow, except as necessary for flood control or maintenance and repairs.
Limits Federal or State judicial review with respect to actions concerning such basin.
Provides a civil action for persons whose interests may be adversely affected by a violation of this section.