Uniform Hazardous Waste Treatment Act of 1994 - Amends the Solid Waste Disposal Act to prohibit facilities that burn fuel for energy recovery from burning fuel containing any quantity of hazardous waste identified or listed pursuant to such Act unless such fuel is conforming hazardous waste fuel.
Directs the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to promulgate quantitative specifications for conforming hazardous waste fuel to ensure that fuel containing such waste is burned to recover useful energy and that such fuel has physical, chemical, thermal, and energy-related properties equivalent to standard fuels such as coal and oil.
Lists minimum specifications.
Permits cement kiln dust to be disposed of only at facilities and in units that meet specified performance standards for hazardous wastes and minimum technological requirements promulgated by the Administrator.
Limits the Administrator's authority to modify certain hazardous waste requirements with respect to cement kiln dust produced in a kiln that burns conforming hazardous waste fuels.
Makes such dust subject to any land disposal treatment standards applicable to the particular hazardous waste contained in the fuel.
Directs the Administrator to promulgate: standards for the design and operation of cement kilns that burn conforming hazardous waste fuel as necessary to protect human health and the environment; standards for the control of emissions of cement kiln dust from cement kilns; regulations to control emissions of metals from all units that burn hazardous waste necessary to protect human health and the environment; and standards for the control of stack emissions from cement kilns.
Sets forth permit requirements with respect to cement kiln dust from kilns that burn conforming hazardous waste fuel.
Establishes monitoring and recordkeeping requirements for owners and operators of combustion units that burn conforming hazardous waste fuel.
Requires the Administrator to promulgate: training requirements for personnel who operate cement kilns that burn conforming hazardous waste or landfills used for disposal of dust from such kilns; and standards for owners and operators of facilities which produce a fuel from any hazardous waste listed under the Solid Waste Disposal Act as necessary to protect human health and the environment.