Provide for the Common Defense Act of 2013 - Amends the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (Gramm-Rudman-Hollings Act) to nullify the presidential sequestration order issued for the revised security category (discretionary appropriations in budget function 050) for FY2014-FY2015 to enforce a specified budget goal.
Establishes the discretionary spending limit for the revised security category for each such fiscal year.
Amends part B (Supplemental Medical Insurance) of title XVIII (Medicare) of the Social Security Act (SSA) with respect to adjustments to the calculation of Medicare parts B and D (Voluntary Prescription Drug Benefit Program) premiums for high income beneficiaries for 2017 and subsequent years.
Reduces the monthly amount of the Medicare parts B and D premium subsidies (with a corresponding increase in the monthly premium amount) for individuals whose modified adjusted gross income exceeds the threshold amount by specified applicable percentages for modified adjusted gross incomes in certain ranges starting at $85,000 (40%) and finally exceeding $214,000 (90%).
Revises the temporary adjustment to income thresholds used to calculate premiums between January 1, 2011, and December 31, 2019, to extend it through December 31 of the first year after 2019 after the year in which at least 25% of individuals enrolled in the Medicare parts B and D are subject to a reduction to the monthly amount of the applicable premium subsidy.
Increases by $25 per year the part B deductible for new enrollees after January 1, 2017, and subsequent years.
Amends the Federal Crop Insurance Act to establish caps beginning with FY2014 for: combined crop insurance provider rates of return, and reimbursements for crop insurance provider administrative and operating expenses.
Reduces according to a specified formula the crop insurance premium for catastrophic risk protection coverage.
Reduces the portion of premium paid by the Federal Crop Insurance Corporation (premium subsidies) for the following coverages: additional insurance, enterprise and whole farm units, area revenue plans, and area yield plans.
Requires an additional 4% increase per year, beginning in calendar 2014, in the percentage of basic pay that federal employees or Members of Congress must contribute to their pension plans under the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or the Federal Employees Retirement System (FERS).
Reduces government contributions to CSRS and FERS by the amount of such increased employee contributions.
Eliminates annuity supplements for federal employees hired after 2013.
Revises the definition of &ldquo;price index,&rdquo; for purposes of cost-of-living adjustments to federal employee benefits, to mean the Chained Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers (Chained CPI) instead of the Consumer Price Index.
Amends SSA title II (Old Age, Surivors, and Disability Insurance) (OASDI) to require the use of the Chained CPI for calculation of Social Security cost-of-living adjustments.