Federal Financial Assistance Management Improvement Act of 1998 - Directs the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with Federal agency heads, to coordinate and assist Federal agencies in establishing: a uniform Federal financial assistance application or set of such uniform applications; ways to streamline Federal financial assistance administrative procedures and reporting requirements for grantees; a uniform Federal financial assistance system; an electronic application and reporting process; use of common rules; improved interagency and intergovernmental coordination of information collection and sharing of data, including the development of a release form to be used by grantees; a process to strengthen the information resources management capacity of State and local governments and qualified organizations; and specific annual goals and objectives to further the purposes of this Act.
Permits the Director to designate a lead agency to assist him or her and use interagency working groups to assist in carrying out such responsibilities.
Requires the Director to: review agency plans and reports developed under this Act for adequacy; monitor each agency's annual performance toward achieving the goals and objectives stated in the agency's plan; ensure that each agency plan does not diminish standards to measure performance and accountability of financial assistance programs; and report to the Congress on implementation of this Act.
Exempts any Federal agency from the requirements of this Act if the Director determines that the agency does not have a significant number of Federal financial assistance programs.
Requires the Director, not later than November 1 of each fiscal year, to submit to the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs and the House Committee on Government Reform and Oversight: a list of each agency exempted in the preceding fiscal year; and an explanation for each such exemption.
Directs the Director to issue guidance on implementation of the requirements of this Act, including a statement on the common rules that he or she intends to review and standardize under this Act.
Sets specifications for the development and implementation of plans by Federal agencies, including for each agency to designate a lead agency official for carrying out the agency's responsibilities under this Act.
Requires the lead official to consult regularly with representatives of State and local governments and qualified organizations during development of the plan.
Requires each Federal agency to submit the plan to the Director and the Congress and report annually thereafter on the implementation of the plan and the agency's performance in meeting the goals and objectives specified under this Act.
Directs the Director or the lead agency to contract with the National Academy of Public Administration to evaluate the effectiveness of this Act.
Requires the evaluation to be submitted to the lead agency, the Director, and the Congress.
Terminates this Act five years after enactment.