Lower Eastern Shore American Heritage Area Act of 1996 - Directs the Secretary of the Interior to establish a Lower Eastern Shore American Heritage Area in the Maryland counties of Somerset, Wicomico, and Worcester.
Requires the Secretary to enter into a compact (which shall include information relating to the objectives and management of the Area's programs) with the State of Maryland, the Lower Eastern Shore Heritage Committee, Inc. (coordinating entity) and any county eligible to be a participating partner under this Act.
Requires the coordinating entity and the participating partners to develop a management plan for the Area that presents comprehensive recommendations for conservation, program funding, management, and development.
Provides that, if the Secretary has not approved a plan by two years after this Act's enactment date, the Area shall be ineligible for Federal funding until a management plan is approved.
Sets forth provisions concerning: the duties of the coordinating entity and participating partners; limitations on Federal contributions for the operation and implementation costs of such entities and partners with respect to this Act; a prohibition on use of such funds for acquisition of real property; and eligibility of coordinating entities to receive the funds for a ten- year period after the date on which the compact is signed and, if necessary, for an additional five-year period, under specified conditions.
Directs the Secretary to make grants available to the coordinating entity and participating partners.
Authorizes the Secretary to provide technical and financial assistance to coordinating entities and participating partners, on the request of coordinating entities.
Allows the Secretary to expend Federal funds for nonfederally- owned property to further the purpose of this Act.
Requires a Federal entity conducting or supporting an activity directly affecting the Area and any unit of government acting pursuant to a grant of Federal funds or a Federal permit or agreement conducting or supporting such activity to: consult with the Secretary and the coordinating entity with respect to the activity; cooperate with the Secretary and the entity in carrying out the Secretary's and the entity's duties under this Act; and conduct or support the activity in a manner consistent with the management plan.
Authorizes appropriations.