Reconstruction and Stabilization Civilian Management Act of 2008 - (Sec.
Amends the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to authorize the President, if in the US national interest, to furnish assistance to assist in stabilizing and reconstructing a country or region that is in, or is in transition from, conflict or civil strife.
Requires specified pre-notification by the President before making assistance available.
Limits: program authority to FY2008-FY2010; and annual fiscal year expenditures to $100 million.
(Sec.
Amends the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 to establish within the Department of State an Office of the Coordinator for Reconstruction and Stabilization.
Sets forth Office functions.
Authorizes the Secretary of State to establish: a Response Readiness Corps (containing an active and standby component consisting of trained US government personnel, including Department and United States Agency for International Development (USAID) employees) to provide stabilization and reconstruction activities in foreign countries or regions that are at risk, in, or are in transition from, conflict or civil strife; and a volunteer Civilian Reserve Corps (authorizes such individuals' employment and training).
Authorizes FY2007-FY2010 appropriations.
Prohibits the establishment and deployment of any Civilian Reserve Corps from substantively impairing state and local capacity and readiness.
Directs the Secretary to ensure the use of existing Department and USAID training and education programs.
(Sec.
Authorizes: the Secretary or the head of any US agency, with respect to agency personnel, to extend to any individual assigned or deployed under this Act certain death gratuity, training, and travel benefits that are provided to Foreign Service members; and the Secretary to accept detailees or assignments from other agencies and state or local employees on a reimbursable or non-reimbursable basis.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary to develop an interagency strategy to respond to reconstruction and stabilization operations.
Sets forth strategy contents.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary to report annually (for six years) to the appropriate congressional committees respecting implementation of this Act.
Sets forth report requirements.