.
Electronic Message Preservation Act of 2015 (Sec.
This bill requires the Archivist of the United States to promulgate regulations governing federal agency preservation of electronic messages that are federal records and to periodically review and amend, as necessary, such regulations.
Such regulations, at a minimum, shall: require the electronic capture, management, and preservation of such electronic records in accordance with the Federal Records Act; require such records to be retrievable through electronic searches; and include timelines for federal agency compliance with the regulations that ensure compliance not later than December 31, 2016.
The Archivist shall promulgate regulations not later than two years after the enactment of this Act that: establish mandatory minimum functional requirements for electronic records management systems and a process to ensure that such systems meet the functional requirements; and include requirements for the capture, management, and preservation of other electronic records.
The bill defines "electronic records management system" as software designed to manage electronic records, including by categorizing and locating records, ensuring that records are retained as long as necessary, identifying records that are due for disposition, and ensuring the storage, retrieval, and disposition of records.
Federal agency heads must report to the Archivist on agency compliance with the regulations promulgated by this Act and make such reports publicly available on the agency's website.
(Sec.
The bill requires the Archivist to: establish standards for the management of electronic presidential records during a President's term of office, including records management controls necessary for the capture, management, and preservation of electronic messages and for ensuring that electronic messages are readily accessible for retrieval through electronic searches; certify annually whether electronic records management controls established by a President meet the requirements of the Presidential Records Act; and report annually to specified congressional committees on the status of such certification.
The Archivist must report to Congress one year after the conclusion of a President's term of office on: the volume and format of electronic presidential records deposited into the presidential archival depository, and whether electronic records management controls of a President met the requirements of this Act and the Presidential Records Act.