Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Act - Establishes the Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Corridor (Heritage Corridor) to: recognize the important contributions made to American culture and history by African-Americans known as the Gullah/Geechee who settled in the coastal counties of South Carolina, North Carolina, Florida, and Georgia; assist State and local governments and public and private entities in South Carolina, North Carolina, Florida, and Georgia in interpreting the story of the Gullah/Geechee and preserving Gullah/Geechee folklore, arts, crafts, and music; and assist in identifying and preserving sites, historical data, artifacts, and objects associated with the Gullah/Geechee for the benefit and education of the public.
Provides that the Heritage Corridor shall be comprised of lands and waters depicted on a map entitled "Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Corridor" dated September 2004 and on file at the National Park Service.
Establishes the Gullah/Geechee Cultural Heritage Corridor Commission to assist Federal, State, and local authorities to develop and implement a management plan for Gullah/Geechee lands and waters.
Sets forth the duties of the Commission, including the preparation and submission of a management plan to the Secretary of the Interior and annual reporting to the Secretary.
Authorizes the Commission to make grants and enter into cooperative agreements with the States of South Carolina, North Carolina, Florida, and Georgia to prepare and implement the management plan.
Provides for technical and financial assistance to the Commission.
Requires the Commission to establish one or more Coastal Heritage Centers in the Heritage Corridor in accordance with the Low Country Gullah Culture Special Resource Study and Environmental Impact Study, December 2003, and additional appropriate sites.
Sets forth protections for private landowners in the Heritage Corridor.
Authorizes appropriations.
Terminates the authorities under this Act 15 years after enactment.