Government Efficiency Act of 2006 - Authorizes the establishment of Federal Review Commissions with respect to specific aspects of federal programs and agencies.
Requires a Commission to review and make recommendations on how to improve the operations, effectiveness, and efficiency of such federal programs and agencies in order to determine whether a reorganization, consolidation, abolishment, expansion, or transfer (reorganization) of existing federal programs and agencies is necessary to carry out any US policy for promoting more effective management of the executive branch.
Permits establishment of a Commission only through the issuance of an executive order or the enactment of a joint resolution that: describes the federal programs and agencies to be reviewed; and grants the Commission powers and authorities specified by, and subjects it to the requirements of, this Act.
Requires a Commission, in reviewing federal programs and agencies, to consider: whether agency missions and goals are being carried out as effectively and as efficiently as possible; any program or agency duplication or conflict with other federal or state agencies, or the private sector; whether a reorganization would better enable the federal government to accomplish its missions and goals; existing rules, any specific legislative authority to promulgate them and carry out related programs, the efficiency of rules implementation, and the extent to which rules duplicate or conflict with those of other federal agencies; and whether the agency or program has operated or was authorized outside of an enumerated power under Article I of the Constitution, or in any manner violates the separation of powers under the Constitution.
Requires a Commission to submit to the President: an assessment of the operations, effectiveness, and efficiency of the federal programs and agencies reviewed; and a legislative proposal, if appropriate, to reorganize, consolidate, abolish, expand, or transfer such programs and agencies.
Requires the President to transmit to Congress the assessment and legislative proposal, if any, along with the President's recommendations.
Sets forth requirements for the composition and powers of a Commission.
Authorizes appropriations.
Provides for expedited congressional consideration of Federal Review Commission recommendations.
Directs the President to submit to Congress a schedule for establishment of Federal Review Commissions.