Veterans Sexual Assault Prevention and Health Care Enhancement Act - (Sec.
Directs the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to develop and implement a centralized and comprehensive policy on reporting and tracking sexual assaults and other safety incidents at each medical facility of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), including: risk-assessment tools; mandatory security training; physical security precautions (surveillance camera systems and panic alarm systems); criteria and guidance for employees communicating and reporting incidents to specified supervisory personnel, VA law enforcement officials, and the Office of Inspector General; an oversight system within the Veterans Health Administration; procedures for VA law enforcement officials investigating, tracking, and closing reported incidents; and clinical guidance for treating sexual assaults reported over 72 hours after assault.
Requires the Secretary to submit to the congressional veterans committees: an interim report on the policy's effectiveness on improving the safety and security of such facilities, and annual reports on such incidents and policy implementation.
(Sec.
Requires VA payments to state nursing homes for care provided to veterans to be based on a methodology which reimburses such home for care provided under contract.
(Under current law, such payments are made according to a prescribed rate.)
Includes entities eligible to enter into such contracts as authorized VA nursing home, adult day health care, or other extended care providers.
(Sec.
Includes the goal of maximizing the individual's independence within an individualized plan for the rehabilitation of veterans with traumatic brain injury (TBI).
Includes within plan objectives the sustaining of improvement in cognitive, behavioral, and vocational functioning.
Includes within the VA definition of "rehabilitative services" treatment and services to sustain and prevent loss of functional gains, as well as any other services or supports that may contribute to maximizing an individual's independence.
Includes rehabilitation services within: comprehensive programs for long-term rehabilitation of veterans with TBI, and cooperative agreements for the use of non-VA facilities for neurorehabilitation and recovery programs for such veterans.
(Sec.
Prohibits the Secretary from disallowing the use of service dogs in any VA facility or property, or in any facility or property that receives VA funding.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary to implement a three-year pilot program to assess the effectiveness of using dog training activities as a component of integrated post-deployment mental health and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) rehabilitation programs at VA medical centers to positively affect veterans with such symptoms and to produce specially trained dogs that may become service dogs for veterans with disabilities.
Requires the pilot program to be carried out at one VA medical center selected by the Secretary other than the VA health care system in Palo Alto, California.
Makes veteran participation voluntary.
Requires the Secretary to: collect program data to determine its effectiveness, as well as the potential to expand the program to additional VA medical centers; and report annually to Congress for the duration of the pilot program.
(Sec.
Eliminates a required annual report on staffing for registered nurses and certain other health-care personnel at VA facilities.