Veterans Nonprofit Research and Education Corporations Enhancement Act of 2009 - (Sec.
Amends federal provisions concerning the establishment at Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical facilities of nonprofit research and education corporations (NRECs) to allow an NREC to facilitate the conduct of research or education, or both, at more than one VA medical center.
States that such an NREC shall be known as a multi-medical center research corporation (MCRC).
Allows an NREC to act as a MCRC if: the NREC board of directors approve a resolution permitting that NREC to act as a MCRC; and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs approves the resolution.
Requires each NREC and MCRC (corporation) to be established in accordance with the nonprofit corporation laws of the state in which the VA medical center which it supports is located.
States that neither such corporation shall be considered to be owned by, or an agent or instrumentality of, the United States.
(Sec.
Restates the purposes of the corporations, including with respect to their role in: providing a flexible funding mechanism; and residencies or similar programs.
(Sec.
Modifies the composition of corporation boards of directors.
Revises requirements concerning non-VA members of boards of directors of NRECs and MCRCs to: state a minimum number who are not officers or employees of the federal government; and expand the required areas of experience or expertise.
Allows a corporation executive director to be an employee of the VA. Removes financial relationship restrictions from conflict of interest standards applicable to directors.
(Sec.
Increases authorized corporate powers of the corporations to include entering into contracts and setting fees for education and training facilitated through a corporation.
(Sec.
Revises annual report procedures to modify the thresholds for the obtaining of audits and require submission of an Internal Revenue Service return form applicable to organizations exempt from income tax.
Revises conflict of interest policies applicable to directors, officers, and employees of a corporation to apply the policy adopted by the corporation (under current law, they are subject to federal laws and regulations applicable to federal employees).
Revises requirements for a report to Congress to increase the threshold for providing information identifying payees of the corporation.