Pitkin County Land Exchange Act of 2006 - (Sec.
Directs the Secretary of Agriculture (the Secretary) and the Secretary of the Interior, upon receipt of title to certain lands located in Pitkin County, Colorado, and certain lands located on Smuggler Mountain in the County (the non-federal lands), to convey to the County or to the Aspen Valley Land Trust, if the County so requests, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to certain National Forest and Bureau of Land Management lands located in the County (the federal lands).
(Sec.
Requires the values of the lands exchanged to be equal or to be made equal.
Sets forth exchange terms and conditions for: the appraisal of such lands; the equalization of the values of such lands, including by a cash equalization payment made by the County and/or conveyance of the Sellar Park land parcel to the Secretary; and the disposition and use of the proceeds received by the Secretary from any such payment.
Requires the County, as a condition of the conveyance of the Crystal River parcel to the County, to agree to: provide public access to the parcel; and require that the parcel be used only for recreational, fish, and wildlife conservation, and public open space purposes.
Requires the Secretary to reserve to the United States a permanent easement to the Wildwood parcel for the location, construction, and public use of the East of Aspen Trail.
(Sec.
States that lands acquired by the Secretary pursuant to this Act shall become part of White River National Forest.
Withdraws the non-federal land permanently from all forms of appropriation and disposal under the public land laws, including mining and mineral leasing laws and the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970.
Allows the Secretary, the Secretary of the Interior, and the County to agree to: minor adjustments to the boundaries of the federal and non-federal lands; and modifications or deletions of parcels and mining claim remnants of federal land or non-federal land to be exchanged on Smuggler Mountain.