Meth Free Families and Communities Act - (Sec.
Amends the Public Health Service Act to require the Director of the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment to collaborate with professionals in the addiction field and primary health care providers to raise awareness about how to: recognize the signs of a substance abuse disorder; and apply evidence-based practices for screening and treating individuals with, or at-risk for developing, an addiction.
(Sec.
Revises provisions governing a grant program for substance abuse residential treatment for pregnant and parenting women (currently, for postpartum women) to: include treatment for addiction to methamphetamine, outpatient treatment services, and referrals for dental services; and require programs to be accessible to pregnant and parenting women in low-income households and in health disparity populations.
Requires the Director to give grant priority to a program serving an area that: is a rural area, an area with a shortage of mental health professionals, or an area with a shortage of family-based substance abuse treatment options; and has high rates of addiction to methamphetamine or other drugs.
Requires the Director to: include in biennial reports to Congress data on the number of pregnant and parenting women in need of, but not receiving, treatment for substance abuse and on recovery and relapse rates of women receiving such treatment; and expand, intensify, and coordinate efforts to provide pregnant and parenting women treatment for addiction to methamphetamine or other drugs.
Reauthorizes appropriations for FY2009-FY2013 for the substance abuse program.
(Sec.
Requires the Director of the Office for Substance Abuse Prevention to develop a clearinghouse that provides information and educational materials to employers and employees about drug testing policies and programs.
(Sec.
Authorizes amounts made available for methamphetamine or inhalant prevention programs in schools and communities to be used to develop a student-driven methamphetamine awareness project.