TABLE OF CONTENTS: Title I: Service to Airports Not Receiving Sufficient Service Title II: Regional Air Service Incentive Program Air Service Improvement Act of 1997 - Title I: Service to Airports Not Receiving Sufficient Service - Authorizes the Secretary of Transportation to grant exemptions pertaining to the use of slots (arrival and departure spaces) at high density airports in order to enable air carriers to provide nonstop air transportation using noise-compliant aircraft between a high density airport and a small hub or nonhub airport that the Secretary determines is not receiving sufficient air service to and from the high density airport.
Provides exemption limitations, including a limitation of no more than six exemptions per day for slots at Washington National Airport.
Requires exemption decisions to be made by the Secretary within 120 days of application.
Makes funds not otherwise obligated or expended for the Federal essential air service program available for: air carrier service to airports not receiving sufficient air service; and rural air safety at airports with less than 100,000 annual boardings.
Requires a decision by the Secretary within 180 days after receipt of a complaint alleging that an air carrier has been or is engaging in an unfair method of competition in the provision or sale of air transportation.
Title II: Regional Air Service Incentive Program - Authorizes the Secretary to guarantee any lender against loss on any loan made to a commuter air carrier (maximum seating capacity of 75 or less) for the purchase of jet aircraft when such aircraft are to be used to provide service to underserved markets.
Outlines loan conditions and limitations, including that: such aircraft comply with certain Federal noise-level requirements; and the air carrier agrees to provide service to the underserved market(s) for at least 12 months after being placed in service.
Authorizes the Secretary to: collect a loan guarantee fee from such lenders; and be given, and make use of, Federal facilities and assistance in carrying out the incentive program.
Terminates the above authority five years after the enactment of this Act.
Authorizes appropriations.