Getting Results through Enhanced Accountability and Transparency Act of 2016 (Sec.
This bill requires that the Government Accountability Office's (GAO's) annual report on its routine investigations to identify programs, agencies, offices, and initiatives with unnecessarily duplicative goals and activities aggregate separately estimates of related costs for instances of actual and potential unnecessary duplication and other potential cost savings and revenue collection.
(Sec.
When executive agencies (with certain exceptions) conduct their systemic review of operations on a continuing basis, the purpose of their reviews must include: improving agency performance toward their mission, informing learning and decision-making processes, assessing opportunities to improve coordination within the agency and with other agencies, and identifying employees who cause their units to be outstanding toward achieving the agency's mission.
Chief operating officers' responsibilities are expanded to include: improving evaluation and risk management; addressing crosscutting program and management issues, including opportunities to improve coordination and address unnecessary duplication, using an enterprise risk management approach; overseeing agency-specific efforts to improve management of mission-oriented components and units; and coordinating with mission-related components, units, and support functions at their agency and the major components of their agency.
The Office of Management and Budget's (OMB's) federal government performance plan submitted with each budget must provide plans to address management challenges concerning unnecessary duplication.
Agency performance plans for each program activity set forth in the budget must include planned actions and performance goals for resolving such challenges.
The OMB's federal government priority goals must include mission support for financial, human capital, information technology, procurement, and real estate management.
The OMB must consider GAO recommendations when developing or adjusting such goals.
Performance improvement officers must collaborate with the heads of agency components and mission support functions when they advise on strategic planning.
Their advice must include performance evaluation and risk management.
The Performance Improvement Council's (PIC's) functions are expanded to include: resolving government-wide issues relating to coordination and unnecessary duplication; facilitating the exchange of performance improvement practices with state and local governments and other nonfederal stakeholders; and coordinating with interagency mission support councils.
PIC must also publish annual reports describing its structure, budgets, funding, staffing, and activities.
The chief operating officers of agencies must publish all of the plans and reports produced for Congress with citations to the relevant statutory requirements.
Agencies must submit to Congress statements regarding the actions they have taken in response to recommendations in the GAO's: annual report on unnecessarily duplicative goals and activities; and High Risk list of fraud, waste, abuse, and mismanagement.