Fitness Integrated with Teaching Kids Act or the FIT Kids Act - (Sec.
Amends the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA) to require local educational agencies (LEAs) located in states receiving school improvement funds to annually provide the families of their students with information on healthful eating habits, physical education, and physical activity.
Requires such LEAs to assist their schools in annually collecting and disseminating to the families of school students information on: the most recent national recommendations for physical education and physical activity for students, as established by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) of the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS); whether the school follows an age-appropriate physical education curriculum for all students that adheres to such guidelines or state guidelines; the amount of time that students in kindergarten through grade 12 are required to spend in physical education, disaggregated by grade level; the facilities available for physical education and physical activity for students enrolled in the school; and any health and wellness council located in the school or with which the school is involved.
Requires: LEAs to provide to their state a description of the amount of time that students in kindergarten through grade 12 are required to spend in physical education, disaggregated by grade level; and the state to ensure that such information is made available to the public.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary of Education to contract with the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) to study: ways of incorporating physical education into school settings, and before- and after-school programs; innovative and effective ways to increase physical activity for all students in kindergarten through grade 12; efforts to encourage the participation of disabled students in physical education programs and the types of accommodations used to increase their participation; the impact health and physical activity and education have on students' ability to learn; and the progress students make in increasing their physical activity and improving their health and well-being, with specific recommendations for effectively measuring such progress.
Directs the Secretary to study the participation of students in physical education and other physical activities in public elementary and secondary schools and assess their physical activity and fitness levels.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary to: identify and make available to states and LEAs, best practices on innovative physical education and physical activity policies and programs at the state and local level; and update the best practices after the NAS study is completed.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary, in collaboration with the Secretary of Agriculture, to encourage schools to participate in the HealthierUS School Challenge of the Food and Nutrition Service of the Department of Agriculture.