.
Delaware River Basin Conservation Act of 2015 (Sec.
This bill requires the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) to establish a nonregulatory Delaware River Basin restoration program, under which it shall: draw on management plans for the basin or portions of the basin and work in consultation with applicable management entities, including representatives of the Partnership for the Delaware Estuary, the Delaware River Basin Commission, the federal government, other state and local governments, and regional and nonprofit organizations, to identify, prioritize, and implement restoration and protection activities within the basin; adopt a basin-wide strategy that supports the implementation of a shared set of science-based restoration and protection activities, targets cost-effective projects with measurable results, and maximizes conservation outcomes with no net gain of federal full-time equivalent employees; and establish the voluntary grant and technical assistance programs in accordance with this bill.
"Basin" is defined as the four-state Delaware Basin region, including all of Delaware Bay and portions of Delaware, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania located in the Delaware River watershed.
(Sec.
The&nbsp;USFWS shall: establish the Delaware River Basin restoration grant program to provide competitive matching grants to carry out restoration and protection activities within the basin, and develop criteria to ensure that funded activities accomplish specified purposes and advance the implementation of priority actions or needs identified in the strategy adopted under this bill.
The&nbsp;USFWS may contract with the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation or another organization that offers grant management services.
(Sec.
The USFWS shall submit to Congress annually a report on the implementation of this bill, including a description of each project that has received funding.
(Sec.
Appropriations are authorized to carry out this bill for FY2016-FY2021.
The USFWS shall use at least 75% of any amount made available for each fiscal year to carry out the grant program and to provide or provide for technical assistance under such program.