COPS Improvements Act of 2009 - (Sec.
Amends the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 to expand the authority of the Attorney General to make competitive grants under the public safety and community policing grant program (COPS grant program) to states, local and Indian tribal governments, other public and private entities, multi-jurisdictional or regional consortia, and individuals to: train officers hired to perform intelligence, anti-terror, or homeland security duties; hire school resource officers and establish local partnerships to combat crime, gangs, drug activities, and other problems in elementary and secondary schools; establish and implement innovative programs to reduce and prevent illegal drug activities, including the manufacturing, distribution, and use of methamphetamine; hire and rehire civilian forensic analysts and laboratory personnel; establish criminal gang enforcement task forces; and meet emerging law enforcement needs.
Authorizes the use of COPS grants to hire honorably discharged members of the Armed Forces to serve as career law enforcement officers.
Authorizes the Attorney General to make grants for: assigning prosecutors to handle cases from specific geographic areas and to address counter-terrorism problems and violent crime in local communities; and developing new technologies to assist state and local law enforcement agencies in crime prevention and training.
Grants the Office of Community Oriented Policing Services exclusive authority to perform functions and activities under the COPS grant program.
Authorizes the Attorney General to extend grant periods and to renew grants if the grant recipient can demonstrate significant progress in achieving the objectives of the initial grant application.
Directs the Attorney General to provide for a scientific study of the effectiveness of the programs, projects, and activities under the grant program in reducing crime.
Increases and extends the authorization of appropriations for the COPS grant program for FY2009-FY2014.
(Sec.
Requires the Inspector General of the Department of Justice (DOJ) to report to Congress on the effect of the COPS grant program on the rate of violent crime, drug offenses, and other crimes, the degree to which state and local government grant recipients contribute funds for law enforcement programs and activities, and any waste, fraud, or abuse within the program.
Requires the Inspector General, in making such report, to audit and review a random sampling of state and local law enforcement agencies.