National Windstorm Impact Reduction Act Reauthorization of 2014 - (Sec.
Amends the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Act of 2004 to revise provisions governing the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program.
Defines the &quot;Director&quot; of the Program to mean the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) (currently, the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy).
(Sec.
Designates NIST as the entity with primary responsibility for Program planning and coordination and expands the responsibilities of the other Program agencies, which include the National Science Foundation (NSF), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA).
Requires NIST to: ensure that the Program includes the necessary components to promote implementation of windstorm risk reduction measures, support the development of performance-based engineering tools, request the assistance of federal agencies other than the Program agencies as necessary, coordinate all federal post-windstorm investigations, and issue recommendations to assist in informing the development of model codes.
Requires NSF to support research in economic and social factors influencing windstorm risk reduction measures.
Requires FEMA to: promote the adoption of windstorm preparedness and mitigation measures, including for households, businesses, and communities; and work closely with national standards and model building code organizations to promote the implementation of research results and promote better building practices within the building design and construction industry.
Requires the Directors of the Program agencies to each include in their agency's annual budget request a description of their agency's projected activities under the Program and an assessment of what they plan to spend on those activities.
Replaces provisions establishing an Interagency Working Group with provisions establishing the Interagency Coordinating Committee on Windstorm Impact Reduction, which shall be composed of the heads of the Program agencies and the Office of Management and Budget (OMB).
Directs the Committee to oversee Program planning and coordination and to develop and submit to Congress a strategic plan, progress report, and coordinated budget for the Program.
(Sec.
Revises provisions providing for the establishment of an Advisory Committee on Windstorm Impact Reduction (currently, the National Advisory Committee on Windstorm Impact Reduction), which shall: be composed of at least seven non-federal members, provide recommendations to be considered by federal agencies in implementing the Program, and offer assessments of the priorities of the Program's strategic plan, coordination of the Program, and Program revisions.
Terminates the Committee on September 30, 2016.
Authorizes appropriations to the Program agencies for FY2014-FY2015 for carrying out the Program.