Melanie Blocker Stokes Mom's Opportunity to Access Health, Education, Research, and Support for Postpartum Depression Act or the Melanie Blocker Stokes MOTHERS Act - Title I: Research on Postpartum Conditions - (Sec.
101) Encourages the Secretary of Health and Human Services to continue: activities on postpartum depression; and research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and treatments for, postpartum conditions.
(Sec.
102) Expresses the sense of Congress that the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health may conduct a nationally representative longitudinal study of the relative mental health consequences for women of resolving a pregnancy in various ways, including carrying the pregnancy to term and parenting the child, carrying the pregnancy to term and placing the child for adoption, miscarriage, and having an abortion.
Title II: Delivery of Services Regarding Postpartum Conditions - (Sec.
201) Amends the Public Health Service Act to authorize the Secretary to make grants for projects for the establishment, operation, and coordination of effective and cost-efficient systems for the delivery of essential services to individuals with a postpartum condition and their families.
Directs the Secretary to ensure that such projects provide education and services with respect to the diagnosis and management of postpartum conditions.
Authorizes such projects to include: delivering or enhancing outpatient home-based health and support services; and providing education to new mothers and their families about postpartum conditions to promote earlier diagnosis and treatment.
Sets forth grant requirements.
Authorizes the Secretary to provide technical assistance to entities seeking a grant.
Title III: General Provisions - (Sec.
301) Authorizes appropriations for FY2010-FY2012.
(Sec.
302) Directs the Secretary to study and report to Congress on the benefits of screening for postpartum conditions.
(Sec.
303) Prohibits the Secretary from utilizing amounts appropriated under this Act to carry out activities or programs that are duplicative of activities or programs that are already being carried out through the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS).