Directs: the Secretary of the Treasury, by January 1 of each year, to transmit to the Director of National Drug Control Policy a list of those individuals who play a significant role in international narcotics trafficking; and the Director, by February 1 of each year, to transmit to the President the list, together with recommendations for individuals to be included or excluded.
Prohibits the inclusion of the name of any individual if the Director of Central Intelligence (DCI) determines that the disclosure of that person's role in international narcotics trafficking could compromise US intelligence sources or methods.
Requires: the DCI to advise the President when a determination is made to withhold an individual's identity; and the President to submit a report in classified form to the House and Senate intelligence committees in each such case setting forth the reasons for the determination.
Prohibits the President from determining later than March 1 of each year whether to designate persons on the list as persons constituting an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States.
Directs the President to: notify the Secretary of any person so designated; and report to Congress the reasons for any determination not to designate any person on such list as such a threat.
Sets forth provisions regarding changes in designations of individuals as threats.
(Sec.
Finds that a national emergency exists with respect to any individual who is a specially designated narcotics trafficker.
Blocks all property of the following persons which is, or which comes within, the possession or control of a US person, with exceptions: a specially designated narcotics trafficker; a person who materially assists in, provides financial or technological support for, or provides goods or services in support of, the narcotics trafficking activities of a specially designated narcotics trafficker; and a person determined by the Secretary to be owned or controlled by, or to act for or on behalf of, a specially designated narcotics trafficker.
Prohibits (with exceptions) any transaction or dealing by a US person, or within the United States: in property or interests therein of any specially designated narcotics trafficker; and that evades or avoids, has the purpose of evading or avoiding, or attempts to violate provisions regarding the blocking of assets under this section.
Authorizes the Secretary to take such actions and to employ all powers granted to the President by the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (IEEPA) as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Subjects violations of licenses, orders, or regulations under this Act to the same penalties as provided by the IEEPA.
(Sec.
Requires the Secretary of State (with exceptions) to deny a visa to, and the Attorney General to not admit to the United States, any: specially designated narcotics trafficker; or alien who the consular officer or the Attorney General knows or has reason to believe is a spouse or minor child of such trafficker, who materially assists such trafficker, or who is owned or controlled by, or acting for or on behalf of, such trafficker.