National Beverage Container Recycling Initiative Act - Amends the Solid Waste Disposal Act to prohibit the sale of beer, ale, or other drinks produced by fermenting malt, soda or noncarbonated water, and all nonalcoholic carbonated or noncarbonated drinks in liquid form (except for dairy products) in beverage containers by retailers and distributors unless such containers carry a refund value of five cents.
Bars sales of wine and spirits unless their beverage containers carry a refund value of 15 cents.
Provides for the adjustment for inflation of the refund amount at ten-year intervals.
Requires: distributors to collect from retailers or redemption centers the refund value for each beverage sold to retailers; and retailers to collect from consumers the refund value for each beverage sold to consumers.
Requires retailers and distributors to pay the refund on returned containers of brands (in the same kind and size of container) sold.
Authorizes retailers to limit the daily amount of containers accepted from any one person.
Directs distributors to pay annually to a State unclaimed refund amounts (the amount by which the total refund value of all containers sold by distributors exceeds the amount paid by distributors to persons in that State).
Makes unclaimed refunds available to a State for carrying out pollution prevention and recycling programs.
Prohibits distributors and retailers from: selling beverages in metal beverage containers with detachable openings; and disposing of containers subject to this Act or any metal, glass, or plastic from such containers (other than the top or seal) in landfills or solid waste disposal facilities.
Makes this Act inapplicable to States that have adopted requirements substantially similar to those under this Act.
Prohibits States or political subdivisions that impose taxes on the sale of beverage containers from imposing any tax on the amount attributable to the refund value of such containers.
Prescribes civil penalties for violations of this Act.