Fiscal Year 2010 Federal Aviation Administration Extension Act - Amends the Internal Revenue Code to extend through December 31, 2009: excise taxes on aviation fuels and air transportation of persons and property; and the expenditure authority for the Airport and Airway Trust Fund.
Authorizes appropriations through the three-month period beginning on October 1, 2009, for airport improvement program (AIP) projects, including project grant authority.
Extends through December 31, 2009, various airport development projects, including: the pilot program for passenger facility fees at nonhub airports; small airport grants for airports located in the Marshall Islands, Micronesia, and Palau; state and local airport land use compatibility projects; the authority of the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority to apply for an airport development grant and impose a passenger facility fee; the temporary increase to 95% in the government share of certain AIP project costs; and Midway Island airport development.
Extends through FY2010 the authorization of appropriations for agreements the Secretary of Transportation makes for assistance under the small community air service development program.
Extends through December 31, 2009, Department of Transportation (DOT) insurance coverage for domestic and foreign-flag air carriers.
Allows further extension through March 31, 2010.
Extends through March 31, 2010, air carrier liability limits for injuries to passengers resulting from acts of terrorism.
Extends through December 31, 2009, certain competitive access assurance requirements for large or medium hub airport sponsors applying for AIP grants.
Extends through FY2010 the termination date of any order issued by the Secretary with respect to the eligibility of certain places for essential air service compensation.
Extends through the three-month period beginning on October 1, 2009, the authorization of appropriations for: Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) operations; air navigation facilities and equipment; and research, engineering, and development.