National Windstorm Impact Reduction Act of 2004 - (Sec.
Establishes the National Windstorm Impact Reduction Program, the objective of which is to achieve major measurable reductions in losses of life and property from windstorms.
Requires the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy to establish an Interagency Working Group consisting of representatives of the National Science Foundation (NSF), the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), and other Federal agencies as appropriate.
Outlines general agency responsibilities.
Requires the Program to consist of the following primary mitigation components: improved understanding of windstorms; windstorm impact assessment; and windstorm impact reduction, which shall be implemented through activities such as data collection and analysis and research and development.
Requires research activities authorized under this Act to be peer-reviewed and the components to be designed to be complementary to, and avoid duplication of, other hazard reduction efforts.
Requires the Working Group to: develop an implementation plan for achieving Program objectives; and transmit biennial reports on the status of the Program.
(Sec.
Requires the Director to establish a National Advisory Committee on Windstorm Impact Reduction to assess: trends and developments in the science and engineering of windstorm impact reduction; the effectiveness of the Program in carrying out the Program components; revising the Program; and implementation and management of the Program.
Requires the Advisory Committee to report biennially on such assessment.
(Sec.
Prohibits anything in this Act from superseding any provision of the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974.
Bars any design, construction method, practice, technology, material, mitigation methodology, or hazard reduction measure of any kind developed under this Act from being required for a home certified under the Act pursuant to standards issued under such Act, without being subject to the consensus development process and rulemaking procedures of that Act.
(Sec.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 2006 and 2007 for: FEMA; NSF; NIST; and NOAA.
(Sec.
Changes, from January 30 of even-numbered years to January 30 of odd-numbered years, the due date for the NSF biennial report required under the Science and Engineering Equal Opportunities Act.