Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park Act - (Sec.
Establishes the Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park in Virginia(Sec.
Authorizes the Secretary of the Interior to: acquire land within the Park's boundaries from willing sellers by donation, purchase, or exchange; acquire associated personal property for interpretation of the Park; and acquire conservation easements and enter into covenants regarding lands in or adjacent to the Park to protect the scenic, natural, and historic resources on such lands and preserve the Park's natural or historic setting.
Authorizes the National Park Service (NPS) to acquire land outside the Park for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities(Sec.
Directs the Secretary to: administer the Park in accordance with this Act and laws generally applicable to NPS units; and submit to specified congressional committees a Park management plan which shall contain provisions to address the needs of non-Federal landowners, including independent nonprofit organizations, within Park boundaries(Sec.
Establishes the Cedar Creek and Belle Grove National Historical Park Advisory Commission to advise the Secretary on: the preparation and implementation of the management plan; and the identification of sites of significance outside the Park deemed necessary to fulfill the purposes of this Act.(Sec.
10) Directs the Secretary and the Commission to encourage conservation of the historic and natural resources within and in proximity of the Park by landowners, local governments, organizations, and businesses.
Authorizes the Secretary to provide technical assistance to local governments in cooperative efforts which complement the values of the Park.(Sec.
11) Authorizes the Secretary to: receive and expend funds from an endowment to be established with the National Park Foundation for the interpretation, preservation, and maintenance of the Park resources and public access areas; enter into cooperative agreements with interested public and private entities and individuals for the conservation of historic and natural resources of the Park; and provide technical and financial assistance for historic structure preservation, natural or cultural landscape maintenance, local preservation planning, interpretation, management of public visitation, and furthering the goals of the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation related to the Park.(Sec.
13) Directs the Secretary to acknowledge and support the continued participation by the Cedar Creek Battlefield Foundation, the National Trust for Historic Preservation and Belle Grove Incorporated, Shenandoah County, the towns of Strasburg and Middletown, Frederick, Shenandoah, and Warren Counties, and the Shenandoah Valley Battlefields Foundation in the management of the Park.
Permits Cedar Creek Battlefield Foundation to transfer ownership interest in portions of their land to the National Park Service(Sec.
14) Authorizes appropriations.