Oglala Sioux Tribe Angostura Irrigation Project Modernization and Development Act - Title I: Modernization - Requires the Secretary of the Interior to: carry out the modernization and improvement of irrigation facilities at the Angostura Unit as described in a specified report; and provide for the delivery of water saved through such modernization and improvement for fish and wildlife purposes and environmental restoration on the Pine Ridge Indian Reservation, South Dakota.
Title II: Development - (Sec.
201) Establishes the Oglala Sioux Tribal Development Trust Fund in the Treasury.
Requires the Secretary of the Treasury to make specified deposits into the Fund and payments from it to the Tribe beginning in the 11th fiscal year after enactment of this Act.
Requires the governing body of the Tribe to prepare a development plan that provides for the manner in which the Tribe shall expend such payments to promote: economic development; infrastructure development; the educational, health, recreational, and social welfare objectives of the Tribe and its members; or any combination of these activities.
Requires the Tribal Council to make a copy of the plan available for review and comment by members of the Tribe before it becomes final.
Authorizes the Tribal Council to revise and update the plan on an annual basis, subject to review and comment procedures.
States that activities of the Tribe in carrying out the plan shall be audited as part of the annual single-agency audit that the Tribe is required to prepare pursuant to a specified Office of Management and Budget circular.
Requires a copy of the audit findings to be inserted into the Tribal Council's published minutes of proceedings.
Prohibits distribution of any portion of any payment to the Tribe to any member on a per capita basis.
(Sec.
202) States that no payment made to the Tribe shall result in the reduction or denial of any service or program under Federal law with respect to which: the Tribe is otherwise entitled because of its status as a federally recognized Indian tribe; or any individual is entitled because of his or her status as a member of the Tribe.
(Sec.
204) States that nothing in this Act: affects any rights, benefits, privileges or claims (including water rights or claims to water rights) of the Tribe, whether located on or off the Reservation, based on treaty, Executive order, agreement, Act of Congress, aboriginal title, the Winters doctrine, or otherwise; validates or invalidates any assertion of the existence, nonexistence, or extinguishment of any water rights or claims to such rights held by the Tribe or any other Indian tribe or individual Indian under Federal or State law; or affects any other water rights in existence on the date of enactment of this Act.