(This measure has not been amended since it was passed by the House on September 15, 2014.
Designer Anabolic Steroid Control Act of 2014 - Amends the Controlled Substances Act to add specified substances to the list of those included within the definition of "anabolic steroid."
Provides that a drug or hormonal substance (other than estrogens, progestins, corticosteroids, and dehydroepiandrosterone) that is not listed and that is derived from, or has a chemical structure substantially similar to, an anabolic steroid that is listed, shall be considered to be an anabolic steroid for purposes of such Act if it: has been created or manufactured with the intent of producing a substance that either promotes muscle growth or otherwise causes a pharmacological effect similar to that of testosterone; or has been, or is intended to be, promoted in any manner suggesting that consuming it will promote any pharmacological effect similar to that of testosterone.
Prohibits a substance from being considered to be a drug or hormonal substance for purposes of such Act if it is: an herb or other botanical, a concentrate, metabolite, or extract of, or a constituent isolated directly from, an herb or other botanical, or a combination of two or more such substances; or a dietary ingredient for purposes of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and is not anabolic or androgenic.
Requires any person claiming the benefit of such an exception to bear the burden of providing the appropriate evidence.
Authorizes the Attorney General to issue an order adding a drug or other substance to the definition of "anabolic steroid" upon finding that: the substance satisfies the criteria for being considered an anabolic steroid, and such addition will assist in preventing abuse or misuse of the substance.
Prohibits importing, exporting, manufacturing, distributing, dispensing, or possessing with intent to manufacture, distribute, or dispense any anabolic steroid, or any product containing an anabolic steroid, unless it bears a label clearly identifying the anabolic steroid by the nomenclature used by the International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC).
Prescribes penalties.
Sets forth an exemption from such IUPAC nomenclature requirement if such product is labeled in the manner required under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, as described in this Act.
Authorizes the Attorney General to: collect data and analyze products to determine&nbsp;whether they contain anabolic steroids and are properly labeled, and publish a list of products containing an anabolic steroid that are not properly labeled.