Link-up for Learning Grant Act - Establishes a program of demonstration grants to local educational agencies (LEAs) in partnership with other eligible entities for coordinated educational and other student support services for at-risk youth.
Authorizes the Secretary of Education to award such grants to eligible entities to pay the Federal share of costs of specified activities.
Sets forth special considerations in awarding grants.
Allows such grants to be for up to three years, subject to satisfactory progress.
Makes eligible to apply for such a grant (provided that at least one LEA in the partnership is eligible to receive chapter 1 financial assistance for educationally disadvantaged children): at least one LEA in partnership with at least one public agency; at least one nonprofit organization, institution of higher education, or private enterprise in partnership with at least one LEA; or an LEA that is receiving assistance under the Head Start Transition Project Act in partnership with any designated Head Start agency.
Requires eligible entities, to serve: educationally deprived students, students eligible to be counted under chapter 1, or students in chapter 1 schoolwide projects, and their family members; and any school, grade span, or program area if the project design is of adequate size, scope, and quality.
Requires each eligible entity desiring a grant to establish a coordinated services advisory council to develop its application.
Establishes a Federal Interagency Task Force to: identify and eliminate program regulations or practices impeding coordination and collaboration; and develop and implement plans for jointly funded programs, unified eligibility and application procedures, and confidentiality regulations that facilitate information sharing.
Directs the Secretary of Education to study and report to the Congress on grantees under this Act to identify regulatory and legislative obstacles to coordinated support services and innovative procedures and programs.
Limits the Federal share of project costs to 50 percent.
Authorizes appropriations.