Antiterrorism Act of 1993 - Prohibits the importation into the United States of goods or services from, and the exportation of goods or services from the United States to, any country that has repeatedly provided support for international terrorism.
Prohibits the rescission of such a determination unless the President certifies to the Congress that the government concerned: has had a fundamental change of leadership and policies; is not supporting international terrorism and has provided assurances that it will not support future terrorism; and at least 45 days before a proposed rescission would take effect, has not provided support for terrorism during the preceding six-month period.
Authorizes waivers of the trade embargo for national security or humanitarian reasons.
Repeals the following provisions of law: an authorization to ban the importation of goods and services from countries supporting terrorism under the International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1985; and a requirement for validated licenses and notice to the Congress for exports to countries supporting terrorism under the Export Administration Act of 1979.
Urges the President to seek: the participation of other nations in an embargo on imports from Libya; and additional measures within the United Nations Security Council to discourage nuclear terrorism.
Directs the President to establish a Government-Business Antiterrorism Council to make recommendations on steps the US Government and US businesses could take to counter the threat posed by international terrorism.
Provides for the retention of the Coordinator for Counter-Terrorism in any reorganization of the Department of State.
Prohibits the obligation of FY 1993 and 1994 international military education and training assistance for Malta.
Expresses the sense of the Congress that US Government personnel who voluntarily accept extended tours of counter-terrorism duty should be accorded beneficial consideration for advancement after completion of such duty.
Designates the Federal Bureau of Investigation as the lead agency for coordinating domestic counter-terrorism activities.
Amends the Federal criminal code to authorize the death penalty for: terrorist murders of US nationals abroad; and acts of domestic terrorism that result in a death.