National Border and Homeland Security Act of 2010 - Amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to give state criminal alien assistance program (SCAAP) funding priority to: northern or southern border states; or state political subdivisions having one of the four largest populations of unlawfully present aliens for the preceding fiscal year.
Amends the Illegal Immigration Reform and Immigrant Responsibility Act of 1996 to direct the Secretary of Homeland Security (DHS) (Secretary) to complete the required 700 mile southwest border fencing by December 31, 2012.
Amends the Secure Fence Act of 2006 to direct the Secretary to achieve operational control over US international land and maritime borders by December 31, 2012.
Directs the Secretary to: increase the number of full-time, active-duty Border Patrol agents; increase the number of Customs and Border Protection officers at US ports of entry; and ensure the implementaion of the automated entry and exit control system for aliens entering the United States at ports of entry (US-Visit) by December 31, 2011.
Prohibits the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture (USDA) from impeding border security-related activities by the Secretary on US public lands.
Sets forth activities that may be taken to increase the number of Operation Streamline prosecutions by the following US district courts: the District of Arizona; the District of New Mexico the Southern District of California the Southern District of Texas; and the Western District of Texas.
Increases criminal penalties for improper US entry by an alien.
Excludes minimum mandatory prison penalties for an alien who: is under 18 years old; is a parent traveling with a child under 18 years old; or has a life-threatening health condition.
Amends the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to direct the Domestic Nuclear Detection Office (of DHS), in protecting the United States from a nuclear, fissile material, or radiological attack, to consider potential smuggling routes in land border areas between ports of entry, railcars entering the United States from Canada or Mexico, and private aircraft or small vessels.
Directs the Secretary to procure the number of next generation portable radiation detectors (PRD) and radioactive isotope identification devices (RIID) required by the Border Patrol along the southern and northern US borders by July 1, 2011.
Authorizes appropriations for port security grants.
Directs the Secretary to develop and implement a strategic plan to detect and interdict biological and chemical weapons entering the United States.