Handgun Control Act of 1996 - Amends the Federal criminal code to prohibit the importation, manufacture, sale, purchase, transfer, receipt, or transportation (use) of a handgun, with exceptions.
Authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury, consistent with public safety and necessity, to exempt such activities by licensed importers, manufacturers, or dealers, and by licensed pistol clubs, as may be required for the operation of such clubs.
Requires a pistol club desiring to be licensed to file an application for a license with the Secretary.
Establishes a $25 per year license fee.
Requires approval of any such application if: all club members are age 21 or older; no member of the club is prohibited from transporting, shipping, or receiving firearms or ammunition in interstate or foreign commerce under Federal or applicable State law; no member of the club has willfully violated any Federal firearms law or regulations; the club has not willfully failed to disclose any material information required, or has not made any false statement as to any material fact, in connection with the application; and the club has premises from which it operates and maintains possession and control of the handguns used by its members and has procedures and facilities for keeping such handguns in a secure place, under the control of the club's chief officer, at all times when they are not being used for target shooting or other sporting or recreational purposes.
Establishes procedures and requirements regarding: approval or denial of applications; license revocation, including notice and opportunity for a hearing; review by the Secretary and appeal of application denials; records requirements by licensed clubs; and license posting and availability for inspection on the premises covered by the licensee.
Sets penalties for violations.
Subjects handguns involved, used, or intended to be used in violation of Federal firearms provisions to seizure and forfeiture and makes all provisions of the Internal Revenue Code relating to seizure, forfeiture, and disposition of firearms, so far as applicable, extend to such seizures and forfeitures.
Makes this Act inapplicable to such use: by the United States or any department or agency thereof or any State or department, agency, or political subdivision thereof; and in which the handgun is determined to be unserviceable, not restorable to firing condition, and intended for use as a curio, museum piece, or collectors' item.
Sets forth provisions regarding: voluntary delivery of a handgun to a law enforcement agency, including provision for reimbursement upon proof of lawful acquisition and ownership; rulemaking by the Secretary; the Secretary's enforcement and administration authority; and the effect of this Act on State law and on other Federal law.