Lifespan Respite Care Act of 2006 - (Sec.
Amends the Public Health Service Act to authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Services to award matching grants or cooperative agreements to eligible state agencies to: expand and enhance respite care services to family caregivers; improve the statewide dissemination and coordination of respite care; and provide, supplement, or improve access and quality of respite care services to family caregivers, thereby reducing family caregiver strain.
Defines "respite care" to mean planned or emergency care provided to a child or adult with a special need in order to provide temporary relief to the family caregiver.
Instructs the Secretary to work cooperatively with the National Family Caregiver Support Program of the Administration on Aging and other respite care programs within the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) to ensure coordination of respite care services for family caregivers of children and adults with special needs.
Requires the Secretary to: give priority to eligible state agencies that show the greatest likelihood of implementing or enhancing lifespan respite care statewide; and give consideration to agencies that are building or enhancing the capacity of their long-term care systems to respond to the comprehensive needs, including respite care needs, of their residents.
Directs that funds must be used to: develop or enhance lifespan respite care at the state and local levels; provide respite care services for family caregivers caring for children or adults; train and recruit respite care workers; provide information to caregivers about available respite and support services; and assist caregivers in gaining access to such services.
Permits part of such funds to be used for: training programs for family caregivers to assist in making informed decisions about respite care services; other services essential to the provision of respite care; or training and education for new caregivers.
Allows the Secretary to award a grant or cooperative agreement to a public or private nonprofit entity to establish the National Resource Center on Lifespan Respite Care to: maintain a national database on lifespan respite care; provide training and technical assistance to state, community, and nonprofit respite care programs; and provide information, referral, and educational programs to the public on lifespan respite care.
Sets forth reporting requirements.
Authorizes appropriations.
(Sec.
Requires the Comptroller General to conduct an evaluation and report to Congress on the effectiveness of lifespan respite care programs, including an analysis of cost benefits and improved efficiency in service delivery.