(This measure has not been amended since it was reported to the House on March 31, 2003.
The summary of that version is repeated here.
)Business Checking Freedom Act of 2003 - (Sec.
Amends Federal law to authorize interest-bearing transaction accounts for all businesses, permitting up to 24 transfers per month (or any greater number the Federal Reserve Board may determine) to another account of the owner in the same institution.(Sec.
Amends the Federal Reserve Act, the Home Owners' Loan Act, and the Federal Deposit Insurance Act to repeal the prohibition against the payment of interest on demand deposits.
Makes such repeal effective two years from the date of enactment(Sec.
Authorizes the payment of interest on reserves by a Federal reserve bank at least quarterly on balances maintained there on behalf of a depository institution.Amends the Federal Reserve Act to require the Board to survey annually and report to Congress on bank fees and services including: checking and other transaction accounts; negotiable order of withdrawal and savings accounts; automated teller machine transactions; and other electronic transactions.
Sets forth minimum survey requirements for each such account or transaction.
Requires the survey to address minimum balance requirements as well as fees.Requires the Board to report annually to Congress on the survey results.Amends the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act of 1994, and the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989, to repeal certain reporting requirements.(Sec.
Amends the Federal Reserve Act to revise the ratio of reserves a depository institution must maintain against its transaction accounts, permitting a ratio of zero(Sec.
Directs the Federal reserve banks to deposit additional surplus funds into the general fund of the Treasury for FY 2003 through 2007 equal to the estimated annual net revenue loss.Prohibits such banks, during FY 2003 through 2007, from replenishing their respective surplus funds by the amount of any such transfer made to cover interest payments.