TABLE OF CONTENTS: Title I: Migratory Bird Treaty Reform Title II: National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Title III: Wetlands and Wildlife Enhancement Title IV: Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Title V: Chesapeake Bay Initiative Title I: Migratory Bird Treaty Reform - Migratory Bird Treaty Reform Act of 1998 - Amends the Migratory Bird Treaty Act to make it unlawful for persons to: take migratory birds by the aid of baiting, or on or over any baited area, if such persons know or should know that the area is a baited area; or place or direct the placement of bait on or adjacent to an area for purposes of causing, inducing, or allowing any person to take or attempt to take any migratory bird by the aid of baiting on or over the baited area.
Increases penalties for violations of the Act.
Requires the Secretary of the Interior to report to specified congressional committees on the effect of the amendments regarding baiting made by this Act and the general practice of baiting on migratory bird conservation and law enforcement efforts under the Act.
Title II: National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement - National Wildlife Refuge System Improvement Act of 1998 - Transfers to the Corps of Engineers, without reimbursement, certain land of the Upper Mississippi River Wildlife and Fish Refuge in Minnesota.
Terminates the jurisdiction of the US Fish and Wildlife Service over: the Killcohook Coordination Area in New Jersey and Delaware; and Lake Elsie National Wildlife Refuge in Richland County, North Dakota.
Revokes Executive Orders 6582, 8648, and 8152.
Renames the Klamath Forest National Wildlife Refuge as the Klamath Marsh National Wildlife Refuge.
Amends the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1996 to specify the periods of imprisonment for knowing violations of the Act (not more than one year) and for other violations (not more than 180 days).
Title III: Wetlands and Wildlife Enhancement - Wetlands and Wildlife Enhancement Act of 1998 - Amends the North American Wetlands Conservation Act and the Partnerships for Wildlife Act to extend the authorization of appropriations to carry out such Acts through FY 2003.
(Sec.
Revises the composition of the North American Wetlands Conservation Council during FY 1999 through 2002 to include: the Group Manager for Conservation Programs of Ducks Unlimited, Inc; and two (currently, three) individuals appointed by the Secretary of the Interior (Secretary) who represent charitable and nonprofit organizations participating in wetlands conservation projects.
Requires the Secretary to publish a policy in the Federal Register for making appointments to the Council from such organizations.
Title IV: Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation - Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act of 1998 - Amends the Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act of 1994 (the Act) to prohibit the sale, import, or export, or the attempted sale, import, or export, of any product, item, or substance (product) intended for human consumption or application containing, or labeled or advertised as containing, any substance derived from any species of rhinoceros or tiger.
Sets forth provisions regarding: criminal and civil penalties, including seizure and forfeiture of such products; enforcement activities; and use of penalty amounts.
(Sec.
406) Directs the Secretary to develop and implement an educational outreach program in the United States for the conservation of rhinoceros and tiger species.
(Sec.
407) Authorizes appropriations.
Title V: Chesapeake Bay Initiative - Chesapeake Bay Initiative Act of 1998 - Directs the Secretary of the Interior to provide technical and financial assistance to: identify, conserve, restore, and interpret natural, recreational, historical, and cultural resources within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed; identify and utilize the collective resources as Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites for enhancing public education of and access to the Bay; link the Gateways sites with trails, tour roads, scenic byways, and other connections as determined by the Secretary; develop and establish Bay Watertrails comprising water routes and connections to Gateways sites and other land resources within the Watershed; and create a network of Bay Gateways sites and Watertrails.
Directs the Secretary to establish a Chesapeake Bay Gateways Grants Assistance Program.
Sets forth provisions regarding grant eligibility, prioritization, and review criteria and matching funds.
Authorizes appropriations.