National Strategic and Critical Minerals Policy Act of 2011 - (Sec.
Declares that it is the continuing policy of the United States to promote an adequate and stable supply of minerals to maintain the nation's economic well-being, security, and manufacturing, industrial, energy, agricultural, and technological capabilities.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary of the Interior, through the Bureau of Land Management (BLM) and the US Geological Survey (Survey), to report to Congress: an inventory of the nonfossil-fuel mineral potential of lands under BLM and US Forest Service jurisdiction; an identification of all such lands that have been withdrawn, segregated, or otherwise restricted from mineral exploration and development; a detailed description of the time required to process mineral applications, operating plans, leases, licenses, permits, and other use authorizations for mineral-related activities on lands; an itemized list of all use authorizations for which applications are pending; an assessment of the impact of litigation on the processing or issuing of permits; an assessment of the federal workforce with educational degrees and expertise in economic geology, geochemistry, mining, industrial minerals, metallurgy, metallurgical engineering, and mining engineering; and an inventory of rare earth element potential on federal lands, and impediments to or restrictions on the exploration or development of those rare earth elements, with recommendations to lift the impediments or restrictions while maintaining environmental safeguards.
Requires progress reports to Congress on: efforts to increase access to domestic supplies of minerals, and facilitation of their production; implementation of recommendations in National Research Council reports on "Minerals, Critical Minerals, and the US Economy" and on "Managing Minerals for a Twenty-First Century Military"; the Department of Energy Critical Minerals Strategy I and II; and a specified Department of Defense assessment and plan for critical rare earth elements in defense applications.
(Sec.
Directs the Survey, for the first National Mineral Assessment conducted after enactment of this Act, to include mineral assessments for mineral commodities important to the nation's energy infrastructure, manufacturing and agricultural industries, and to the national defense.
Urges priority be given to minerals that are critical based on the impact of a potential supply restriction and the likelihood of a supply restriction.
(Sec.
Directs the Survey to expand the current Global Mineral Assessment to include mineral assessments for rare earth elements and other minerals that are critical based on the impact of a potential supply restriction and the likelihood of a supply restriction.
Requires such assessments to include an analysis, developed with participation by the National Minerals Information Center, of the rare earth elements or other critical minerals supply chain and associated processes and products, including mining, processing, recycling, separation, metal production, alloy production, and manufacturing of products sold to end users.