Title I: Naval Vessel Transfer - Naval Vessel Transfer Act of 2008 - (Sec.
102) Authorizes the President to transfer on a grant basis to: Pakistan, the OLIVER HAZARD PERRY class guided missile frigate MCINERNEY; Chile, the KAISER class oiler ANDREW J HIGGINS; and Peru, the NEWPORT class amphibious tank landing ships FRESNO and RACINE.
States that: the value of such vessels transferred on a grant basis shall not be counted against the aggregate value of excess defense articles transferred to countries in any fiscal year under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961; transfer costs shall be charged to the recipient; and to the maximum extent practicable, the country to which a vessel is transferred shall have necessary vessel repair and refurbishment carried out at US shipyards (including US Navy shipyards).
Terminates transfer authority two years after enactment of this Act.
Title II: United States Arms Exports - (Sec.
201) Directs the President to: carry out an ongoing assessment of the extent to which Israel possesses a qualitative military edge (as defined by this Act) over military threats; use such assessment in reviewing applications to sell defense articles and services under the Arms Export Control Act to a Middle Eastern country other than Israel; and submit an initial report on such assessment to the appropriate congressional committees by June 30, 2009, and then every four years thereafter.
Amends the Arms Export Control Act to require any certification relating to a proposed sale or export of defense articles or services to a Middle Eastern country other than Israel to include a determination that such sale or export will not adversely affect Israel's qualitative military edge (as defined by this Act for purposes of this provision) over military threats.
(Sec.
202) Makes specified foreign military financing program funds for FY2009 available on a grant basis for Israel.
Authorizes funding in FY2009 for the procurement of advanced weapons systems, including research and development, by Israel.
(Sec.
203) Amends the Arms Export Control Act to provide the Republic of Korea with special foreign military sales status, including expedited congressional review for export of US defense items and services.