Educational Technology Utilization Extension Assistance Act - Requires the Director of the National Science Foundation (NSF), in cooperation with the Secretary of Education and the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST), to provide assistance for the creation and support of regional centers for the utilization of educational technologies (ETU Centers).
Allows ETU Centers to be established at any institution of higher education, and to include the participation of non-profit entities and organizations.
Requires ETU Centers to enhance the use of educational technologies in elementary and secondary education through: advising school administrators, school boards, and teachers on adopting and using new educational technologies and the usefulness of local schools' existing educational technology assets and infrastructure; participation of individuals from the private sector, universities, State and local governments, and other Federal agencies; active dissemination of technical and management information about the use of educational technologies; and appropriate use of the expertise and capabilities that exist in Federal laboratories and Federal agencies.
Requires ETU Centers' activities to include: active transfer and dissemination of research findings and ETU Center expertise to local school authorities; training teachers in integrating schools' existing educational technology infrastructure into their instructional design; training and advising teachers, administrators, and school board members in acquiring, using, and supporting educational technologies; support services to teachers, administrators, and school board members; and advising teachers, administrators, and school board members on current skill set standards employed by private industry.
Sets forth requirements for program administration and application and selection procedures.
Allows any undergraduate institution of higher education, consortia of such institutions and non-profit organizations to apply for financial support in accordance with the procedures.
Requires each applicant to provide adequate assurances that it will contribute 50 percent or more of the proposed ETU Center's capital and annual operating and maintenance costs.
Requires the NSF Director, in conjunction with the Secretary of Education and the NIST Director, to subject each application to competitive merit review, including specified considerations.
Requires each ETU Center to be evaluated during its third year of operation.
Requires a positive evaluation for renewal of funding.