Education for the 21st Century (E-21) Act - Establishes assistance programs for middle school computer literacy and for high-quality educational software for all schools.
(Sec.
Authorizes the Secretary of Education to award grants to States that integrate into the State curriculum the goal of making all middle school graduates in the State technology literate.
Requires preference to be given to States which place a priority on training middle school teachers.
Requires such grants to be used for teacher training in technology, with an emphasis on programs that prepare one or more teachers in each middle school in the State to become technology leaders who then serve as experts and train other teachers.
Directs States to encourage schools that receive such assistance to provide matching funds.
Authorizes appropriations.
(Sec.
Authorizes the Secretary to award competitive grants to secondary school and college students working with university faculty, software developers, and experts in educational technology for the development of high-quality educational software and Internet web sites by such students, faculty, developers, and experts.
Directs the Secretary to: recognize outstanding educational software and Internet web sites developed with such assistance that focus on core curriculum areas; and issue certificates to each student and faculty member who develops such recognized software or sites.
Requires grant award priority to be given for developing such software or sites in the following core curriculum areas: for the first year of awards, in mathematics, science, and reading; and for the second and third years of awards, again in mathematics, science, and reading, but also in social studies, the humanities, and the arts.
Requires: such recognized educational software to be made available to local educational agencies for free downloading from the Department of Education's Internet web site; and such recognized Internet web sites to be accessible to any World Wide Web user.
Authorizes appropriations.