Demanding Accountability for Veterans Act of 2014 - (Sec.
Requires the Inspector General (IG) of the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA), upon determining that the VA Secretary has not appropriately responded to an IG report that recommends actions to be taken by the Secretary to address a VA public health or safety issue, to notify the Secretary and the congressional veterans committees of such failure.
Requires the Secretary: within 15 days after such notification, to submit to the IG a list of the names of each responsible VA manager and the matter for which the manager is responsible; within 7 days after such submission, to notify each such manager of the covered issue; to direct such manager to resolve the issue; to provide the manager with appropriate counseling and a mitigation plan for resolving the issue; and to ensure that a manager's performance review includes an evaluation of actions taken with respect to such issue.
Prohibits the Secretary from paying a bonus or award to any manager whose issue remains unresolved.
(Sec.
Authorizes the Secretary, for the three years beginning on October 1, 2014, to transfer a veteran who is eligible for VA nursing home care to a medical foster home if: the veteran requests that transfer, the home meets the VA's standards, and the transfer is made pursuant to a contract or agreement between the VA and the medical foster home.
Requires a veteran so transferred to agree, as a condition of such transfer, to accept VA home health services.
Defines a &quot;medical foster home&quot; as a home designed to provide non-institutional, long-term, supportive care for veterans who are unable to live independently and prefer a family setting.
(Sec.
Prohibits the Secretary from making a per diem payment to a public or nonprofit private entity for the provision of housing or housing services to homeless veterans unless such entity submits to the Secretary an annual certification that the building proposed for such housing or services is in compliance with codes relevant to the operations and level of care provided, licensing requirements, fire and safety requirements, and any other local requirements regarding the condition of the facility and the operation of the entity providing such housing or services.
Directs the Secretary to include, in a currently required annual report on assistance to homeless veterans, an evaluation of the safety and accessibility of such facilities.
(Sec.
Extends, through October 1, 2018, the current rates for fees on housing loans guaranteed by the VA, excluding the rates for fees on subsequent loans.
(Sec.
Extends through through May 31, 2017, the Secretary's authority to obtain veterans' income verification information from the Commissioner of Social Security or the Secretary of the Treasury.