Prohibits Federal agencies from offsetting funds made available for Indian tribal court membership organizations or Indian legal services organizations against other funds otherwise available for use in connection with technical or legal assistance to tribal justice systems or members.
Authorizes appropriations.
Title II: Indian Tribal Courts - Authorizes the Attorney General to award grants and provide technical assistance to enable Indian tribes to carry out programs to support: the development, enhancement, and continuing operation of tribal justice systems; and the development and implementation of tribal codes and sentencing guidelines; inter-tribal courts and appellate systems; tribal probation services, diversion programs, and alternative sentencing provisions; tribal juvenile services and multi-disciplinary protocols for child physical and sexual abuse; and traditional tribal judicial practices, tribal justice systems, and methods of dispute resolution.
Authorizes appropriations.
Amends the Indian Tribal Justice Act to extend the authorization of appropriations relating to tribal justice systems through FY 2007.
Title III: Technical Amendments to Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act - Amends the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act to make technical amendments to provisions regarding open season for allotments for certain Alaska Native veterans.
Revises eligibility requirements to make a veteran eligible for an allotment if the veteran served at least six months between January 1, 1969, and December 31, 1971 (currently, June 2, 1971), and meets other existing requirements.
Changes provisions regarding the authority of a personal representative of a decedent to select an allotment to authorize such representative or a special administrator appointed in an Alaska State court to select an allotment if the decedent was a veteran who served in Southeast Asia at any time during August 5, 1964, and December 31, 1971, and during such period: was killed in action; was wounded in action and died as a consequence of the wound; or died while a prisoner of war.
(Current law allows personal representatives to select such allotments if, between January 1, 1969, and December 31, 1971, one of such events occurred with respect to the decedent.)
Subjects a beneficiary's interest in a settlement trust and the distributions thereon to creditor action only to the extent that Settlement Common Stock and related distributions are subject to such action under the Act.
Title IV: National Leadership Symposium For American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian Youth - Authorizes appropriations to the Secretary of Education for the Washington Workshops Foundation for administration of a national leadership symposium for American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian youth on the traditions and values of American democracy.