Federal Communications Commission Authorization Act of 1994 - Amends the Communications Act of 1934 (the Act) to authorize appropriations for the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) for FY 1995.
Derives a portion of the sum of such appropriations in each fiscal year in an amount determined from the establishment and adjustment of regulatory fees under the Act.
Repeals provisions of the Act regarding the travel and reimbursement program.
Amends the Federal Communications Commission Authorization Act of 1988 to authorize the FCC during FY 1995 to: make grants to, or enter into cooperative agreements with, private nonprofit organizations designated under the Older Americans Act; and expend funds as required to relocate the Hawaii Monitoring Station.
Revises the schedule of application fees for personal communications services and amateur vanity call signs under the Act.
Sets forth provisions regarding: use of such moneys; recovery of executive and legal costs incurred by the FCC; establishment and adjustment of fees; regulatory fees for satellite television operations; and governmental entities use for common carrier purposes.
Directs the FCC to: develop accounting systems for the purposes of making adjustments authorized by this Act; and annually prepare and submit to the Congress an analysis of such systems and afford interested persons the opportunity to submit comments concerning the allocation of costs.
Authorizes the FCC to: designate an entity to make inspections of ship radio stations; and narrow the circumstances under which the required annual inspection may be waived in the public interest.
Sets forth provisions regarding: expedited Instructional Television Fixed Service processing; tariff rejection authority; refund authority; licensing of aviation, maritime, and personal radio services by rule; forfeitures for violations imperiling safety of life; use of experts and consultants; and the statute of limitations for forfeiture proceedings against common carriers.
Directs the FCC to report to the Congress on the existing and future use of the FM band to facilitate the use of auditory assistive devices for individuals with hearing impairments.