Amends the Elwha River Ecosystem and Fisheries Restoration Act to direct the Secretary of the Interior, as soon as sums are appropriated, to acquire the Elwha and Glines Projects (Clallam County, Washington, hydroelectric power projects) for a purchase price of $295 million.
Conditions such acquisition on a release of the owner and local industrial consumer from liability to the United States arising from such Projects.
Prohibits the United States from assuming or satisfying the liability of such owner or consumer to any federally recognized Indian tribe.
Directs the Secretary: after acquiring the Elwha Project and as soon as sums are appropriated for such purpose, to remove the Elwha dam, taking necessary action to ensure the continued availability of current water quality and quantity to specified areas and users; during the removal phase, to thoroughly evaluate the removal's impact on fish runs and submit findings to the Congress; and subject to appropriations, to pay specified compensation for a period of 12 years to the Clallam County Board of Commissioners for revenues lost due to such removal (with a specified condition).
Directs the Secretary to continue operation of the Glines Canyon dam after the Elwha dam has been removed, subject to appropriations.
Requires the Secretary to: complete a Glines Canyon engineering and design study concerning the reconfiguration of transmission lines and dam operational controls; and evaluate the impact that managing such Project for fisheries restoration will have on future hydropower operations.
Directs the Secretary to: develop an annual work plan that defines all requirements necessary to achieve the ecosystem restoration objectives of the Act; and appoint an Independent Scientific Review Panel to review progress toward restoration of the Elwha River ecosystem and the contribution of removal of the dam toward restoration.
Requires the Panel to make recommendations to the Secretary on the work plan and removal of the Glines Canyon dam.
Directs the Secretary to take steps to remove the Glines Canyon dam after receiving a Panel recommendation to do so.
Prohibits, except as otherwise provided in this Act and for safety or necessary repairs, the removal or significant modification of any United States Reports-owned or -operated dam or other facility on the Columbia or Snake Rivers without specific congressional approval.