Dr. James Allen Veteran Vision Equity Act of 2007 - Title I: Low-Vision Benefits Matters - (Sec.
101) Modifies the standard for awarding disability compensation to veterans for loss of vision to require payment of compensation for impairment of vision due to a service-connected disability resulting in 20/200 (currently, 5/200) visual acuity or less.
(Sec.
102) Modifies the above standard in the case of impairment of vision (currently, blindness) involving both eyes due to a service-connected disability in one eye and a non-service-connected disability in the other eye to require payment in the case of impairment resulting in a visual acuity of 20/200 or less or of a peripheral field of 20 degrees or less in each eye.
Title II: Matters Relating to Burial and Memorial Affairs - (Sec.
201) Authorizes the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, in lieu of furnishing a headstone or marker for the grave of certain individuals buried in a private cemetery, to furnish a medallion or other device to signify the deceased's status as a veteran, to be attached to a headstone or marker furnished at private expense.
(Sec.
202) Repeals, as of October 1, 2006, the time limit for a state's filing of a request for reimbursement for interment costs for veterans buried in cemeteries other than national cemeteries.
Authorizes the Secretary to make a grant to a state for operating and maintaining a veterans' cemetery owned by such state.
Limits to $5 million the amount of such grants awarded in a fiscal year.
(Sec.
203) Makes permanent the authority of the Secretary to furnish government headstones or markers for the burial of veterans at private cemeteries.
Title III: Other Matters - (Sec.
301) Requires the Secretary to provide the Secretary of Health and Human Services with information for comparison with the National Directory of New Hires for income verification purposes in order to determine eligibility for certain veteran benefits and services.
Requires the Secretary to: seek only the minimum information necessary to make such determination; receive prior written consent of the individual before seeking, using, or disclosing any such information; independently verify any information received prior to terminating, denying, or reducing a benefit or service; and allow an opportunity for an individual to contest negative findings.
Terminates such authority at the end of FY2011.
(Sec.
302) Extends, through June 30, 2010, the Secretary's authority to provide an educational allowance to persons performing qualifying work-study activities.