Sudan Peace Act - Declares that Congress condemns violations of human rights on all sides of the conflict in Sudan (including the Government of Sudan), the ongoing slave trade there, the Government's use and organization of "murahalliin" (or "mujahadeen"), Popular Defense Forces (PDF), and regular Sudanese Army units into raiding and slaving parties in Bahr al Ghazal, the Nuba Mountains, Upper Nile, and Blue Nile regions, and its aerial bombardment of civilian targets.
Recognizes that the use of raiding and slaving parties is a tool for creating food shortages as a systematic means to destroy the societies, culture, and economies of the Dinka, Nuer, and Nuba peoples in a policy of low-intensity ethnic cleansing.(Sec.
Urges the President to make certain funds available for humanitarian assistance to the National Democratic Alliance(Sec.
Authorizes the Secretary of State to utilize Department of State personnel for the support of ongoing negotiations, and eventual implementation of a peace settlement, between the Government of Sudan and opposition forces(Sec.
Expresses the sense of Congress that: the United Nations (UN) should be used as a tool to facilitate peace and recovery in Sudan; and the President should seek to end the Government of Sudan's veto power over relief flight plans, to investigate the practice of slavery in Sudan, and to sponsor a condemnation of the Government of Sudan each time it subjects civilians to aerial bombardment.(Sec.
Prohibits business entities engaged in commercial activities in Sudan from trading their securities in any US capital market unless they make public disclosure of their activities in Sudan(Sec.
Directs the President to exercise his authorities under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to prohibit any entity engaged in the development of oil or gas in Sudan from: raising capital in the United States; or trading its securities (or depository receipts with respect to its securities) in any US capital market(Sec.
10) Requires the Secretary of State to report to the appropriate congressional committees on the conflict in Sudan(Sec.
11) Declares the sense of Congress that the President should continue to increase the use of non-Operation Lifeline Sudan agencies in relief supply distribution in southern Sudan.
Requires the President to submit a progress report to the appropriate congressional committees.(Sec.
12) Directs the President to develop a contingency plan to provide, outside UN auspices, the greatest amount of US Government and privately donated relief to all affected areas in Sudan, including the Nuba Mountains, Upper Nile, and the Blue Nile regions, in the event the Government of Sudan imposes a ban on Operation Lifeline Sudan (OLS) air transport relief flights.
Authorizes the President to reprogram up to 100 percent of funds for OLS operations for purposes of such contingency plan(Sec.
13) Directs the Secretary to collect and report to specified congressional committees on information about possible war crimes by all parties to the conflict in Sudan, including slavery, rape, and aerial bombardment of civilian targets.