.
Countering Terrorist Radicalization Act TITLE I--AMPLIFYING LOCAL EFFORTS TO ROOT OUT TERROR (Sec.
101) This bill authorizes the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to provide training at state and major urban area fusion centers for the purpose of administering community awareness briefings and related activities in furtherance of its efforts to counter violent extremism, identify and report suspicious activities, and increase awareness of and more quickly identify terrorism threats, including the travel or attempted travel of individuals from the United States to support a foreign terrorist organization abroad.
(A "fusion center" serves as a focal point within the state and local environment for the receipt, analysis, gathering, and sharing of threat-related information between the federal government and state, local, tribal, territorial and private sector partners.)
(Sec.
102) The bill directs DHS to assess its efforts to support countering violent extremism at the state, local, tribal, and territorial levels.
Such assessment shall: catalog such efforts; review cooperative agreements between DHS and such governments relating to countering violent extremism; and evaluate DHS plans and any potential opportunities to better support such governments that are in furtherance of DHS's countering violent extremism objectives and consistent with all relevant constitutional, legal, and privacy protections.
(Sec.
103) DHS shall notify Congress of the number of employees of state, local, tribal, and territorial governments with security clearances sponsored by DHS, including a detailed list of the agencies that employ such employees, the level of clearance held, and whether such employees are assigned as representatives to fusion centers.
TITLE II--COUNTERMESSAGING TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS (Sec.
201) DHS shall incorporate the public testimonials of former extremists into its efforts to combat terrorist recruitment.
Such efforts may include: counter-messaging of foreign terrorist organization communications, and related community engagement and public education efforts.
TITLE III--COUNTERTERRORISM ADVISORY BOARD (Sec.
301) This title amends the Homeland Security Act of 2002 to establish in DHS a board to coordinate and integrate DHS's intelligence, activities, and policy related to its counterterrorism mission and functions.
The board shall: meet on a regular basis to discuss intelligence and coordinate ongoing threat mitigation efforts and departmental activities, and advise the Secretary of DHS on the issuance of terrorism alerts.
The Secretary shall appoint a Coordinator for Counterterrorism within DHS to serve as the chair of the board.
TITLE IV--PROHIBITION ON NEW FUNDING (Sec.
401) No additional funds are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this bill.