Amends the Controlled Substances Act (CSA) to authorize the medical prescription of marihuana, subject to regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Establishes in the Department of Health and Human Services the Office for the Supply of Internationally Controlled Drugs which shall be responsible for regulating, administering, and supervising the domestic production of marihuana for distribution for medical, scientific, and research purposes.
Directs the Secretary to take all necessary actions to secure and maintain a supply of marihuana adequate for the legitimate medical, research, scientific, and export needs of the United States.
Directs: the Office or its delegates, within four months of the end of the harvest of marihuana grown by registered bidders pursuant to contract with the Office, to take physical possession of the marihuana harvested; and the Secretary to declare that a state of emergency exists if a supply of marihuana adequate to meet domestic medical, scientific, and research needs is not obtained through contractual arrangements with domestic registered bidders, in which case the Secretary shall make arrangements for the direct importation by the Office of an adequate supply, subject to specified requirements.
Sets forth procedures for: physicians to file written applications with the Office seeking permission to use marihuana in their practices; and hospitals and pharmacies to obtain supplies of marihuana.
Directs the Secretary to: set a price for marihuana that will recoup, within a reasonable time, all of the costs incurred by the Government in producing, processing, and distributing marihuana; and promulgate regulations to ensure an adequate supply of medically usable marihuana and to ensure proper safeguards to prevent its diversion to other than legitimate channels.
Sets penalties for using an order form for the distribution of medicinal marihuana in a manner prohibited under the CSA or to furnish such a form in violation of the CSA.
Amends the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to provide that: the approval of the Secretary shall not be required for the introduction or delivery of marihuana into interstate commerce in compliance with the CSA; and marihuana is defined as a prescription drug for specified purposes and only physicians who are eligible to obtain marihuana under the CSA may issue written prescriptions authorizing the dispensing of marihuana.
Authorizes appropriations.
Sets forth interim provisions.