Eightmile Wild and Scenic River Act - Amends the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (the Act) to designate specified segments in the Eightmile River in Connecticut as components of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System.
Requires the Secretary of the Interior to: manage Eightmile River in accordance with the Eightmile Watershed Management Plan, dated December 8, 2005, and such amendments to the Plan as the Secretary determines to be consistent with this Act; and coordinate the management responsibilities of the Secretary relating to the River with the Eightmile River Coordinating Committee, as described in such Plan.
Allows the Secretary, concerning cooperative agreements for the administration of any component of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, to enter into a cooperative agreement with: the State of Connecticut; the towns of Salem, Lyme, and East Haddam, Connecticut (the towns); and appropriate local planning and environmental organizations.
Requires that each such cooperative agreement authorized: shall be consistent with the management plan; and may include provisions for financial or other assistance from the United States.
Bars the Eightmile River from being: administered as part of the National Park System; or subject to regulations that govern such System.
Considers, with respect to the Eightmile River, each zoning ordinance adopted by the towns in effect as of December 8, 2005, to satisfy each standard and requirement under the Act regarding the prohibition on the federal acquisition of certain lands by condemnation for inclusion in any national, wild, scenic, or recreational river area.
Makes the provisions of the Act that prohibit federal acquisition of land by condemnation applicable to the acquisition of land for the Eightmile River.
Limits the authority of the Secretary to acquire land for the purpose of managing the River as a component of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System to acquisition by donation or with the consent of the owner of the land and subject to the additional criteria set forth in the management plan.
Recognizes specified tributaries of the Eightmile River Watershed as integral to the protection and enhancement of the River and that watershed.
Authorizes appropriations.