TABLE OF CONTENTS: Title I: Fair Health Information Practices Subtitle A: Duties of Health Information Trustees Subtitle B: Use and Disclosure of Protected Health Information Subtitle C: Access Procedures and Challenge Rights Subtitle D: Miscellaneous Provisions Subtitle E: Enforcement Title II: Amendments to Title 5, United States Code Title III: Regulations, Research, and Education; Effective Dates; Applicability; and Relationship to Other Laws Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995 - Title I: Fair Health Information Practices - Subtitle A: Duties of Health Information Trustees - Requires, subject to stated exceptions, health care providers, health information service organizations, health oversight agencies, health benefit plan sponsors, and health researchers (health information trustees) to permit an individual (protected individual) to examine his or her own medical records (protected health information).
Excepts certain mental health or other records which may endanger the protected individual.
Sets forth provisions concerning: notice of information practices; accounting for disclosures; and security.
Subtitle B: Use and Disclosure of Protected Information - Sets forth the general rule that a health information trustee may use protected information only for a purpose: that is compatible with and directly related to the purpose for which the information was collected or received by the trustee; or for which the trustee has received authorization to disclose such information.
Makes exceptions, if proper procedures are followed, for the following situations: next of kin and directory information; public health; health research; emergencies; judicial and administrative purposes; law enforcement; subpoenas, warrants, and search warrants; and health information service organizations.
Subtitle C: Access Procedures and Challenge Rights - Sets forth access and challenge procedures for subpoenas, warrants, and search warrants concerning protected health information.
Subtitle D: Miscellaneous Provisions - Permits a health information trustee to disclose only such information as is necessary to process a payment when payment is made by a debit, credit, or other payment card.
(Sec.
143) Directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to establish electronic documents transmission, receipt, and maintenance standards.
(Sec.
147) Directs a State to establish a process under which any created or recorded protected health information is delivered to and maintained by the State or its designated entity.
Subtitle E: Enforcement - Sets forth civil and criminal penalties for violations of this Act's provisions.
Directs the Secretary to develop alternative dispute resolution methods to resolve the civil complaints.
Title II: Amendments to Title 5, United Sates Code - Amends provisions of title 5 (Government Organization and Employees) of the United States Code concerning agency records maintained on individuals to direct the head of any agency that is a health information trustee to promulgate rules to exempt a system of records within the agency from stated provisions of title 5, to the extent that the such system contains protected health information.
Title III: Regulations, Research, and Education; Effective Dates; Applicability; and Relationship to Other Laws - Directs the Secretary to prescribe regulations to carry out this Act.
Authorizes the Secretary to sponsor research concerning protected health information.
Directs the Secretary to establish education and awareness programs concerning such information.
(Sec.
303) Sets forth provisions concerning: the applicability of the provisions of this Act to protected health information; and the relationship of the provisions of this Act to other laws.