(Sec.
This bill specifies that the amount deposited in the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) Reserve Fund for FY2018 may not exceed $48 million.
TITLE I--TRID IMPROVEMENT (Sec.
101) The bill amends the Real Estate Settlement Procedures of 1974 to modify disclosure requirements&nbsp;applicable to mortgage loan transactions.
Specifically, the disclosed charges for any title insurance premium shall be equal to the amount charged for each individual title insurance policy, subject to any discounts as required by either state regulation or the title company rate filings.
TITLE II--PROTECTION OF SOURCE CODE (Sec.
201) The bill amends the Securities Act of 1933, the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, the Investment Company Act of 1940, and the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 to specify that the SEC may not compel a person to produce a source code or similar intellectual property without first issuing a subpoena.
TITLE III--FOSTERING INNOVATION (Sec.
301) The bill amends the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 with respect to auditor-attestation requirements for public companies.
These requirements shall not apply with respect to any audit report prepared for an issuer that: ceased to be an emerging growth company on the last day of its fiscal year following the fifth anniversary of its first sale of common equity securities, had average annual gross revenues of less than $50 million as of its most recently completed fiscal year, and is not a large accelerated filer.
This exemption shall expire at the earliest of: the last day of the fiscal year 10 years after the issuer's first sale of common equity securities, the end of the fiscal year in which the issuer's average annual gross revenues exceed $50 million, or when the issuer becomes a large accelerated filer.
TITLE IV--NATIONAL SECURITIES EXCHANGE REGULATORY PARITY (Sec.
401) The bill amends the Securities Act of 1933 to exempt from state registration securities qualified for national trading by the SEC and authorized to be listed on a national securities exchange.
Currently, securities listed on exchanges specified by statute or rule are exempt.
TITLE V--ELIMINATING BARRIERS TO JOBS FOR LOAN ORIGINATORS (Sec.
501) The bill amends the SAFE Mortgage Licensing Act of 2008 to temporarily allow loan originators that meet specified requirements to continue to originate loans after moving: from one state to another, or from a depository institution to a non-depository institution.
(Sec.
502) The bill revises the SAFE Mortgage Licensing Act's civil liability immunity provisions.