TABLE OF CONTENTS: Title I: Inspector General of the General Accounting Office Title II: General Accounting Office Final Reports and Congressional Requests for Reports Title III: General Accounting Office Peer Review Committee General Accounting Office Oversight and Improvement Act of 1993 - Title I: Inspector General of the General Accounting Office - Amends the Inspector General Act of 1978 and other Federal law to: establish an Office of Inspector General in the General Accounting Office (GAO); require the GAO Inspector General (IG) to be appointed jointly by the Speaker and the Minority Leader of the House and the leadership of the Senate; allow removal only for cause; and set the IG's annual salary.
(Sec.
104) Authorizes the Comptroller General (CG) to make changes with regard to GAO's Office of Special Investigations that are consistent with this title.
Title II: General Accounting Office Final Reports and Congressional Requests for Reports - Amends Federal law to require the CG to: provide an agency of the Federal Government or the District of Columbia government relevant to a report an opportunity to review any finding of GAO in such report before it is final and released; include a summary of the post-review agency response in the final report; and include, to the greatest extent practicable, a list of all organizational contacts and informational sources used in each final report.
(Sec.
201) Authorizes the CG to release a final report no earlier than seven days after receiving a Member of Congress' request to withhold such release.
Prohibits release of a final report unless the CG includes in it a written determination that GAO has complied with all internal quality control procedures.
Sets forth procedures for releasing or preparing a report upon request by committee chairmen, ranking minority members, or individual Members.
Requires CG to treat all requests from committee chairmen and ranking members on an equal basis.
Title III: General Accounting Office Peer Review Committee - Establishes the General Accounting Office Peer Review Committee.
Lists Committee functions, which include recommending a formal process and standards for review under which agencies, and affected parties, may appeal to GAO for correction of factual errors and for reconsideration of study, audit, investigation, and report findings based on erroneous or unconsidered information.
(Sec.
304) Requires the CG to implement Committee recommendations to the greatest extent practicable consistent with applicable law.