Infrastructure Growth and Employment Act of 1993 - Authorizes the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Economic Development Administration, to make grants to States or local governments for construction, renovation, repair, or other improvement of local public works projects (including projects for which Federal funding is authorized under other laws).
Sets the Federal share at 80 percent of project cost.
Terminates the making of such grants after the earlier of: any three-consecutive-month period during which the national unemployment rate remained below six percent; or September 30, 1994.
Allocates funds among the States on the basis of a formula involving relative numbers of unemployed persons, average unemployment rates, and severity of unemployment.
Reserves funds for projects of Indian tribes and Alaskan Native villages, minimum State allotments, and development and administration of each project.
Requires that at least ten percent of total grant funds be set aside for grants to local governments with populations under 10,000.
Sets project priority and preference requirements.
Requires giving priority to applications from States or local governments with unemployment rates in excess of the national rates.
Requires State and local prioritization of projects in their applications.
Requires localization of unemployment rate determinations.
Requires procedures which assure that adequate consideration is given to the relative needs of various sections of the country, based on factors including amount of unemployment or underemployment in construction and construction-related industries.
Requires applicants to assure that, if funds are available, on-site labor work can begin within 90 days after project approval.
Requires: contracting out; competitive bidding; awards to the lowest responsive bid; advertising specifications; environmental law and regulation compliance; and applicability of specified requirements involving Buy American provisions, minority participation, individuals with disabilities, and Davis-Bacon Act prevailing wage rates.
Authorizes appropriations.