(This measure has not been amended since it was passed by the Senate on December 8, 2010.
The summary of that version is repeated here.)
National Alzheimer's Project Act - (Sec.
Establishes in the Office of the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) the National Alzheimer's Project.Â Requires the Secretary to: be responsible for the creation and maintenance of an integrated national plan to overcome Alzheimer's; provide information and coordination of Alzheimer's research and services across all federal agencies; accelerate the development of treatments that would prevent, halt, or reverse the course of Alzheimer's; improve the early diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease and coordination of the care and treatment of citizens with Alzheimer's; ensure the inclusion of ethnic and racial populations at higher risk for Alzheimer's, or least likely to receive care for Alzheimer's, in clinical, research, and service efforts with the purpose of decreasing health disparities in Alzheimer's; and coordinate with international bodies to integrate and inform the fight against Alzheimer's globally.
Directs the Secretary to: use discretionary authority to evaluate all federal programs around Alzheimer's, including budget requests and approvals; and annually assess the nation's progress in preparing for the escalating burden of Alzheimer's.
Establishes an Advisory Council on Alzheimer's Research, Care, and Services to advise the Secretary and provide the Secretary and Congress with: an initial evaluation of all federally -funded efforts in Alzheimer's research, clinical care, and institutional-, home-, and community-based programs and their outcomes; initial recommendations for priority actions to expand, eliminate, coordinate, or condense programs based on their performance, mission, and purpose; initial recommendations to improve health outcomes and reduce the financial impact of Alzheimer's on Medicare and other federally-funded programs and on families living with Alzheimer's disease; and an annual evaluation of the implementation and outcomes of the recommendations through an updated national plan.
Terminates the Advisory Council on December 31, 2025.
Directs federal agencies to share Alzheimer's data with the Secretary.
Sets forth reporting requirements.
Terminates the Project on December 31, 2025.