National Police Athletic League Youth Enrichment Act of 1999 - Directs the Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Justice Programs of the Department of Justice, for each of FY 2000 through 2004, to award a grant to the Police Athletic League (PAL) for the purposes of establishing PAL chapters to serve public housing projects and other distressed areas and expanding existing chapters to serve additional youths.
Requires PAL, in order to be eligible to receive a grant, to submit to the Assistant Attorney General an application which shall include: a long-term strategy to establish 250 additional chapters and a detailed summary of those areas in which new chapters will be established, or in which existing chapters will be expanded to serve additional youths, during the next fiscal year; a plan to ensure that there are a total of not less than 570 chapters in operation before January 1, 2003; a certification that there will be appropriate coordination with those communities where new chapters will be located; and an explanation of the manner in which new chapters will operate without additional, direct Federal financial assistance once assistance under this Act is discontinued.
Directs the Assistant Attorney General to review, and take action on, an application within 120 days after the date of submission.
(Sec.
Directs that amounts made available under a grant awarded under this Act be used by the PAL to provide funding for the establishment of PAL chapters serving public housing projects and other distressed areas, or the expansion of existing PAL chapters.
Requires that each new or expanded PAL chapter assisted carry out not less than four programs during non-school hours, of which: not less than two programs shall provide mentoring assistance, academic assistance, recreational and athletic activities, or technology training; and any remaining programs shall provide drug, alcohol, and gang prevention activities; health and nutrition counseling; cultural and social programs; conflict resolution training, anger management, and peer pressure training; job skill preparation activities; or Youth Police Athletic League Conferences or Youth Forums.
(Sec.
Sets forth reporting requirements.
(Sec.
Authorizes appropriations.
Sets aside specified percentages of grant sums for research and evaluation, technical assistance, and management and administration.