Dollars to the Classroom Act - Requires the Secretary of Education to award the total amount of certain applicable education funding directly to the States.
(Sec.
Requires such direct awarding of all the funds (except those used for specified multiyear awards) that are appropriated for the Department of Education for the fiscal year for programs or activities under specified provisions of: the Goals 2000: Educate America Act; the Educational Research, Development, Disseminations, and Improvement Act of 1994; the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994; the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA); and the Stewart B McKinney Homeless Assistance Act.
Sets deadlines for: each State to conduct a census to determine, and report to the Secretary, the number of kindergarten through grade 12 students in the State for the academic year; and the Secretary to publish and disburse the amount each State will receive under this Act for the succeeding fiscal year.
Sets forth: a formula for determination of such award amounts, based on relative numbers of such students in each State; and penalties for false information.
Provides for continuation of certain multiyear awards made prior to enactment of this Act.
Requires award amounts under this Act to be paid to the State Governor, who shall make them available to the individual or entity in the State responsible for the State administration of Federal education funds.
Prescribes requirements for the use of such funds, earmarking not less than 95 percent for distribution to local educational agencies (LEAs) for the costs of activities or services provided in the classroom that LEAs determine appropriate, excluding associated administrative expenses, but including nonadministrative expenses associated with statewide or districtwide initiatives directly affecting classroom learning.
Prohibits: any head of a Federal department or agency other than the Secretary from promulgating regulations under this Act; and the Secretary from issuing any regulation regarding the type of classroom activities or services that may be assisted under this Act.
(Sec.
Amends ESEA title I (Helping Disadvantaged Children Meet High Standards) to require the use of at least 95 percent of title I funds for an LEA for a fiscal year according to the requirements of this Act.
Directs the Secretary to: develop and implement a plan for streamlining regulations and eliminating bureaucracy so that 95 percent of such ESEA title I funds for LEAs are used for the costs of activities and services provided in the classroom; and recommend to Congress legislation containing changes to Federal law needed for the use of such funds.
(Sec.
Requires each LEA that receives funds under this Act to provide for the participation of children enrolled in private and home schools.