Amends the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (CERCLA) to authorize States to submit to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for approval programs for the remediation of qualified municipal waste landfills.
Defines a "qualified municipal waste landfill" as a landfill on the National Priorities List (NPL) which is owned by a municipality or a county or is a privately-owned site which has a record of receiving municipal waste.
Makes CERCLA provisions inapplicable to releases or threatened releases at landfills covered under approved programs.
Directs the President to promulgate regulations governing response actions for State programs that provide for a presumptive remedy based on streamlined site characterization using EPA's Model Municipal Landfill Remedial Investigation and Feasibility Study Guidance and for closure of the site consistent with Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Includes within such remedy: waste consolidation where feasible if multiple discrete disposal sites can be more economically contained in one unit; final cover; landfill gas and surface water controls; control of leachate where feasible; groundwater monitoring or treatment under specified conditions; controls to prevent future exposure to waste; site security to prevent access; and a post-closure care plan that ensures the integrity of the remedy.
Authorizes additional protections as necessary to protect human health and the environment.
Provides for reimbursement from the Hazardous Substance Superfund for remediation expenses incurred by States with approved programs.
Limits total reimbursement to $5 billion.
Permits reimbursement for remediation commenced before approval of a program if activities were not completed before January 1, 1994, and the remediation provides protection equivalent to that specified by this Act.
Exempts any person who is otherwise liable under CERCLA or other Federal law with respect to a release of a hazardous substance from liability if the State has an approved remediation program.
Bars such exemption in cases where: remediation was completed before January 1, 1994; or a person violated any Federal, State, or local law relating to the generation, transportation, or disposal of solid waste which is present at the facility concerned.