TABLE OF CONTENTS: Title I: Congressional Compliance With Certain Generally Applicable Laws Title II: Other Congressional Reforms Title I: Congressional Compliance With Certain Generally Applicable Laws - Equity for Congress Act - Makes applicable to the Congress the following Federal laws: with respect to employment, title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967, the National Labor Relations Act, sections 1977 and 1977A of the Revised Statutes, the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, and the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993; with respect to conduct regarding matters other than employment, the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990; with respect to information in its possession, the Privacy Act of 1974; and specified provisions of the Federal judicial code relating to independent counsel.
Amends the Standing Rules of the Senate and the Rules of the House of Representatives to require a three-fifths' vote in each House before it considers legislation that creates a requirement of general applicability but exempts the Congress from such provisions.
Title II: Other Congressional Reforms - Applies the Freedom of Information Act to the Congress.
Establishes the Freedom of Information Access Office in the Congress in order to assure that Members of Congress comply with the provisions of such Act.
Declares that any law enacted pertaining to the reform of our Nation's health care system should apply to Members of Congress.
Limits the total of amounts appropriated for the legislative branch for FY 1995 to the total for FY 1994.
Requires each Member of Congress and congressional employee to pay for parking on the Capitol grounds and at any other Government location in the same amount as officers and employees of the executive branch.
Subjects official travel performed by Members and employees of the Congress to the same guidelines as to mode and cost of travel that applies to the executive branch.
Requires: any barber shop or beauty shop on the Capitol grounds to be operated by contract with a private sector entity; and the cost of each office move for a Member of Congress to be paid from an official allowance made available to the Member.
Prohibits an elevator operator from being employed for any elevator in the Capitol, House of Representatives office building, or Senate office building.
Prohibits a Member of Congress or congressional employee from: using preferential parking at any airport; or accepting any gift or ticket from a registered lobbyist.
Makes the annuities and other retirement benefits of Members and employees of the Congress the same as the annuities and other retirement benefits of the executive branch.
Prohibits a Member of Congress or congressional employee from using any limousine service that is paid for from official funds.
Amends rule XI of the Rules of the House to: prohibit proxy voting by any committee or subcommittee member; and make all House committee and subcommittee attendance and voting records available to the public.
Prohibits: appropriated funds from being used to purchase US Capitol Historical Society calendars for the Congress; and a Federal, State, or local department or agency from providing any service or assistance for a Member or employee of the Congress that is not provided for all citizens, except for assistance in support of the constituent or legislative responsibilities of such Member or employee.