Contracting and Tax Accountability Act of 2013 - (Sec.
States that it is the policy of the US government that no government contracts or grants should be awarded to individuals or business entities with seriously delinquent federal tax debts.
(Sec.
Requires the head of any executive agency that issues an invitation for bids or a request for proposals for a contract in an amount greater than the simplified acquisition threshold (i.e., $150,000) to require each person submitting a bid or proposal to: certify that such person does not have a seriously delinquent tax debt, and authorize the Secretary of the Treasury to disclose information limited to describing whether such person has a seriously delinquent tax debt.
Requires the head of any executive agency: in evaluating any offer received in response to an agency solicitation for bids or proposals for a contract, to consider a certification that the offeror has a seriously delinquent tax debt to be definitive proof that the offeror is not a responsible source to do business with the federal government; and to initiate a suspension or debarment proceeding against an offeror or a grant applicant after receiving an offer for a contract or grant application that contains a certification that such person has a seriously delinquent tax debt, or after receiving information from the Secretary that a submitted certification is false.
Allows a waiver of such debarment requirement if an agency head certifies in writing urgent and compelling circumstances significantly affecting the interests of the United States.
(Sec.
Requires the head of any executive agency that offers a grant in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold amount to require each grant applicant to: certify that the applicant does not have a seriously delinquent tax debt, and authorize the Secretary to disclose information limited to describing whether such a applicant has a seriously delinquent tax debt.
Requires the agency head, in evaluating a grant application, to consider a certification that the grant applicant has a seriously delinquent tax debt to be definitive proof that the applicant is high-risk, requiring enhanced oversight.
Requires the revision of the Federal Acquisition Regulation to incorporate requirements set forth in this Act relating to responsibility determinations and debarment for offerors or grant applicants.
(Sec.
Defines "seriously delinquent tax debt" as an outstanding federal tax debt for which a notice of lien has been filed in public records.
Exempts from such definition: tax debts that are being paid in a timely manner under an approved installment agreement, and debts for which a collection due process hearing has been requested or is pending.
(Sec.
Makes this Act applicable to contracts and grants awarded on or after 270 days after its enactment.