Melanie Blocker-Stokes Postpartum Depression Research and Care Act - Title I: Research on Postpartum Depression and Psychosis - (Sec.
101) Encourages the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) and the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health (NIMH), to continue aggressive work on postpartum depression and other postpartum psychosis.
Encourages the Director of NIMH to continue research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and find a cure for, postpartum conditions, including: basic research concerning the etiology and causes of the conditions; epidemiological studies to address the frequency and natural history of the conditions and differences among racial and ethnic groups; the development of improved screening and diagnostic techniques; clinical research for the development and evaluation of new treatments; and information and education programs for health care professionals and the public.
(Sec.
102) Encourages the Director of NIH and the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration (HRSA) to carry out a national campaign to increase the awareness and knowledge of postpartum depression and postpartum psychosis.
(Sec.
103) Requires the Director of NIH to include in the biennial report to Congress a summary of NIH research activities on depression.
(Sec.
104) Expresses the sense of Congress that the Director of NIMH may conduct a longitudinal study of the relative mental health consequences for women of resolving a pregnancy in various ways.
Requires the Director of NIMH to report to Congress on the findings of the study.
Title II: Delivery of Services Regarding Postpartum Depression and Psychosis - (Sec.
201) Urges the Secretary of Health and Human Services to make grants to public or nonprofit private entities for projects to establish, operate, and coordinate effective and cost-efficient systems for the delivery of essential services to individuals with postpartum depression or postpartum psychosis and their families.
Requires the Secretary to ensure that such projects provide services for the diagnosis and management of postpartum conditions.
Provides that the Secretary may authorize projects that include: delivering or enhancing outpatient and home-based health and support services; delivering or enhancing inpatient care management services that ensure the well-being of the mother and family and the future development of the infant; and improving the quality, availability, and organization of health care and support services for individuals with postpartum conditions and support services for their families.
Urges the Secretary to integrate programs under this Act with other grants programs.
(Sec.
202) Sets forth grant requirements, including that the applicant agrees: to abide by any limitations deemed appropriate by the Secretary on any charges to individuals receiving services pursuant to the grant; that the grant will not be expended for services paid for under another program or by an entity that provides health services on a prepaid basis; and to post a conspicuous notice of any federal policies that apply with respect to the imposition of charges.
(Sec.
203) Authorizes the Secretary to provide technical assistance to assist entities in complying with the requirements of this title in order to make such entities eligible for grants.
Title III: General Provisions - (Sec.
301) Authorizes appropriations for FY2008-FY2010.