This measure has not been amended since it was passed by the Senate on February 15, 2006.
The summary of that version is repeated here.
Stop Counterfeiting in Manufactured Goods Act - Amends the federal criminal code to revise provisions prohibiting the trafficking in counterfeit goods and services to include trafficking in labels or similar packaging of any type or nature, with knowledge that a counterfeit mark has been applied to such labels or packaging, the use of which is likely to cause confusion, to cause mistake, or to deceive.
Subjects to forfeiture any article that bears or consists of a counterfeit mark and any property used to violate the prohibition against counterfeit marks.
Directs a court: at the conclusion of forfeiture proceedings, to order the destruction of any article that bears or consists of a counterfeit mark; and to order any person convicted of using a counterfeit mark to forfeit to the United States property used in commission of the crime and to pay restitution to the owner of the mark and any other affected victim.
Modifies the definition of "counterfeit mark" to include a spurious mark that is applied to or consists of a label or packaging of any type or nature that is designed, marketed, or otherwise intended to be used on or in connection with the goods and services for which the mark is registered in the US Patent and Trademark Office, that is substantially indistinguishable from such registered mark, and that is likely to cause confusion, to cause mistake, or to deceive.
Provides that nothing in this Act shall entitle the United States to bring a criminal prosecution for the repackaging of genuine goods or services not intended to deceive or confuse.
Directs the US Sentencing Commission to: review and amend federal sentencing guidelines and policy statements applicable to persons convicted of trafficking in counterfeit labels or goods and services; and make findings with respect to the definition of "infringement amount."
Protecting American Goods and Services Act of 2005 (sic) - Amends the federal criminal code to modify the definition of "traffic" for purposes of the prohibition against trafficking in counterfeit goods or services to include the motive of commercial advantage or private financial gain in such activity.
Applies such definition to related provisions pertaining to: trafficking in sound recordings and music videos of live musical performances; trafficking in counterfeit labels for phonorecords and computer programs; and unauthorized fixation and trafficking in sound recordings and music videos.