(Sec.
102) Revises a formula to determine whether a local educational agency (LEA) may use such part A funds for schoolwide programs (to upgrade the entire educational program in a school).
Allows such schoolwide use of funds if: the school serves an eligible school attendance area in which at least 35 percent (currently 50 percent) of the children are from low-income families; or at least 35 percent (currently 50 percent) of the children enrolled in the school are from such families.
Title II: Professional Development - Amends ESEA to revise title II (Dwight D. Eisenhower Professional Development Program) by replacing current provisions.
(Sec.
201) Authorizes the Secretary of Education to provide title II grants to eligible LEAs to provide specified services.
Requires LEA grant applications to include five-year plans to improve student achievement by providing high-quality professional development for teachers, hiring new teachers, and reducing class size.
Requires half of title II funds to be allocated among States according to their relative populations of students in kindergarten through 12th grade, and the other half to be distributed according to each LEA's share of allocations under ESEA title I part A Authorizes LEAs to use title II funds for specified activities.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 2001 through 2005 for title II of ESEA.
Title III: Education Reforms - Amends ESEA to revise title III (Technology for Education) by replacing current provisions.
(Sec.
301) Authorizes the Secretary to provide title III grants to eligible LEAs to provide specified services.
Requires LEA grant applications to include five-year plans to improve student achievement through education reforms.
Requires one-quarter of title III funds to be allocated among States according to their relative populations of students in kindergarten through 12th grade, and the other three-quarters to be distributed according to each LEA's share of allocations under ESEA title I part A Authorizes LEAs to use title III funds for specified activities.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 2001 through 2005 for title III of ESEA.
Title IV: Administrative Expenses - Amends ESEA to revise title IV (Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities) by replacing current provisions.
(Sec.
401) Authorizes the Secretary to provide grants to State educational agencies (SEAs) to maintain State standards and assessments and to monitor LEA progress toward meeting State goals.
Bases the amount each State receives on its relative number of students aged five to 17.
Requires SEAs to use title IV funds for specified activities and to take corrective action in certain cases.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 2000 through 2004 for title IV of ESEA.
Title V: Increased Authorization Levels - Amends ESEA to extend through FY 2005 the authorization of appropriations, in increased specified amounts, for: Magnet School Assistance under part A of title V; and Public Charter Schools under part C of title X Title VI: Limited English Proficient Students - Amends ESEA to revise title VII (Bilingual Education, Language Enhancement, and Language Acquisition Programs) by replacing current provisions.
(Sec.
601) Authorizes the Secretary to provide title VII grants to LEAs to provide specified services to limited English proficient students to enable them to meet the same rigorous standards for academic performance as other students in the State.
Requires LEA grant applications to include five-year plans to improve limited English proficiency education, address the needs of immigrant students, and establish numerical performance objectives to determine student progress in learning English.
Requires use of census data to identify the number of limited English proficient students served by an LEA, to determine the amount each LEA may be eligible to receive.
Requires half of title VII funds to be allocated among States according to their relative populations of students in kindergarten through 12th grade, and the other half to be distributed according to each LEA's share of allocations under ESEA title I part A.
Sets forth hold-harmless provisions under which an LEA will not receive less than the total amount it received in FY 2000 under ESEA title VII as in effect prior to enactment of this Act.
Authorizes LEAs to use title VII funds for specified activities.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 2001 through 2005 for title VII of ESEA.