SBA Trade Programs Act of 2007 - Title I: Small Business Trade Policy - (Sec.
101) Amends the Small Business Act to require the director of the Office of International Trade (Office) within the Small Business Administration (SBA) to: present recommendations regarding small business exporters to trade negotiators; develop trade policies that support small businesses in domestic and foreign markets; implement trade policies through relationships developed with federal trade policymakers and transnational organizations; establish programs to boost exports of entrepreneurs and encourage transnational organizations to support and publicize such programs; notify the congressional small business committees of pending strategic alliances; and engage in follow-up activities for strategic alliances increasing trade opportunities for small businesses.
(Sec.
102) Requires the director to: develop and maintain a small business trade strategy that is contributed as part of the National Export Strategy developed by the Department of Commerce; and report such strategy to the small business committees.
(Sec.
103) Requires the director to develop a system to track small business exports and the use by small businesses of federal trade promotion resources.
Title II: Trade Compliance Programs - (Sec.
201) Requires the director to design a program that provides technical assistance, counseling services, and reference materials to assist small businesses in navigating the trade dispute and remedy processes.
(Sec.
202) Directs the Office to design counseling services for small businesses taking legal action to secure intellectual property protection in foreign countries.
Title III: Trade Adjustment Assistance for Small Businesses - (Sec.
301) Directs the SBA to increase outreach and marketing of international trade loans to district offices and private lenders.
(Sec.
302) Requires the director to establish a comprehensive set of services to assist small business trade readjustment.
Title IV: Export Assistance - (Sec.
401) Directs the Office to increase by at least six the number of trade finance specialists at Export Assistance Centers.
Authorizes appropriations.
Requires the director to carry out a national study to compare the rates of exports from each state and major metropolitan region to the availability of SBA staff participating in Export Assistance Centers in such state or region.
(Sec.
402) Increases SBA loan limits for small and medium-sized exporters participating in export working capital and international trade programs.
Title V: Authorization of Appropriations - (sec.
501) Authorizes appropriations.