(NOTE: This summary reflects language of the bill text as set forth in House Report 108-768, which differs from the language of the official bill text.)
Program Assessment and Results Act - (Sec.
States as the purposes of this Act: improving the Government Performance and Results Act of 1993 by implementing a process to determine the strengths and weaknesses of Federal programs, with a particular focus on results produced by individual programs; using information to help the executive branch make informed management decisions and evidence-based funding requests; providing Congress with the information necessary to conduct more effective oversight and make better-informed authorization and spending decisions.
(Sec.
Requires the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to the maximum extent practicable to conduct, jointly with agencies of the Federal Government, an assessment of each Federal program at least once every five fiscal years (program assessments).
Requires the Director to: coordinate with Federal agency heads to determine the programs to be assessed and to evaluate the purpose, design, strategic plan, management, and results of such programs; develop criteria for identifying programs to be assessed each fiscal year; assess certain higher priority programs more frequently than once every five years; publish in electronic format and provide to Congress a list of programs to be assessed during a fiscal year and the criteria to be used to assess the programs, and allow interested person to comment on such programs; and provide guidance to Federal agency heads for implementing the requirements of this Act.
Requires the Director to report to Congress the results of program assessments conducted during a fiscal year at the same time the President submits the next budget after the end of such fiscal year.
Provides for the submission of program assessments containing classified information.
Requires that program assessment activities be performed only by Federal employees as inherently Governmental functions.
Terminates program assessments after September 30, 2013.
(Sec.
Changes: the date by which the heads of each Federal agency are required to submit strategic plans for program activities to September 30 of each year following a presidential election, beginning with September 30, 2005; and the period of coverage for strategic plans from five to four years.