Traumatic Brain Injury Act of 2008 - (Sec.
Amends the Public Health Service Act to revise the national program for traumatic brain injury registries to make grants for state traumatic brain injury surveillance systems or registries (currently, only for registries) to: determine the incidence and prevalence of traumatic brain injury and related disability; ensure the uniformity of reporting under each such system or registry; link individuals with traumatic brain injury to services and supports; and link such individuals with academic institutions to conduct applied research.
Requires the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), to report to the relevant congressional committees on activities and procedures that can be implemented by the CDC to improve the collection and dissemination of compatible epidemiological studies on the incidence and prevalence of traumatic brain injury in those who were formerly in the military.
(Sec.
Authorizes the Secretary, acting through the Director of CDC, to conduct a study to: determine the incidence of traumatic brain injury and prevalence of traumatic brain injury related disability; report national trends in traumatic brain injury; identify common therapeutic interventions which are used for the rehabilitation of individuals with such injuries; identify interventions and therapies that can prevent or remediate the development of secondary neurologic conditions related to traumatic brain injury; and develop practice guidelines for such rehabilitation.
(Sec.
Authorizes appropriations for FY2009-FY2012 for NIH's trauma research program.
(Sec.
Allows the Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources Services Administration (HRSA), to make grants to states and American Indian consortia (currently, only to states) to improve access to rehabilitation and other services (currently, to health and other services) regarding traumatic brain injury.
Authorizes appropriations for such grants for FY2009-FY2012.
Requires the Administrator and the Commissioner of the Administration on Developmental Disabilities to coordinate the collection of data regarding protection and advocacy services.
Directs the Administrator to make a grant for training and technical assistance to protection and advocacy systems, if funds permit.
Authorizes appropriations for FY2009-FY2012.