Veterans Entrepreneurship and Benefits Improvement Act of 2003 - Authorizes a State agency to approve entrepreneurship (business education) courses for attendance by veterans using veterans' basic educational assistance provided through the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Prohibits the Secretary of Veterans Affairs from treating a business owner as already qualified for such purposes.
Includes entrepreneurship courses within authorized programs of veterans' education assistance.
Amends the Small Business Act to authorize a Federal contracting officer to award a sole source contract to any certified small business (one owned and controlled by service-disabled (qualified) veterans) if: the certified business is determined to be responsible with respect to the performance of the contract opportunity and the contracting officer does not expect two or more such businesses to submit offers for such contract; the anticipated award price of the contract will not exceed a specified amount; and the contract award can be made at a fair and reasonable price.
Allows a contracting officer to restrict contract competition to such businesses if the officer can reasonably expect two or more such businesses to submit offers.
Directs the Administrator of the Small Business Administration (SBA), at least every three years, to: complete a survey of qualified veterans receiving such benefits; and report survey results to Congress.
Prohibits a contracting officer from making a procurement under this Act: unless the officer has determined that such procurement cannot be made on the basis of a preference provided under another provision of the Small Business Act; or if the procurement would otherwise be made from a different source under provisions of the Federal criminal code governing Government procurement of prisoner products or services or of the Javits-Wagner-O'Day Act.
Outlines the appropriate order of priority, with the highest priority under small business start-up loans guaranteed by the SBA.
Provides priority requirements with respect to a contracting officer of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Terminates that priority with respect to Department procurements after FY 2007.
Authorizes the Secretary to provide adapted housing assistance to certain categories of disabled military personnel (having suffered loss of limbs, organs, partial blindness or deafness, etc.)
serving on active duty if the disability is the result of an injury or disease contracted or aggravated during such duty.Increases from 65 to 85 the percentage of the number of purchases during a fiscal year of real property acquired by the Secretary as a result of default on guaranteed loans for the purchase or construction of homes for veterans that may be financed by a loan made by the Secretary.Requires the payment of all accrued monetary benefits (currently limited to two years' worth) of a deceased veteran's beneficiary to the veteran or any other surviving dependent.