Mosquito Abatement for Safety and Health Act - (Sec.
Amends the Public Health Service Act to authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, to make grants to States for the purposes of: coordinating mosquito control programs; and assisting States to make grants to localities to conduct assessments regarding the need for control programs and to develop plans for carrying out such programs.
Declares that a State may receive only one grant.
Directs the Secretary to give preference to States that have one or more localities with high incidences or high risk of mosquito-borne disease or substantial populations of infected mosquitoes.
Sets a maximum amount of $10,000 for grants to localities for assessments and plans.
Requires States receiving grants to: have developed, or to have agreed to develop, a plan for coordinating control programs in the State which takes into account any assessments or plans for control programs that have been conducted or developed in the State; agree to monitor control programs in the State to ensure they are carried out in accordance with such plan; and submit a report to the Secretary describing the activities of the State under the grant and evaluating whether the control programs of localities were effectively coordinated with each other.
Allows the Secretary, acting through the Director, to make grants for control programs to localities or consortia of localities that have: conducted an assessment of the needs for a program, with such assessment including an entomological survey of potential mosquito breeding areas; and developed, based on the assessment, a plan for carrying out a control program.
Directs the Secretary to give preference to localities and consortia that meet any of certain criteria, including having a history of elevated incidence of mosquito-borne disease or a population of infected mosquitoes.
Requires each locality or consortium receiving a grant for a control program to make available matching funds in an amount not less than 1/3 of the cost of the program.
Allows the Secretary to waive the matching requirement in the case of extraordinary economic conditions in a locality or consortium.
Requires a locality or consortium receiving a grant to submit a report to the Secretary and to the State in which the locality or consortium is located describing the control program and its effectiveness.
Limits grants to localities to a maximum amount of $100,000 for a fiscal year.
Limits grants to consortia to a maximum amount of $110,000 for each constituent locality.
Sets forth exceptions to such limits.
States that a locality or consortium may receive only one grant.
Permits the Secretary to provide training and technical assistance to localities and consortia with respect to the planning, development, and operation of control programs and to States with respect to assessments and plans.
States that such assistance may be provided either directly or through award of grants or contracts to public and private entities.
Authorizes appropriations.
Requires that for FY 2004, at least 50 percent of appropriated funds be used to award grants to localities or consortia of localities.
(Sec.
Requires the Director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences to conduct or support research into methods to control the population of insects and vermin that transmit dangerous diseases to humans.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary of Health and Human Services to report to Congress on various topics, including: the status of the development of protocols for ensuring the safety of the US blood supply with respect to the West Nile Virus; and the benefits and risks of the spraying of insecticides as a public health intervention, including recommendations and guidelines for such spraying.