Southern Sea Otter Recovery and Research Act - (Sec.
Requires the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) and the United States Geological Survey (USGS), to carry out a Recovery and Research Program for southern sea otter populations along the coast of California that includes: monitoring, analysis, and assessment of population demographics, health, mortality, and life history parameters; and implementation of measures to reduce or eliminate potential factors limiting populations that are related to marine ecosystem health or human activities.
Requires the Secretary to: appoint persons to a southern sea otter recovery implementation team as authorized under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 within a year; establish a peer-reviewed, merit-based process to award competitive grants for research regarding such otters and for projects assisting the recovery of otter populations; and establish a peer review panel to provide scientific advice and guidance to prioritize proposals for grants.
Authorizes research grant topics to include: causes of sea otter mortality; southern sea otter demographics and natural history; effects and sources of pollutants, nutrients, and toxicants on such otters and sequestration of contaminants; effects and sources of infectious diseases and parasites affecting such otters; limitations on the availability of food resources for such otters and the impacts of food limitation on southern sea otter carrying capacity; interactions between southern sea otters and coastal fisheries and other human activities in the marine environment; assessment of the keystone ecological role of sea otters in southern and central California's coastal marine ecosystems; and assessment of the adequacy of emergency response and contingency plans.
Authorizes funded recovery projects to include projects to: protect and recover southern sea otters; reduce, mitigate, or eliminate potential factors limiting southern sea otter populations that are related to human activities; and implement emergency response and contingency plans.
Requires the Secretary, within 12 months, to report to Congress on: the status of southern sea otter populations; implementation of the research and grant programs; and endangered species consultations regarding southern sea otters.
Requires the Secretary, within 24 months and every five years thereafter, to report to Congress and the public on: an evaluation of southern sea otter health, causes of southern sea otter mortality, and the interactions of southern sea otters with California's coastal marine ecosystems; an evaluation of actions taken to improve otter health, reduce mortality, and improve southern sea otter habitat; recommendation for actions to improve otter health, reduce the occurrence of human-related mortality, and improve the health of such coastal marine ecosystems; and recommendations for funding to implement this Act.
(Sec.
Authorizes appropriations for each of FY2010-FY2015.
(Sec.
Terminates this Act on the date the Secretary publishes a determination that the southern sea otter should be removed from the endangered species and threatened species lists.