Nevada Native Nations Land Act - Title I: Elko Motocross Land Conveyance - (Sec.
102) Directs the Department of the Interior to convey to Elko County, Nevada, without consideration, approximately 275 acres of land managed by the Bureau of Land Management (BLM), Elko District, Nevada, for use as a motocross, bicycle, off-highway vehicle, or stock car racing area or for other public purpose consistent with the Recreation and Public Purposes Act.
Reverts the conveyed land to the United States if it ceases being used for a public purpose.
Title II: Conveyance of Land To Indian Tribes - (Sec.
201) Declares that the United States holds approximately 373 acres of BLM administered land in trust for the Te-moak Tribe of Western Shoshone Indians of Nevada.
Makes such land part of the Tribe's reservation.
Declares further that the United States holds approximately 19,094 acres of BLM-administered land in trust for the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe.
Makes such land part of that Tribe's reservation.
Declares that the United States also holds in trust the following lands: for the Shoshone Paiute Tribes, approximately 82 acres of land administered by the Forest Service depicted as the &quot;Proposed Acquisition Site&quot; on a Mountain City Administrative Site Proposed Acquisition map; for the Summit Lake Paiute Tribe, approximately 941 acres of BLM-administered land depicted as &quot;Reservation Conveyance Lands&quot; on a Summit Lake Indian Reservation Conveyance map; for the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony, approximately 13,434 acres of BLM-administered land depicted as &quot;RSIC Amended Boundary&quot; on a Reno-Sparks Indian Colony Expansion map; and for the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe, approximately 11,719 acres of BLM-administered land depicted as &quot;Reservation Expansion Lands &quot; on a Pyramid Lake Indian Reservation Expansion map.
(Sec.
202) Prohibits certain gaming on the lands taken into trust under this Act.
Authorizes the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to such lands, to carry out any fuel reduction and other landscape restoration activities on the land, including restoration of sage grouse habitat, beneficial to the Indian tribe and the BLM.