Clean Books Act - Repeals certain unfunded education programs under various Federal laws.
Repeals specified provisions of the Adult Education Act for: business, industry, labor, and education partnerships for workplace literacy; English literacy grants; education programs for commercial drivers; and adult literacy volunteer training.
Repeals specified provisions of the Carl D Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act for: other State-administered programs; State assistance for vocational education support programs by community-based organizations; consumer and homemaking education; comprehensive career guidance and counseling programs; business-labor-education partnerships for training; supplementary State grants for facilities and equipment and other program improvement activities; community education employment centers and vocational education lighthouse schools; demonstration programs; and certain bilingual programs.
Repeals the Community School Partnership Act (contained in the Improving America's Schools Act of 1994).
Repeals specified provisions of the Educational Research, Development, Dissemination, and Improvement Act of 1994 for a teacher research dissemination demonstration program.
Repeals provisions of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (ESEA) for: innovative elementary school transition projects; school dropout assistance; impact aid program; special programs and projects to improve educational opportunities for Indian children; special programs relating to adult education for Indians; Federal administration of such special programs, including the National Advisory Council on Indian Education; the De Lugo territorial education improvement program; extended time for learning and longer school year; and territorial assistance.
Repeals the Family and Community Endeavor Schools Act.
Repeals specified provisions of the Goals 2000: Educate America Act for grants for the study, evaluation, and analysis of education systems in other nations.
Repeals specified provisions of the Higher Education Act of 1965 for: State and local programs for teacher excellence; national teacher academies; class size demonstration grants; middle school teaching demonstration programs; small State teaching initiative; early childhood education training; and grants to States for workplace and community transition training for incarcerated youth offenders.
Amends the Higher Education Amendments of 1992 to eliminate the Olympic Scholarships program.
Repeals specified provisions of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 for: career advancement training consortia; vocational rehabilitation services for individuals with disabilities; loan guarantees for community rehabilitation programs; comprehensive rehabilitation centers; special demonstration programs; reader services for blind individuals; interpreter services for deaf individuals; community service employment pilot programs for individuals with disabilities; and business opportunities for individuals with disabilities.
Eliminates certain demonstration activities, including: transportation services grants; projects to achieve high quality placement; early intervention demonstration projects; transition demonstration projects; barriers to successful rehabilitation outcomes for minorities; studies, special projects, and demonstration projects to study management and service delivery; the National Commission on Rehabilitation Services; model personal assistance services systems; demonstration projects to upgrade worker skills; and model systems regarding severe disabilities.
Eliminates certain training activities, including: distance learning through telecommunications; training regarding impartial hearing officers; and recruitment and retention of urban personnel.
Repeals specified provisions of the Stewart B McKinney Homeless Assistance Act for grants to State educational agencies for programs of literacy training and academic remediation for adult homeless individuals.
Repeals specified provisions of the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals With Disabilities Act of 1988 for various training and demonstration projects, including programs for technology training, technology transfer, device and equipment redistribution information systems and recycling centers, business opportunities for individuals with disabilities, and products of universal design.