Capitol Police Retention, Recruitment, and Authorization Act of 2002 - (Sec.
Requires the Capitol Police Board to increase by five percent the annual rate of basic compensation for officers and members of the Capitol Police, except that for officers above the rank of captain the increase shall be made at a rate determined by the Board at its discretion (but not to exceed five percent).(Sec.
Authorizes the Board to compensate newly appointed officers, members, and employees at an annual rate exceeding the lowest rate of compensation otherwise applicable, up to the maximum annual rate of basic compensation otherwise applicable.(Sec.
Amends the Emergency Supplemental Act, 2002 to provide additional compensation for each Capitol Police officer assigned to another specialty assignment designated by the Chief of the Capitol Police(Sec.
Requires limits on the amount of premium pay which may be earned by officers and members during emergencies (as determined by the Board) to be applied by the Board on an annual and not pay period basis.
Makes such application retrospective to hours of duty occurring on or after September 11, 2001(Sec.
Requires the Board to provide that if an officer or member completes three years of employment with the Capitol Police (taking into account any period occurring before, on, or after this Act's enactment) he or she shall receive eight hours of annual leave per pay period.(Sec.
Requires the Board, under certain conditions, to establish a tuition reimbursement program to assist officers and members in higher education costs relating to law-enforcement.Limits such reimbursement to $3,000 yearly.
Authorizes the Board to pay a one-time bonus of up to $500 to each participant upon completion of the course of study involved.(Sec.
Allows the Board to make a one-time bonus payment in an amount not to exceed $500 to any officer, member, or civilian employee who recruits a new officer or member.
Excludes from such bonus officers, members, or civilian employees who carry out recruiting activities as part of their official responsibilities.
Prohibits disbursement of such bonus until the recruited individual completes the required training.(Sec.
Requires deposit into specified Capitol Police appropriation accounts of any funds: from the proceeds of disposal of property; for compensation for damage to, or loss of, property of the Capitol Police, including any insurance payment or payment made by an Capitol Police officer or civilian employee for such compensation; and from reimbursement made by another entity of the Federal government or by a State or local government for assistance provided by the Capitol Police(Sec.
10) Limits the total number of full-time equivalent positions of the US Capitol Police (including members and civilian employees) to 1,981(Sec.
11) Requires the disposal of firearms by officers and members to be carried out in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Board and approved by specified congressional committees.(Sec.
12) Authorizes an officer who works with a police dog and is responsible for its care during non-working hours to use an official Capitol Police vehicle when the officer is accompanied by the dog to travel between the officer's residence and duty station and to otherwise carry out official duties(Sec.
13) Expresses the sense of Congress that, to the greatest extent possible consistent with the mission of the Capitol Police, the Chief should seek to deploy the Police's human and other resources in a manner maximizing opportunities for individual officers: to be trained for, and to acquire and maintain proficiency in, all aspects of the Police's responsibilities; and to rotate regularly among different posts and duties, in order to utilize fully the skills and talents of officers, enhance the appeal of their work, and ensure the highest state of readiness.(Sec.
14) Authorizes appropriations.