United States Coast Guard Servicemember Benefits Improvements Act - Establishes or modifies the housing-related authorities of the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating regarding: reconstruction and maintenance of military family housing or unaccompanied housing; conveyance or lease of real property; and the Coast Guard Housing Fund.
Repeals the $40 million cap on the total value in budget authority of all contracts and investments undertaken using Coast Guard housing authorities.
Repeals the expiration date for such authorities, thus making them permanent.
Eliminates specified new housing demonstration projects.
Authorizes the Coast Guard Commandant to: use appropriated funds to provide child development services; and collect and expend, for such services, fees based on family income.
Raises from 62 to 64 the mandatory retirement age for flag officers.
Allows deferral of the mandatory retirement age of any regular commissioned officer serving in a flag officer grade position (currently 62): by the Secretary until age 66; and by the President until age 68.
Authorizes the Secretary of the Navy to: detail Chaplain Corps personnel to the Coast Guard; and provide support services (including transportation, food, lodging, child care, supplies, fees, and training materials) to chaplain-led programs to assist members of the Coast Guard on active duty and their dependents, and members of the reserve component in an active status and their dependents, in building and maintaining a strong family structure.
Authorizes the President to award a Coast Guard cross and silver star medals to persons serving in any capacity with the Coast Guard for extraordinary heroism or gallantry in action while engaged in action against a US enemy, or in other specified actions.
Removes provisions excluding the Coast Guard from provisions relating to Armed Forces Retirement homes.
(Authorizes Coast Guard participation in the Armed Forces Retirement Home system.)
Authorizes the Secretary of Homeland Security, subject to the availability of legal staff resources, to provide to members of Coast Guard reserve components legal assistance in connection with their personal civil legal affairs.
Amends the Public Health Service Act to require that, during a public health emergency, Coast Guard members and assets remain under the command and control of the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating.