NATO Enlargement Facilitation Act of 1996 - Declares that it should be the policy of the United States to: assist the transition to full membership in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) of emerging democracies in Central and Eastern Europe; ensure that such countries are aware of the costs and responsibilities of such membership; and work to construct a political and security relationship between an enlarged NATO and the Russian Federation.
Expresses the sense of the Congress that in order to promote security in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovenia, Slovakia, Bulgaria, Romania, Albania, Moldova, and Ukraine: the United States should continue to support the full and active participation of these countries in activities that will qualify them for NATO membership; the US Government should continue to press the European Union to admit as soon as possible any country qualifying for membership; and the United States and NATO should continue to support military and peacekeeping initiatives between and among such countries and NATO countries.
Expresses the sense of the Congress that Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania have valid historical security concerns and should not be disadvantaged in seeking to join NATO by virtue of their forcible incorporation into the Soviet Union.
Designates Poland, Hungary, and the Czech Republic as eligible to receive certain assistance for transition to full membership in NATO.
Declares that such designation shall not preclude the designation by the President of other Central and Eastern Europe countries.
Authorizes appropriations for FY 1997 for NATO enlargement assistance.
Authorizes the availability of certain funds for implementation of the Regional Airspace Initiative and the Partnership for Peace Information Management System.
Declares that the transfer of excess defense articles to countries intending to participate in NATO (including countries on NATO's southern flank) shall be given priority, to the maximum extent feasible, over the delivery of such articles to other countries, except certain countries specified under the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1995.
Declares that the Congress endorses US efforts to modernize the defense capability of Poland, Hungary, the Czech Republic, and any other countries the President designates under the NATO Participation Act of 1994, by exploring options for the sale or lease to such countries of weapons systems compatible with those used by NATO members, including air defense systems, advanced fighter aircraft, and telecommunications infrastructure.
Provides for the termination of the eligibility of a country for Partnership of Peace assistance.