(Sec.
Prohibits: US assistance for the Government of Zimbabwe; and cancellation or reduction of any indebtedness owed by the Government of Zimbabwe to the US Government.
Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to instruct the US Executive Director of each international financial institution to oppose and vote against: extension of any assistance to the Government of Zimbabwe, except to meet basic human needs and for good governance; and any cancellation or reduction of indebtedness owed by the Government of Zimbabwe to the institution.
Prescribes conditions for restoration of Zimbabwe's eligibility for assistance and debt relief, including that: the rule of law has been restored, including respect for ownership and title to property held before January 1, 2000, freedom of speech and association, and an end to the lawlessness, violence, and intimidation sponsored, condoned, or tolerated by the Government of Zimbabwe, the ruling party, and their supporters or entities; Zimbabwe has held parliamentary and presidential elections widely accepted by the participating parties and the duly elected are free to assume their offices (or, before a presidential election, the government has sufficiently improved the pre-election environment to a degree consistent with accepted international standards for security and freedom of movement and association); the Government of Zimbabwe has demonstrated a commitment to an equitable, legal, and transparent land reform program meeting specified criteria; the Government of Zimbabwe is making a good faith effort toward an expeditious removal of its forces from the Democratic Republic of Congo, and ending all other support for any of the parties to the conflict in that country; and the Zimbabwean Armed Forces and the National Police of Zimbabwe are responsible to and serve the elected civilian government.
(Sec.
Authorizes the President to use certain appropriations under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to finance the legal and related expenses of: individuals and democratic institutions challenging restrictions to free speech and association in Zimbabwe and electoral outcomes or restrictions to their pursuit of elective office or democratic reforms; and victims of torture or political violence.
Directs the Broadcasting Board of Governors to further the communication of information and ideas through the increased use of radio broadcasting to Zimbabwe.
Authorizes the President, during FY 2001, to use certain funds for democracy and governance programs in Zimbabwe.
Expresses the sense of Congress that the President should provide support, including through the National Endowment for Democracy, for international election observers to the Zimbabwean parliamentary elections in 2000 and the presidential election scheduled for 2002, including assessments of the pre-electoral environment in each case and the electoral laws of Zimbabwe.
(Sec.
Authorizes certain funds for support for alternative schemes under the Inception Phase of the Land Reform and Resettlement Program.
Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to review the feasibility of restructuring, rescheduling, or eliminating the sovereign debt of Zimbabwe held by any Federal agency.
Requires the Secretary to direct the US Executive Director of each international financial institution to which the United States belongs to propose that such institution: review the feasibility of restructuring, rescheduling, or eliminating the sovereign debt of Zimbabwe it holds; and undertake financial and technical support for Zimbabwe, especially for its economic recovery and development.
Establishes a Southern Africa Finance Center in Zimbabwe that will co-locate regional offices of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, the Export-Import Bank of the United States, and the Trade and Development Agency in order to facilitate development of commercial projects in Zimbabwe and the southern Africa region.