Justin Bailey Veterans Substance Use Disorders Prevention and Treatment Act of 2008 - Requires each substance use disorder treatment plan developed by a Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) medical center to ensure that such center provides ready access to a full continuum of care for substance use disorders for veterans in need of such care.
Includes under a full continuum of care: screening for substance use disorder; detoxification and stabilization; intensive outpatient care; relapse prevention; outpatient counseling; residential substance use disorder treatment; pharmacological treatment to reduce cravings and opioid substitution therapy; coordination with groups providing peer-to-peer counseling; short-term, early interventions for substance use disorders; and marital and family counseling.
Requires the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to provide outreach to veterans of Operations Enduring Freedom or Iraqi Freedom to increase awareness of the availability of such care.
Requires the Secretary to: ensure that amounts made available to the VA for substance use disorder care, treatment, and services are allocated to ensure a full continuum of such care to veterans regardless of the location of their residence; and include in annual budget reports a report on such care, treatment, and services.
Requires: each such report to be reviewed by the Committee on Care of Severely Chronically Mentally Ill Veterans; and the Committee to provide an independent assessment of such care, treatment, and services furnished directly by the VA to veterans.
Directs the Secretary to carry out a two-year pilot program to test the feasibility and advisability of providing veterans who seek treatment for substance use disorders with access to a computer-based self-assessment, education, and specific treatment program through a secure Internet website operated by the Secretary.
Authorizes appropriations.
Requires a pilot program report from the Secretary to Congress.
Requires the Secretary to: conduct a review of all residential mental health care facilities, including domiciliary facilities, of the Veterans Health Administration; and report review results to the congressional veterans' committees.
States that this Act is in tribute to Justin Bailey, who, after returning to the United States from service in Operation Iraqi Freedom, died in a VA domiciliary facility while receiving care for post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and a substance use disorder.