Title I: Benefit Matters - (Sec.
101) Extends, for those separated or released on or after June 15, 2005, the termination of Servicemembers' Group Life Insurance (SGLI) coverage for totally disabled veterans to two years after their separation or release from active duty or active duty for training of at least 30 days.
(Sec.
102) Allows a veteran under age 60 and insured under Veterans' Group Life Insurance (VGLI) for less than the maximum SGLI amount ($400,000) to increase at renewal the VGLI coverage by up to $25,000 at the time of renewal.
(Sec.
103) Entitles a surviving spouse to a benefit for the month of a veteran's death if, at the time of the veteran's death: the veteran was receiving veterans' disability compensation or veteran's pension; or the veteran was not receiving such compensation or pension but had a claim pending for the month of the veteran's death for which benefits would have been payable had the veteran not died.
Prohibits the Secretary of Veterans Affairs (VA) from requesting the return of a check or payment made to a surviving spouse, in the month in which the veteran's death occurs, as additional compensation for a dependent or additional pension as a married veteran.
(Sec.
104) Includes under the VA's presidential memorial certificate program (a program presenting a presidential certificate of appreciation for service in the Armed Forces) an individual who dies during active service.
Title II: Loan Guaranty Matters - (Sec.
201) Deems as satisfying occupancy requirements necessary for a veteran's housing loan the occupancy by a veteran's dependent child, when the veteran is in active duty status and therefore unable to occupy the property.
(Sec.
202) Allows the Secretary, in determining whether a VA-guaranteed housing loan is secured by a first lien, to either disregard or allow for subordination to a superior lien created by a recorded covenant in favor of a public entity that has provided or will provide assistance in response to a major disaster as declared by the President under the Robert T Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act.
Title III: Other Matters - (Sec.
301) Requires the VA to adjudicate appeals for relief from findings of mental incompetence made under the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) within 180 days after their receipt.
Deems granted any appeals not processed within such period.