Reforming Federal Procurement of Information Technology Act or RFP-IT Act - Establishes an increased $500,000&nbsp;simplified acquisition threshold for contracts for the purchase of information technology services from a small business concern.
Makes permanent the authority to issue solicitations for purchases of commercial items in excess of the simplified acquisition threshold.&nbsp; Establishes within the General Services Administration (GSA) the Presidential Innovation Fellows Program to bring non-government innovators into the federal government to solve challenges of national importance.
Redesignates the Office of Electronic Government as the United States Digital Government Office or United States DGO.
Designates the head of such Office as the US Chief Information Officer.
Establishes in the DGO the Digital Service Pilot Program&nbsp;to provide digital services to support executive agencies on high-priority federal information technology projects.
Directs the GSA Administrator to conduct an in-depth analysis of IT Schedule 70.
Defines "IT Schedule 70" as the multiple award supply of GSA for the procurement of information technology.
Directs the Comptroller General (GAO) to report to Congress on: the effectiveness of the 18F program of GSA, IT Schedule 70, and challenges and barriers to entry for small business technology firms into the federal marketplace.
Requires the Federal Acquisition Regulation (FAR) to be revised to clarify that agency acquisition personnel are permitted and encouraged to engage in responsible and constructive exchanges with industry, so long as such exchanges are consistent with existing law and do not promote an unfair competitive advantage.
Requires the US Chief Information Officer to advise the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) on improving the performance of federal agencies in development specifications for an information technology project&nbsp;contract.
Makes the Administrator of the Small Business Administration (SBA) a member of the&nbsp;FAR Council.