Drywall Safety Act of 2012 - (Sec.
Expresses the sense of Congress that the Secretary of Commerce should insist that: the government of China, which has ownership interests in the companies that manufactured and exported problematic drywall to the United States, facilitate a meeting between the companies and US government representatives about remedying affected homeowners; and such companies comply with any related US court decisions.
(Sec.
Requires certain gypsum board labeling standards of ASTM International (formerly known as the American Society for Testing and Materials), as in effect on the day before the enactment of this Act, to be treated as a rule promulgated by the Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC).
Provides procedures for: ASTM International to notify the CPSC of any subsequent revision of such standards; and the revised standards to become effective unless the CPSC, within a specified period, determines that the revisions do not adequately identify gypsum board by manufacturer and month and year of manufacture.
(Sec.
Requires the CPSC to promulgate a final rule concerning drywall manufactured or imported for domestic use that limits sulfur content to a level not associated with elevated rates of corrosion in the home.
Provides exceptions, and means of enforcement as a rule, if the CPSC determines that a voluntary standard (developed by a specified Subcommittee on Specifications and Test Methods for Gypsum Products of ASTM International) is adequate to permit identification and publishes the determination in the Federal Register.
Provides procedures for revision of such voluntary standards.
Allows the CPSC, at any time subsequent to publication of such a rule, to initiate a rulemaking to modify the sulfur content limit or include a provision relating only to drywall composition or characteristics that the CPSC determines is reasonably necessary to protect public health or safety.
(Sec.
Directs the CPSC to revise its "Remediation Guidance for Homes with Corrosion from Problem Drywall" to specify that problematic drywall removed pursuant to the guidance should not be reused or used as a component in production of new drywall.