Title I: National Aviation Heritage Area - National Aviation Heritage Area Act - (Sec.
103) Establishes within the States of Ohio and Indiana the National Aviation Heritage Area (the Area).
(Sec.
104) Directs the Area's management entity, the Aviation Heritage Foundation, Incorporated (the AHFI, an Ohio nonprofit) to develop and submit to the Secretary of the Interior (the Secretary) a Management Plan (the Plan) for the Area.
Requires the Plan to provide for the protection, enhancement, and interpretation of the natural, cultural, historic, scenic, and recreational resources of the Area.
Prohibits the Secretary, if AHFI fails to submit the Plan within three years, from providing any additional funding under this title to AHFI until it submits a plan.
Directs the Secretary to approve the Plan or to disapprove it, and to provide recommendations in the latter instance.
Prohibits funds made available under this title from being expended to implement any changes made by a substantial amendment to the Plan until the Secretary approves of such amendment.
(Sec.
105) Permits AHFI, for purposes of implementing the Plan, to use Federal funds made available under this title to make grants to, and enter into cooperative agreements with, the State of Ohio (including a political subdivision of the State), a private organization, or any person.
Requires AHFI to: give priority to implementing actions in the Plan; assist units of government and nonprofits in developing the Area in specified ways, including by encouraging local governments to adopt land use policies that are consistent with the management of the Area and the goals of the Plan; and encourage economic viability in the Area.
Prohibits AHFI from using any Federal funds made available under this title to acquire real property or any interest in real property.
Allows AHFI to use non-Federal funds to acquire real property or an interest in real property.
(Sec.
106) Authorizes the Secretary to enter into a cooperative agreement with AHFI or other public or private organizations to provide financial or technical assistance to the Area to develop and implement the Plan upon request by the AHFI.
Allows the Secretary to provide to such organizations in the Area operational assistance to support the implementation of the Plan.
Requires any Federal agency involved with any activity directly affecting the Area to consult with the AHFI and the Secretary and, to the maximum extent practicable, act in ways the AHFI determines will not adversely affect the Area.
Provides for the coordination of decisions with regard to the Area by the Secretary, the Secretary of Defense, and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
(Sec.
107) Authorizes appropriations.
Limits the Federal share of the total cost of any activity assisted under this title to 50 percent.
(Sec.
108) Terminates assistance from the Secretary for the Area 15 years after the enactment of this Act.
Title II: Wright Company Factory Study - Requires an updated study and report concerning alternatives for incorporating the Wright Company Factory as a unit of the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Park.
Instructs the Secretary to consult with the Delphi Corporation, the Aviation Heritage Foundation, State and local agencies, and other interested parties in the area in which the Factory is located.