International Trafficking of Women and Children Victim Protection Act of 1999 - Establishes within the Department of State in the Office of the Secretary of State an Inter-Agency Task Force to Monitor and Combat Trafficking.
(Defines "trafficking" as the use of deception, coercion, debt bondage, the threat of force, or the abuse of authority to recruit, transport within or across borders, purchase, sell, transfer, receive, or harbor a person for the purpose of placing or holding such person, whether for pay or not, in involuntary servitude, slavery, or slavery-like conditions or in forced, bonded, or coerced labor.)
Directs the Secretary of State to: report annually, with the assistance of the Task Force, to Congress describing the status of international trafficking; and ensure that US missions abroad maintain a consistent reporting standard and thoroughly investigate reports of trafficking.
Requires US mission personnel to seek out and maintain contacts with human rights and other nongovernmental organizations, including receiving reports and updates from such organizations and, when appropriate, investigating such reports.
Makes any government of a foreign country identified in the latest report as one that has failed to take effective action towards ending the participation of its officials in trafficking and that has failed to investigate and meaningfully prosecute those officials found to be involved, ineligible for police assistance, subject to a presidential waiver if in the US national interest.
Amends the Immigration and Nationality Act to provide for a nonimmigrant classification for trafficking victims.
Provides for a waiver of grounds for ineligibility for admission with respect to such an individual if the Attorney General considers it to be in the national interest to do so.
Directs the Attorney General and the Secretary of State to jointly promulgate trafficking regulations for law enforcement personnel, immigration officials, and Foreign Service officers concerning response training and victim treatment and protection.
Authorizes: the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to provide, through the Office of Refugee Resettlement, assistance to trafficking victims and their children in the United States; and the President to provide programs and activities to assist trafficking victims and their children abroad.
Authorizes appropriations for the Task Force, the Secretary of HHS, and the President.
Bars the use of funds made available to carry out this Act for the procurement of weapons or ammunition.