Gulf of Mexico Red Snapper Conservation Act of 2013 - Directs the Gulf States Marine Fisheries Commission to: prepare and adopt a data collection strategy for the Gulf of Mexico red snapper fishery, including interstate collaboration measures and a plan for annual stock assessments; and prepare, adopt, and submit to the Secretary of Commerce a fishery management plan providing for the conservation and management of Gulf of Mexico red snapper and describing the standards of compliance for Gulf coastal states (Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas) to use in developing fishery management measures.
Permits an increase in the quota of Gulf of Mexico red snapper apportioned to commercial fishing based on stock assessments.
Prohibits such plan, for a three-year period, from reducing such quota, except in the event of a reduction in stock prior to the end of such period in which case the quotas apportioned to all fishing sectors shall be reduced to ensure a sustainable harvest.
Directs the Secretary to determine whether the plan: includes fishery management measures compatible with the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act, and ensures the long-term sustainability of Gulf of Mexico red snapper.
Requires each Gulf coastal state to submit for the Commission's approval appropriate management measures that ensure compliance with the objectives of the fishery management plan.
Directs the Secretary, upon receiving the Commission's certification that the management measures of all such states have been approved, to: revoke federal regulations and portions of the Fishery Management Plan for the Reef Fish Resources of the Gulf of Mexico that conflict with the plan for Gulf of Mexico red snapper, and transfer management of Gulf of Mexico red snapper to such states.
Directs the Commission to determine, periodically, whether state enforcement is satisfactory.
Requires the Commission to: offer assistance to noncompliant states, and vote on whether to notify the Secretary when a state remains noncompliant.
Authorizes the Secretary to close a fishery within federal waters adjacent to a noncompliant state.
Directs the Secretary to report biennially to Congress, the governor of each Gulf coastal state, and the Commission regarding the economic impacts for the local, regional, and national economy of the Gulf of Mexico red snapper fishery.