Christopher and Dana Reeve Paralysis Act – Title I: Paralysis Research - (Sec.
101) Requires the Director of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) to develop mechanisms to coordinate NIH paralysis research and rehabilitation activities in order to further advance and avoid duplication of such activities.
Authorizes the Director to make grants for the cost of planning, establishing, improving, and providing basic operating support for consortia in paralysis research.
Requires the Director to designate each consortium funded as a Christopher and Dana Reeve Paralysis Research Consortium.
Authorizes such consortia to: conduct basic, translational, and clinical paralysis research; facilitate and enhance the dissemination of clinical and scientific findings; and replicate the findings of consortia members or other researchers for scientific and translational purposes.
Authorizes the Director to provide for a mechanism to educate and disseminate information on NIH paralysis programs and research activities, through which the Director can receive comments from the public.
Title II: Paralysis Rehabilitation Research and Care - (Sec.
201) Requires the Director to award grants for multicenter networks of clinical sites that will collaborate to design clinical rehabilitation intervention protocols and measures of outcomes on forms of paralysis that result from central nervous system trauma, disorders, and/or stroke.
Authorizes a multicenter network of clinical sites to: focus on areas of key scientific concern, including improving functional mobility; and replicate the findings of network members or other researchers for scientific and translation purposes.
Title III: Improving Quality of Life for Persons with Paralysis and Other Physical Disabilities - (Sec.
301) Authorizes the Secretary of Health and Human Services to: study the unique health challenges associated with paralysis and other physical disabilities; and carry out projects and interventions to improve the quality of life and long-term health status of persons with paralysis and other physical disabilities, including developing a national paralysis and physical disability quality of life action plan and establishing a population-based database that may be used for longitudinal and other research on paralysis and other disabling conditions.
Authorizes the Secretary to award grants to state and local health disability agencies to: establish a population-based database that may be used for longitudinal and other research on paralysis and other disabling conditions; develop comprehensive paralysis and other physical action plans and activities; assist state-based programs in collaborating with people with paralysis and other physical disabilities and their constituent organization; coordinate paralysis and physical disability activities with existing state-based disability and health programs; provide education and training opportunities and programs for health professionals and allied caregivers; and develop, test, evaluate, and replicate effective intervention programs to maintain or improve health and quality of life.
Allows the Secretary to award grants to private health and disability organizations to: disseminate information to the public; improve access to services for persons living with paralysis and other physical disabilities and their caregivers; test model intervention programs to improve health and quality of life; and coordinate existing services with state-based disability and health programs.
Authorizes appropriations for FY2008-FY2011.