United States Marshals Service 225th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act - (Sec.
Directs the Secretary of the Treasury, in commemoration of the 225th anniversary of the establishment of the United States Marshals Service, to mint and issue $5 gold and $1 silver coins, and half-dollar clad coins emblematic of the 225 years of exemplary and unparalleled achievements of the US Marshals Service.
(Sec.
Permits: only one facility of the United States Mint to be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act, and the Secretary to issue coins to the public minted under this Act beginning on or after January 1, 2015.
Prohibits such coins from being minted after December 31, 2015.
(Sec.
Requires all such coin sales to include a surcharge of: $35 per $5 coin, $10 per $1 coin, and $3 for the half-dollar coin.
Requires distribution of the first $5 million to the US Marshals Service National Museum for the preservation, maintenance, and display of artifacts and documents of the US Marshals Service.
Requires distribution of one-third of the remainder each to the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children to be used for finding missing children and combating child sexual exploitation, and the Federal Law Enforcement Officers Association Foundation (FLEOAF).
Limits the use of such funds by FLEOAF to financial assistance for: surviving family members of federal law enforcement members killed in the line of duty; disabled federal law enforcement members; federal law enforcement employees and their families in select instances, such as severe trauma or financial loss, where no other source of assistance is available; scholarships to students pursuing a career in the law enforcement field; and selective grants to charitable organizations.
Requires distribution of one-third of the remainder to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund to support construction of of the National Law Enforcement Museum.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary to take actions to ensure that: minting and issuing such coins will not result in any net cost to the US government, and no funds will be disbursed to the recipients designated in this Act until the total cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping) is recovered by the Treasury.