Guam World War II Loyalty Recognition Act - (Sec.
Recognizes the suffering and the loyalty of the people of Guam during the Japanese occupation of Guam in World War II.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary of the Treasury to make specified payments to: living Guam residents who were raped, injured, interned, or subjected to forced labor or marches resulting from, or incident to, such occupation and subsequent liberation; and survivors of compensable residents who died in war and survivors of compensable injured residents (such payments to be made after payments have been made to surviving Guam residents).
Defines "compensable Guam decedent" as a Guam resident who died or was killed as a result of the attack and occupation of Guam by Japanese military forces during World War II, or incident to Guam's liberation by US military forces, and whose death would have been compensable under the Guam Meritorious Claims Act of 1945 if a timely claim had been filed.
Defines "compensable Guam victim" as an individual who, as a result of the attack and occupation of Guam by Japanese military forces during World War II or incident to the liberation of Guam by US military forces, suffered any of the following: rape or severe personal injury (such as loss of a limb, dismemberment, or paralysis); forced labor or personal injury (such as disfigurement, scarring, or burns); or forced march, internment, or hiding to evade internment.
(Sec.
Directs the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission to specify injuries that would constitute a severe personal injury or a personal injury.
Authorizes the Commission to adjudicate claims and determine payment eligibility.
Requires: claims to be filed within one year after the Commission publishes public notice of the filing period in the Federal Register; and the Commission to make filing period information available to the public through the media in Guam.
Subjects false claims to criminal penalties.
(Sec.
Directs the Secretary of the Interior to establish a grant program for research, educational, and media activities that memorialize the events surrounding the World War II occupation of Guam or honor the loyalty of the people of Guam during the occupation, or both.
(Sec.
Authorizes appropriations, which shall remain available for obligation until September 30, 2013, for: Guam World War II claims payments and adjudication; and the Guam World War II memorial grant program.