Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Amendment Act - Amends the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant Land Withdrawal Act (WIPP Act) to remove certain provisions relating to: compliance of specified Federal oil and gas leases with the Solid Waste Disposal Act; test phase; requirements for the commencement of disposal operations; and disposal regulations.
Revises parameters for compliance with Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) disposal regulations to require the Secretary of Energy to provide to the Congress a schedule for the incremental submission of chapters of the WIPP EPA-compliance application to the EPA Administrator within a prescribed time frame.
Repeals the requirement that the Secretary use waste form modifications of engineered and natural barriers to comply with final disposal regulations at WIPP, but requires use of any other measures necessary, in addition to engineered and natural barriers, to achieve compliance.
Exempts transuranic mixed waste designated for disposal at the Waste Isolation Pilot Plant (WIPP) project from the land disposal restrictions in specified Federal regulations.
Removes certain provisions: relating to determination of noncompliance during the disposal and decommissioning phases; and declaring that the authorities provided to the Administrator and the State (under provisions relating to compliance with environmental laws and regulations) are in addition to the enforcement authorities available to the State under State law and to the Administrator, the State, and any other person under the Solid Waste Disposal Act and the Clean Air Act.
Replaces provisions relating to retrievability with provisions declaring that it is the intent of the Congress that a decision will be made by the Secretary regarding the disposal of transuranic waste no later than a specified date.
Removes provisions: mandating a plan for the decommissioning of WIPP; and setting a deadline for a plan for the management and use of the Withdrawal (the WIPP withdrawal site) following WIPP decommissioning or termination of the land withdrawal.
Authorizes appropriations to the State of New Mexico (currently, to the Secretary for payments to the State of New Mexico) for 15 fiscal years beginning on the date of enactment of the WIPP Act (currently, beginning in the first fiscal year in which the transport of transuranic waste to WIPP is initiated).
Declares that an appropriation to the State shall be in addition to any appropriation for WIPP.
Allows WIPP to receive transuranic waste from the Secretary that did not result from a defense activity.