It appeared that the petitioner had not paid the rent during the long pendency of proceedings and the present petition is to be a blatant misuse of the process of courts.
So, all the petitions would be dismissed with a cost of Rs. One lakh held by Hon’ble Justice Rajbir Sehrawat in M/s A.R.Ventures and another versus M/s Roop Square Pvt. Ltd. and another [CR No. 7265 of 2019 (O &amp; M)].
The cost imposed on the petitioner has to be deposited within 45 days of the order given.
If no receipt of such deposit is submitted to the registry of the Court, then action is to be taken for necessary recovery.
The facts leading to this case relate to the petition filed by the tenant, which he was using two premises w.e.f.
1512017 under two separate agreements dated 1122016.
Respondent was the owner of the two properties mentioned in the buildings Roop square complex in Ludhiana.
The petitioner had taken the top floor and 4th floor on rent with two separate written agreements dated 1122016 with the monthly rent for the top floor was Rs. 1lakh monthly and 4th floor with Rs.4lakh monthly with 5% increment per annum, and the tenancy was fixed for 9years.
The allegation was petitioner had paid rent for 5month only with intermittent default and after that defaulted for payment.
Respondent verbally requested defaulted payment.
After the request, some settlements were done and then again, the default was started.
Without paying the rent, he was enjoying the property, and even he was not paying the electricity charges and any other taxes and the respondent was forced to pay the GST.
Then respondent filed the two separate petitions under the Punjab Rent Act, 1995.
For recovery of possession as well as claiming his requirement for expanding his business.
The petitioner has also filed the petition under Section 20(2) of the Act stated that the respondent had not given any notice in the prescribed manner, so the eviction petition was void and deserved to be rejected, and the petitioner has also filed the written petition that Rent Authority taken this consideration and framed this issues for its determination.
The Appellate Authority considered four appeals, two filed by the petitioner/tenant and two filed by the respondent/landlord.
The Appellate Authority dismissed the appeals filed by the petitioner and held that the Rent Authority had rightly rejected the application for rejection of the eviction petitions.
In the appeal filed by the respondent/landlord, the Appellate Authority held that since the tenant has not paid the rent and the default continued even during the pendency of the proceedings before the Rent Authority, therefore, the tenant was liable to be evicted for non-payment of rent.
Hence, the appeals filed by the Landlord were allowed.
Counsel of the petitioner has stated that the Rent Authority was restrained from passing such an order because the respondent has not given any written notice prescribed in Section 20(2) and also submitted that the agreement was not registered as per section 4 of the Act, so same is not admissible in evidence as per section 49 of the Registration Act, 1860. so this agreement has not no legal value and has not been led in evidence by the respondent.
Counsel also submitted during the pendency the Landlord has disconnected the facilities available to the tenant.
Which is against section 19 of the Act.