The appellate authority under the RTI (Right to Information) Act of the Securities and Exchange Board of India comprising of Mr. Anand Baiwar adjudicated in the matter of Geeta Khattar v CPIO, SEBI, Mumbai (Appeal No. 4321 of 2021) dealt with an issue in connection with Section 2 (f) of the Right to Information Act, 2005.
The appellant, Ms Geeta Khattar had filed an application via RTI MIS Portal on the 15th of May, 2021 under the Right to Information Act, 2005.
The respondent responded to the application by a letter on the 10th of June, 2021, filed by the appellate.
After receiving a letter from the respondent on 10th of June, 2021, on her application, the appellate decided to file an appeal on the 16th of June, 2021.
In her application, the appellate was seeking the following information: The respondent, in response to the query numbers 1,2,3,5,6 and7, observed that the queries are in the nature of seeking clarification/opinion and accordingly, cannot be construed as, “information”, as defined under section 2(f) of the RTI Act, 2005.
In response to query number 4, the respondent informed that the appellant should refer to SCORES FAQs.
The respondent also provided the weblink for accessing the same.
The appellant filed the appeal on the grounds of that the information was refused.
The appellant, in her appeal, reiterated the query raised in her application.
For the queries, the appellate authority, Mr Anand Baiwar, made reference to the matter of Hon’ble CIC, in the matter of Vineet Pandey vs. CPIO, United India Insurance Company Limited (Judgment dated January 21, 2021), wherein similar observations were made by the Hon’ble CIC.
Further, in the matter of Shri Shantaram Walavalkar vs. CPIO, SEBI (Decision dated January 17, 2013), it was noted that the Hon’ble CIC held: “… we would also like to observe that, under the Right to Information (RTI) Act, the citizen has the responsibility to specify the exact information he wants; he is not supposed to seek any opinion or comments or clarifications or interpretations from the CPIO…”.
In view of the said observations, I do not find any deficiency in the response.
In view of these observations, the appellate authority found no deficiency in the response.