It is not unknown  in commercial world  that  the  parties amend original contract and even give up their claims under the subsisting agreement.
 the Ministry of External Affairs (for short,“MEA”) and the appellant in the leading appeal, Water and Power Consultancy Services (India) Limited (for short, “WAPCOSL”),  a Public   Sector   Undertaking,   entered   into   an   agreement,   dated 29112004,   for   the   implementation   of   the   work completion   of   Salma   Dam Project   (3×14   MW),   AfghanistanThe respondent No.1 in both the appeals, Salma Dam Joint Venture (for short, “SDJV”) was formed by the M/s SSJV Projects Private   Limited   (for   short,   “SSPPL”)   and   M/s   Angelique International   Ltd   (for   short,   “AIL”)     under   a   Joint   Venture Agreement (for short,  “JVA”) dated 09092005 to submit its bid for the said project. SSPPL was nominated to be the ‘Lead Partner’ of SDJV with ninety-five percent (95%) share as compared to five percent (5%)   share   of   AIL.
  SSPPL   was   also   authorized   to   invoke arbitration by appointing an arbitrator, make claims, et cetera, on behalf of AIL, by executing a Power of Attorney (for short, “PoA”)WAPCOSL and SDJV signed certain documents to be read with the Contract Agreement and to form part and parcel thereof. Out of several such documents, Conditions of Particular Applications (for short “CoPA”) is the relevant one for the purpose of this case.A letter was sent by WAPCOSL, informing about the acceptance of revised rates of eight items and raising the total consideration to Rs. 872.67 Crores. Subsequent to this, SDJV and WAPCOSL signed a revised agreement for the rates, referred to as the Amendment of Agreement (for short, “AoA”), dated 09062015Despite signing of AoA, SDJV raised certain claims before the Engineer of WAPCOSL. After rejection of said representation, SDJV   preferred   six   appeals   to   the   Technical   Committee constituted in terms of clause 2.1 of Section – 02 of AoA. Five of these   appeals   were   rejected/disposed   of   vide   report   of   the Technical Committee dated 28.10.2016. Subsequent to the execution of AoA, dispute arose between the JV partners which resulted in AIL filing a petition (bearing number O.M.P. (I) (COMM.
) 70/2016) under Section 9 of the Arbitration Act, wherein the High Court of Delhi, vide order dated 05092016, directed WAPCOSL to deposit the amount payable to SDJV with the Registrar of the High Court in order to secure the interests of both the JV entitiesOn 21.09.2016, the Board of Directors of AIL resolved to revoke the PoA executed in favour of SSPPL and in furtherance of the same, AIL, vide letters dated 19.10.2016 and 11112016, wrote to the respective Banks and also to WAPCOSL informing them about the revocation of the authority of SSPPLupon rejection of the claims of SDJV by the Technical Committee, on 28.10.2016, SSPPL, unilaterally, espousing claims of SDJV proceeded to invoke the arbitration process, under clause 20.6 of CoPA and also appointed a nominee arbitrator, vide letter dated 12112016WAPCOSL vide   letter   dated 05122016, recorded that since SDJV is a joint venture entity and the authority of SSPPL to represent AIL has been revoked, the appointment of arbitrator by SSPPL, unilaterally, is illegal in terms of clause 4.2 of the Contract Agreement and clause 3.2 of the JVA.Resultantly,   SSPPL   filed   a   petition   on   behalf   of   SDJV against   WAPCOSL   under   Section   11(6)   of   the   Arbitration   Act (bearing number Arb. P. 810/2016) before the High Court of Delhi,   wherein   it   has   been   asserted   that   the   PoA   dated 15072005 given by AIL in its favour is still in force and forms part of the Contract Agreement dated 09.03.2006.Resultantly,   SSPPL   filed   a   petition   on   behalf   of   SDJV against   WAPCOSL   under   Section   11(6)   of   the   Arbitration   Act (bearing number Arb. P. 810/2016) before the High Court of Delhi,   wherein   it   has   been   asserted   that   the   PoA   dated 15072005 given by AIL in its favour is still in force and forms part of the Contract Agreement dated 09032006WAPCOSL   preferred   a   Special   Leave Petition   (bearing   number   SLP   (Civil)   26555/2017)   before   this Court.
  This   Court,   vide   order   dated   03112017,   directed impleadment   of   AIL   as   a   party   and   also   stayed   the   arbitral proceedings.This Court, vide order dated 11.12.2017, deemed it proper to set aside the order Page 7 of 27 passed  by   the  High   Court  of   Delhi   dated  15.03.2017  and   to relegate the parties before the High Court for reconsideration of all aspects.The High Court of Delhi, vide judgment dated 25012019 (for short, “impugned judgment”), once again allowed the said arbitration petition and appointed a sole arbitrator, instead of three arbitrators envisaged in CoPA.
ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT: whether   on   the   date   of   presentation   of   Arbitration   Petition, purportedly   by   SDJV   through   SSPPL   on   15.12.2016,   the arbitration   agreement   posited   in   Contract   Agreement   dated 09032006 was in existence or subsisting and in force? whether   the   Arbitration   Petition   filed   in   the   name   of   SDJV through SSPPL, in law can be considered as having been properly and validly presented despite the express revocation of authority of SSPPL vide resolution passed by the Board of Directors of AIL on   21.09.2016   and   duly   communicated   to   SSPPL   as   well   as WAPCOSL before 15.12.2016, as was granted to SSPPL in terms Page 10 of 27 of JVA read with PoA including the Contract Agreement?
RATIO OF THE COURT: The court observed that Going by the Contract Agreement read with relevant clauses of CoPA and FIDIC, it is obvious that the parties had agreed for resolution of all their differences or disputes arising from the Contract Agreement by process of settlement of disputes and arbitration. It was later added that the execution of stated AoA has not been disputed by SDJV or for that matter by SSPPL More so, these entities have not even challenged the implementation of AoA  the asseveration in the Arbitration Petition is that the claim set up by SDJV is in reference to items and bills raised subsequent to the execution of AoA.The court pointed out that neither SDJV nor SSPPL have   disputed   the   execution   of   AoA   nor   it   is   even   remotely suggested in the Arbitration Petition that the AoA was executed by   them   under   duress   or   coercion and thus, opined that the terms and conditions specified in AoA leave no manner of doubt that the arbitration agreement has been done away with – as is manifest from the unambiguous declaration   that   balance   pending   claims   of   Contractor   stand buried and that there will be no arbitration for the settlement of claimsThe court observed that  that the purport of the terms and conditions   incorporated   in   the   AoA   dated   09.06.2015   are unambiguous expression of intent to supersede the arbitration agreement incorporated in Contract Agreement dated 09.03.2006 and to resolve all the contentious issues regarding the claims of SDJV, in the manner specified therein.  The court observed that the Arbitration Petition filed for and on behalf of SDJV through SSPPL was not maintainable.
  In   other   words,   the   Arbitration   Petition   should have been rejected for lack of subsisting or existing arbitration agreement between the parties on the date of filing of Arbitration Petition. the court pointed out that the parties consciously and with full understanding executed AoA whereby the contractor gave up all his claims and consented to the new arrangement specified in AoA including that there will be no arbitration for the settlement of any claims by the contractor in future.  The court reffered to:  Damodar   Valley Corporation   vs.   K   K   Kar, National   Insurance   Company Limited  vs.  Boghara  Polyfab  Private  Limited and observed that it is not open to the contractor   to   now   take   recourse   to   arbitration   process   or   to resurrect the claim which has been resolved in terms of the amended agreement, after availing of steep revision of rates being condition precedent.  DECISION HELD BY COURT: the impugned judgment of the High Court was set aside and the  Arbitration Petition No. 810 of 2016 filed by the respondent No. 1 was dismissed.option available to the parties to take recourse to other remedies, inter se, which they are free to adopt in accordance with law; and the rejection of Arbitration Petition   will   be   no   impediment   for   them   to   pursue   those remedies.The appeals were allowed in the above terms with no order as to costs.