Court decided that the petitioners can be released on bail  taking a lenient view on account of the fact that they are only 18 years of age subjected to certain conditions as other accused have already been granted bail and was held by High Court of Kerala through the learned bench led by HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE GOPINATH P in the case of ASHIK DAVIS &amp; MUHAMED HASIF vs STATE OF KERALA (BAIL APPL.
NO. 1288 &amp; 1297 OF 2022) on 14th of March 2022.
Brief facts of the case are that on 28012022 at about 945 PM, the accused Nos1 and 2 were found in possession of 2100 grams of MDMA and 7900 grams of ganja while traveling in a scooter bearing registration No. KL-64-K2894 at a road in front of an institution named Chakkola Meries Tiles Works at Muringoor.
According to the prosecution case, the petitioner obtained the contraband articles from the accused No4 and sold the same to the accused Nos1 and 2.
Learned Counsel for petitioners contends that the petitioners are absolutely innocent in the matter and both are only 18 years of age and that they have been falsely implicated in the matter.
It is submitted that the 3rd and 4th accused has been already granted bail by the Court.
Considering the age of the petitioners and the fact that their detention is not necessary for the purpose of any investigation, they may be directed to be released on bail.
It is also submitted that no criminal antecedents have been reported against the petitioners.
Learned Public Prosecutor appearing on behalf of respondent vehemently opposes the grant of bail.
The circumstances of the case appearing from the record are pointed out.
It is submitted that there are serious allegations against the petitioners and they are not entitled to be released on bail.
In the view of the facts and circumstances of the case and considering the fact that 3rd and 4th accused have already been granted bail, the Court decided the petitioners can also be released on bail, taking a lenient view on account of the fact that they are only 18 years of age subjected to certain conditions like- Petitioners shall execute separate bonds for a sum of Rs50,000/-  with two solvent sureties each for the like sum to the satisfaction of the jurisdictional Court, Petitioners shall appear before the investigating officer whenever called and petitioners shall not involve in any other crime while on bail.
If any of the conditions are violated, the Investigating officer may file an application before the jurisdictional Court for cancellation of bail.