Offences arising out of matrimony are personal in nature and the parties are seeking to resolve their entire dispute.
In case of compromise between the husband and wife, the possibility of conviction would be remote and bleak and continuation of the criminal case would result in great prejudice and/or injustice.
A division bench of SS SHINDE &amp; ABHAY AHUJA, JJ; while adjudicating the matter in Yuvraj Raman Jadhav v. State of Maharashtra; [CRIMINAL WRIT PETITION NO.2053 OF 2021] dealt with the issue of whether to proceed with a criminal proceeding when there is a conciliation between the parties.
Petitioner No1 and Respondent No.2 were husband and wife, whose marriage was solemnized on 10th January, 2017, as per Hindu rites and rituals.
However, as differences arose between the parties, divorce petition was filed before the Family Court at Bandra, which was later on converted into mutual consent divorce petition under Section 13 -B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955.
It is submitted that during the pendency of the criminal matter, Petitioner No1 and Respondent No.2 have settled their matrimonial dispute amicably and have decided to dissolve their marriage by fling consent terms dated 3rd April, 2021 before the Family Court at Bandra upon the terms and conditions contained therein.
The respondent filed an affidavit stating “I say that, during the pendency of these proceedings before the Hon’ble Family Court and the Hon’ble Magistrate Court, I and the Petitioners have arrived at an amicable settlement with regard to the property and have entered into a consent terms which is fled before the Hon’ble Family Court at Bandra on 3rd April, 2021 (“Consent Terms”).
I say that I repeat, reiterate and confirm that I want to amicably resolve the matter and bring an end to the criminal proceedings emanating from the FIR.
I further state, that the pending Marriage Petition filed by the Petitioner No1 is now converted into Mutual Consent Petition on the basis of the Consent Terms fled.”