“The courts are not inclined to entertain the appeal only on the ground of the smallness of the quantum involved” The spouse of the complainant who was pregnant, was admitted to sarvodaya Hospital in a medical emergency at about 5 am on 9 March 2004.  She delivered a baby at about 8 am, a few hours after admission.
The baby was delivered prematurely and, according to the complainant, required medical care in a Nursery ICU. The complainant and his spouse were referred to safdarjung Hospital for admission of the child for emergency medical care.  The grievance against sarvodaya hospital was that prior to the delivery, it had been represented that the Hospital was fully equipped with a Nursery ICU and that when the complainant came to realise that this was not the case, he felt cheated.The complainant proceeded to safdarjung Hospital with his spouse and child between 12 and 1 pm on 9 March 2004.  The grievance of the complainant was that at safdarjung Hospital, the baby was not placed in a Nursery ICU, but was initially admitted to the General Ward and thereafter to a General ICU.
The child died in the last week of April 2004.
A complaint was presented before the District Forum seeking damages against Sarvodaya Hospital and Safdarjung Hospital.PROCEDURAL HISTORY:The District Forum dismissed the consumer complaint.  As regards, sarvodaya Hospital, it arrived at the finding that there was no misrepresentation of fact and that the Hospital had an independent facility of a Nursery and ICU available.The SCDRC, by its judgment dated 10 December 2013, came to the conclusion that sarvodaya Hospital was guilty of medical negligence and directed it to pay a sum of Rs 2,00,000 as compensation and costs quantified at Rs 20,000.
However, the complaint was held not to be maintainable against safdarjung Hospital.Finding that there was no denial of this assertion and relying on the decision of this Court in Indian Medical Association, the complaint was rejected as against safdarjung Hospital.  However, the SCDRC had also found negligence on the part of safdarjung Hospital.ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT:Whether safdarjung hospital had been correctly exonerated?Whether the NCDRC can at all exercise in revisional proceedings the powers which have been conferred on an appellate court under Order XLI Rule 33 of the Code of Civil Procedure 1908?RATIO OF THE COURT:The court contended after hearing the learned counsel and analysing the provisions that it is only where a hospital provides medical services free of charge across the board to all patients that it would stand outside the purview of the Act. The Court held that a hospital which renders free services to a certain category of patients, while providing for services which are charged to the bulk of others would not lie outside the purview of the jurisdiction of the consumer fora.The court observed that the only factual foundation that was led before the District Forum was the evidence of Dr. KC Aggarwal who deposed that the patient in question had been treated free of charge.
We have scrutinized the grounds of appeal in the Special Leave Petition.  Not even a single ground has been raised by Safdarjung Hospital, challenging the factual basis of the finding that has been arrived at by the NCDRC on the issue of jurisdiction.  .Hence, in the absence of a proper challenge before the District Forum, the SCDRC or the NCDRC and, as this court observed that even before this Court, it would be inappropriate for this Court to render a conclusive opinion.
This court ought not to do so in the absence of a factual foundation in the pleadings and evidence.  This court observe of the fact that the award in the present case is in a relatively small amount of Rs 2 lakhs.The court observed that this court were not inclined to entertain the appeal only on the ground of the smallness of the quantum involved.  The appeal is accordingly dismissed but with the above clarifications.
The payment of Rs 2 lakhs in compliance of the order of the NCDRC shall be made to the original complainant within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a certified copy of this order.
Time to pay the amount of Rs 2 lakhs is accordingly extended.DECISION HELD BY COURT:The court stated that if any pending application is left of this case shall be stand disposed off.