In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot interfere to correct mere errors of law or fact or just because another view than the one taken by the tribunals or Courts subordinate to it, is a possible view.
In other words the jurisdiction has to be very sparingly exercised.
This was said in the case of Kunal Vinaykumar Rayllon vs Dhansukh Harjibhai Patel [C/SCA/15899/2019] by Dr. Justice Ashokkumar C Joshi in the High Court of Gujarat The facts of the case are that a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is filed by the petitioners against the order dated 09.08.2019 passed by the learned 4th Additional Senior Civil Judge, and Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate The petitioners contended that the impugned order is contrary to the express provisions of O22 R10 r/w.
O.1 R10 of the Civil Procedure Code.
Secondly, by an order, the petitioners were ordered to be joined as a party defendants in the counter claim only and not in the suit, however, the trial Judge has failed to appreciate the said fact and erred in passing such an order.
It was further contended that as per the settled principles of law, mentioning of wrong provisions or non-mentioning of relevant provisions in an application, is immaterial.
The respondents contended that the application of the petitioners was under specific provisions i.e. O.1 R10 r/w.
Section 151 CPC and the trial Court, after due application of mind, has rejected the said application giving detailed reasons.
Secondly, a petition filed under Article 227 of the Constitution of India has a specific scope for interference in the orders of the lower Court, Tribunal and Authority and not for mere correction or error of law.
Further, the wrong referring of any provisions does not vitiate the order passed by the authority if otherwise the authority has power and jurisdiction to pass the order The Court referred to the case of Ouseph Mathai and Ors. v. M Abdul Khadir [AIR 2002 SC 110] wherein it is held that “Only wrong decision may not be a ground for the exercise of jurisdiction under this article unless the wrong is referable to grave dereliction of duty, flagrant abuse of power by the subordinate Courts and tribunals, resultantly in “grave injustice” to any party”.