To make out the offence under Section 120-B of IPC, the prosecution must lead evidence to prove the existence of some agreement between the accused persons Case Name: Subhash@ Dhillu V State of Haryana With  Mukesh@Billu V State of Haryana  Case Number: Criminal Appeal No.1375 of 2010  Criminal Appeal No. 1328 of 2013 Court: The Supreme Court of India Bench: Justice Pinaki Chandra  Ghose Justice Abhay Manohar Sapre Decided on: 25/02/2015 Relevant Acts/Statutes: Indian Penal Code BRIEF FACTSAND PROCEDURAL HISTORY:Complainant Bal Kishan and his nephew Sanjay were going on a motorcycle carrying Rs46,000/- with them in the dicky, for purchasing a piece of land.  While they were near a Farm, two accused persons: Manjeet and Bijender (not appellants herein) came from behind in Maruti car.
They brandished country made pistol and asked the complainant to stop and as the complainant stopped, the accused persons asked them to hand over the money.
The accused persons took out the money and sped away. A FIR was registered at Sonepat Police Station.
The accused were charged for the offence punishable under Sections 120-B, 392, 397  of  the  IPC  and  Section  25  of  the  Arms  Act. The  Trial Court convicted all the four accused persons  and  sentenced  them  for  various  offences out of which accused  Mukesh  and  Subhash were  sentenced  to  undergo  10 years’ rigorous imprisonment and to pay a fine of  Rs.10,000/-  each,  under  Section  120-B  of  IPC.Aggrieved by the judgment all the accused persons preferred appeals.
The High Court reduced the sentence of rigorous imprisonment of 10 years to 7 years, in respect of the offence under Section 397 and Section 120-B of IPC.
Subhash and Mukesh, who were convicted only under Section 120-B went for an Appeal before this Court, ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT: Whether the court should interfere with the order passed by the High Court in the present matter.
RATIO OF THE COURTThe court took into consideration that in the Trial Court’s judgment, nothing could be found in evidence that was incriminating against the present appellants.To make out the offence under Section 120-B of IPC, the prosecution must lead evidence to prove the existence of some agreement between the accused persons.
The Court could not find any specific evidence as to where and when the conspiracy was hatched and what the specific purpose of such conspiracy was.
DECISION HELD BY COURT:The Court held that the conviction and sentence of the appellants have to be set aside.The Appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1328 of 2013 was directed by the Court to be released.The Appellant in Criminal Appeal No.1375 of 2010 as was already released on bail granted by this Court.
His bail bonds stood discharged.There was no order as to costs.