“Whenever the agreement specifically provides for appointment of named arbitrators, the appointment of arbitrator should be in terms of the contract” On 14072010, Northern Railways awarded the contract for misc. civil engineering works such as construction of duty huts at L-xings, water supply arrangements, provision of station name boards etc. in connection with Rewari-Rohtak New Line to the respondent.
The total cost of the work at accepted rate came to Rs.5,30,31,369.30.
The work was finally completed on 31.03.2012.According to the appellant, final payments were made by the appellant to the respondent vide bill bearing Vr.No00356/104/C/TKJ dated 06052014.
On the same day ie on 06052014, parties also entered into a supplementary agreement which recorded full accord and satisfaction as on 06052014.
In the meanwhile, on 05052014, respondent sent a letter to the appellant alleging that under the compulsion of circumstances, it had to sign the so-called final bill without protest as desired by the administration, otherwise heavy financial loss would have been caused to respondent and it may not be in a position to tender and execute further works.The respondent averred that a sum of over Rs.1.50 crores still remains to be paid to the respondent and calling upon the appellant to make the payment within 90 days.
The respondent vide its letter dated 05052014 invoked arbitration clause as contained under Clause 64 of General Conditions of Contract.
The appellant issued a reply dated 25072014 rejecting the arbitration claim of the respondent, taking the stand that the respondent had signed the final bill and also signed the supplementary agreement which clearly stipulates that it was agreed between the parties that the respondent has accepted the said sums mentioned therein in full and final satisfaction of all dues and claims under the principal agreement.The respondent thereafter filed Arbitration Petition No168 of 2015 under Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 before the High Court for appointment of an arbitrator.
Upon consideration of contention of the parties, the learned Single Judge held that the question whether the discharge certificate and supplementary agreement were signed by the respondent under duress, would require evidence to be led and is therefore, required to be examined by the arbitrator.So far as the appointment of arbitrator is concerned, the High Court held that since the Railways failed to appoint an arbitrator despite invocation of the arbitration clause by the respondent on 05052014, the Railways forfeited its right under the arbitration clause and the learned Judge appointed Mr. Ram Prakash(Retd.
), District and Sessions Judge as the sole arbitrator instead of directing the appointment of arbitrator as per Clause 64 of the General Conditions of Contract.ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT:Whether the High Court erred in appointing an independent arbitrator instead of directing the appointment of arbitrator as per Clause 64 of the General Conditions of Contract?
RATIO OF THE COURT:Mr. Bharat Singh, learned counsel appearing for the appellant Union of India-Railways submitted that the request for appointment of arbitrator was made before the Amendment Act, 2015 (w.e.f  23.10.2015) and hence, the proceedings will have to be proceeded in accordance with the pre-amended provision of the Act, 1996.
It was submitted that the High Court erred in appointing an independent arbitrator instead of directing the General Manager, Railway administration to appoint an arbitrator as per the terms and conditions of Clause 64 of GCC which stipulates that “excepted matters” cannot be referred to arbitration.Per contra, Mr. Shantanu Kumar and Ms. Geetanjali Mohan, learned counsel for the respondent submitted that once the appellant has failed to appoint an arbitrator under the terms of the agreement before the petition under Section 11(6) of the Arbitration Act, 1996 being filed before the Court, the authority forfeits its right of appointing an arbitrator and it is for the Chief Justice/Designate Judge to appoint an independent arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act.
It was further submitted that Section 11(6) empowers the court to deviate from the terms of the agreement, if required, by appointing an independent arbitrator.The Court observed that the respondent is a registered contractor with the Railways and it is claiming certain payments on account of the work entrusted to it.
The request of the respondent for appointment of arbitrator invoking Clause 64 of the contract was declined by the Railways stating that their claims have been settled and the respondent has issued “No Claim” certificate and executed supplementary agreement recording “accord and satisfaction” and hence, the matter is not referable to arbitration.
Admittedly, the request for referring the dispute was made much prior to the Amendment Act, 2015 which came into force w.e.f.
23.10.2015.
Since the request for appointment of arbitrator was made much prior to the Amendment Act, 2015 (w.e.f.
23.10.2015), the provision of the Amended Act, 2015 shall not apply to the arbitral proceedings in terms of Section 21 of the Act unless the parties otherwise agree.
Reference was made to SP Singla Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Himachal Pradesh and another (2019) 2 SCC 488 and Union of India v. Parmar Construction Company 2019 (5) SCALE 453In Union of India and another v. MP Gupta (2004) 10 SCC 504, Union of India and another v. VS Engineering (P) Ltd. (2006) 13 SCC 240, Union of India v. Singh Builders Syndicate (2009) 4 SCC 523 and in a catena of judgments, the court held that whenever the agreement specifically provides for appointment of named arbitrators, the appointment of arbitrator should be in terms of the contract.The court, however observed that in the case of public institutions which are slow in responding to the request made by the contractor for appointment of an arbitrator, the power of the High Court to appoint an arbitrator under Section 11 is not taken away.
The failure of the authorities in appointing an arbitrator and when the contractor approached the court for appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11 of the Act, it will then be in the discretion of the Chief Justice/designated Judge to appoint a railway officer as per the contract or a High Court Judge.Considering the various matters of railway contracts and setting aside the appointment of independent arbitrators, after referring to MP Gupta and VS Engineering and other judgments, in Parmar Construction Company, this Court set aside the appointment of the independent arbitrator and directed the General Manager of the Railways to appoint arbitrator in terms of Clause 64(3) of the agreement.
The ratio of the above decision squarely applies to the case in hand.
When the agreement specifically provides for appointment of named arbitrators, the appointment should be in terms of the agreement.
The High Court, in our view, was not right in appointing an independent arbitrator ignoring Clause 64 of the General Conditions of Contract.Insofar as the plea of the appellant that there was settlement of final bill/issuance of “No Claim” letter, we are not inclined to go into the merits of the contention of the parties.
It is for the arbitrator to consider the claim of the respondent(s) and the stand of the appellant-railways.
This contention raised by the parties is left open to be raised before the arbitrator.
DECISION HELD BY COURT:In the result, the impugned judgments dated 15052015 and 02.02.2015 of the High Court of Delhi in Arbitration Petition No168 of 2015 and Arbitration Petition No531 of 2014 are set aside and these appeals are allowed.
The appellant is directed to appoint the arbitrator in terms of Clause 64(3) of the agreement within a period 14 of one month from today under intimation to the respondent- contractors.
As soon as the communication of the appointment of arbitrator is made to the respondent, the statement of claim be filed by the respondent within six weeks thereafter and the reply of the appellant to be filed within four weeks thereafter.
The arbitrator shall proceed with the matter in accordance with law and decide the claim after affording sufficient opportunity of hearing to both parties expeditiously preferably within a period of four months.