Rules 4 and 5 provide the license to be granted by the Executive Authority and a Certificate to be issued by the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon and further the responsibility for the Licensee to dispose of the unusable of these slaughtered animals, the Authorities Competent are bound to ensure that the abovesaid Rules are implemented effectively, so as to prevent any health issues in the event of any violations.
These were discussed by the bench of Honourable Mr. Justice S M Subramaniam in the case of V.Paneerselvam v. Executive Authority &amp; Ors( WP No.37708 of 2015).
The crux of the case is complaint made by the petitioner was that the second respondent without getting any license in Animal Slaughtering running a shop in violation of the Rules issued by the Government of Tamil Nadu.
The petitioner states that in spite of the complaint given by him, the Authorities Competent failed to initiate any action.
The Tamil Nadu Village Panchayats Rules, 1999 provides regulation for slaughtering by issue of license.
The procedure for grant of license is contemplated under Rule 4 of the Rules.
The Certificate to be issued by the Veterinary Assistant Surgeon is contemplated under Rule 5.
Rule 6 provides responsibility for the Licensee to dispose of the unusable of these slaughtered animals.
Violation of Rule 6 also was raised by the petitioner.
Thus, the petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition.
The bench of Honourable Mr. Justice SMSubramaniam stated that “Under these circumstances, the third respondent-The Director of Rural Development, Panagal Building, Saidapet, Chennai-600 015 is directed to issue appropriate directions/instructions to all Subordinate Authorities to implement the Tamil Nadu Village Panchayats (Prohibition or Regulation of the use of places for slaughtering animals and licensing of slaughterers) Rules, 1999 and initiate all appropriate actions against the violators by following the procedures as contemplated.
In the event of slaughtering the animals without any license, criminal cases are to be registered and all appropriate and necessary actions are to be initiated  The third respondent is directed to issue consolidated circular/ instructions for the purpose of effective implementation of Statute, Rules and Guidelines issued by the Government and by the Competent Authorities..”