Where the contract makes provision (that is, full and complete provision, so intended) for a given contingency it is not for the court to import into the contract some other different provisions for the same contingency called by different name.
[Case Brief] The Naihati Jute Mills Ltd.
Vs. Hyaliram Jagannath  The appellant entered into a contract on July 7, 1958 with the respondent to purchase from him 2000 bales of jute to be imported from Pakistan.
The contract, inter alia.
Provided that shipment of the consignment would be made; during August-November, 1958, that the buyers would obtain the necessary import licence, that if they failed to obtain the licence by November 1958, the period of shipment would be extended upto December 1958 and that if it was not obtained by December 1958, the contract would be settled at the market price prevailing on January 24, 1959 The contract also contained an arbitration clause hereunder all disputes under the con-tract including the question whether the contract had been terminated or completed were to be referred to the arbitration of an Arbitration Tribunal.
The appellants applied to the Jute Commissioner on August 8 for an import licence but this was refused on the ground that the appellants had sufficient stock to carry on for some months more.
’They applied again on November 29, 1958 when their stock was reduced but the Jute Commissioner refused to issue the licence and asked them to meet their requirements from purchases of Indian jute.The respondents thereafter claimed damages from the appellants on the ground that the appellants had failed to furnish, the import licence as provided in the contract.
The appellants disclaimed their ’liability and thereupon the ’disputes between the parties were referred to the Arbitration Tribunal.
The Tribunal passed an award holding that the appellants had failed to carry out their part ’of the contract and Were liable to pay damages to the respondent assessed at Rs. 34,000 and interest.The appellants thereafter applied the High Court to set aside the award and contended (a) that they could not be held to have committed breach of the contract as they had done all that could be expected of them to obtain the licence; (b) that owing to the intervening causes, i.e., a change in the policy of the Government, which the parties could not foresee when they entered into the contract, the contract became impossible of performance and ought to have been treated as void under s 56 of the Contract Act; and (c) that the arbitrators had no jurisdiction as the arbitration clause in the said contract perished along with the contract. A Single Bench of the High Court-dismissed the application and an appeal to a Division.
Hence the present appeal.
ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT: Whether contract discharged on an implied term or on Court deciding performance impossible within the scope of section 32 and 56 of the contract act?Was there a change in the policy of the Government of India of a total prohibition of import of Pakistan jute which was not foreseen by the parties and which intervened at the time of, performance and which made the performance of their stipulation to obtain a, licence impossible?
RATIO OF THE COURT As envisaged by s. 56, impossibility of performance would be inferred by the courts from the nature of the contract and the surrounding circumstances in which it was made that the parties must have made their bargain upon the basis that a Particular thing or state of things would continue to exist and because of the altered circumstances the bargain should no longer be held binding.In Satyabrata Ghose v. Mugneeram [1954] S.C.R. 310 the court  stated that sec. 56 laid down a rule of positive law and did not leave the matter to be determined according to the intention of the parties.
Since under the Contract Act a promise may be expressed or implied, in cases where the court gathers as a matter of construction that the contract itself contains impliedly or expressly a term according to which it would stand discharged on the, happening of certain circumstances the dissolution of the contract would take place under the terms of the contract itself and such cases would be outside the purview of sec. 56The court observed Even if the appellants had established frustration, it would not be as if, the contract was ab initio void.
In cases of frustration it is the performance of the contract which comes to an end but the contract would still be in existence for purposes such as the resolution of disputes arising under or in ’connection with it.The doctrine of frustration is applied not on the ground that the parties themselves agreed to an implied term which operated to release them from performance of the contract.
The Court can grant relief on the ground of subsequent impossibility when it finds that the whole purpose or the basis of the contract was frustrated by the intrusion or occurrence of an unexpected event or change of circumstances which, was not contemplated by the parties at the date of the contract. There would in such a case be no question of finding out an implied term ; percentage of greed to by the parties embodying a provision for discharge because the parties did not think about the matter at all nor could possibly have any intention regarding it.
When such an event or change of circumstances which is so fundamental as to be regarded by law as striking at the root of the contract as a whole occurs it is the court which can pronounce the contract to be frustrated and at an end.
This is really a positive rule enacted in sec. 56 which governs such situations.As for the given circumstances as early as March 1958 the Government of India had issued warnings that import of Pakistan jute would be permitted to the absolute minimum and that the jute mills should satisfy their needs by, purchasing Indian jute.
The contract, no doubt, contained the printed term that the buyers would not be responsible for delay in delivering the licence but such delay as therein provided was to be excused only if it occurred by such reasons as an act of God, war, mobilization etc., and other force majeure.
It is nobody’s case that the performance became impossible by reason of such force majeure.
The application was refused because of a personal disqualification and not by reason of any force majeure.
Since this was the position there is no question of the performance becoming impossible by reason of any change in the Governments policy which could not be foreseen by the parties.
No question also would arise of importing an implied term into the contract.The court held that the said contract cannot be said to be or to have been void and that in any event the stipulation as to obtaining the import licence was absolute.  The question that the arbitration clause perished along with the contract and consequently the arbitrators had no jurisdiction cannot arise.
The question as to whether the contract became impossible of performance and was discharged under the doctrine of frustration would still have to be decided under the arbitration clause which operates in respect of such purposes.
DECISION HELD BY COURT: The appeal fails and is dismissed with costs.