In the case of Raja Jha Vs State of Bihar &amp; Ors. [Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No22497 of 2018] Patna High Court held that court exercising jurisdiction of judicial review, cannot examine, the sufficiency of the reasons for satisfaction of the competent authority especially when it is supported by material on the record.
The petitioner filed an application, under Article 226 of the Constitution of India seeking issuance of certiorari quashing order contained in Memo No.3751 passed by Secretary of Bihar Sanskrit Shiksha Board whereby the petitioner was put under suspension and the departmental proceeding was initiated, framing the charges in Proforma- ‘Ka’.
In a writ petition a Bench of this Court had directed CBI investigation in the matter of appointment of 73 Gramin Dak Sevak during the period 2008-13 in Muzaffarpur Postal Division on the basis of fake and forged Madhyama marksheet.
Eight R.C. cases were registered.
During investigation of the aforesaid RCcase, it revealed that officials of one of the schools namely Krishnadev Niranjan Dr. Jai Narayan Sharma Sanskrit High School, Patahi, Muzaffarpur in a conspiracy, accepted forms of Madhyama examination for the period 2005-09 from the students and their fee was also collected in unauthorized manner.
The SP, CBI vide his letter addressed to the Chairman of Bihar Sanskrit Shiksha Board reported that during investigation, sufficient material came on the record to initiate departmental proceeding for major punishment against three persons including the petitioner who were Assistants in Bihar Sanskrit Shiksha Board as they had allowed backdoor entry of students.
The impugned order has been challenged on the ground that Bihar Government Servant (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 2005 was not applicable in the case of employees of the Sanskrit Shiksha Board nor there is any other Rule governing the service condition regulating the area.
Therefore, the impugned order has been passed without jurisdiction.
The impugned order had further been challenged on the ground that the action has been taken on the recommendation of the CBI Hence, the impugned order suffered from non-application of its own mind by the competent authority.
The petitioner admitted that the Board used to adopt State Government’s Rule relating to payment of gratuity, leave encashment and benefit of A.C.P.
schemes, for its own employees.