A constitutional amendment by the Union Parliament can revive a statute that has previously been declared as void on the ground of infringement of the fundamental rights without any re-enactment of the statute provided it was in accordance with the legislative powers conferred by the Constitution.
The Madras Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961, provided for fixation of ceiling on agricultural land holdings in the State of Madras.
The Act aims to acquire agricultural land from persons owning large holdings of it and distributing the same to the landless and other persons so as to reduce the disparity in the ownership.Its validity had been challenged by various writ petitions on the ground that its provisions violated Articles 14, 19 and 31(2) of the Constitution.
It was held by this court that the key provisions of the impugned act were violative of Article 14 and was thus declared as unconstitutional.Similar attacks had been made on several other acts of other States imposing ceilings on holding of land, and in order to protect these Acts against such attacks Parliament passed the Constitution (Seventeenth Amendment) Act, 1964.
This constitutional amendment placed various acts including the impugned act (Madras Act) in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution.In the present appeal before the Supreme Court of India the validity of the Madras Act was again challenged on the grounds that since it has already been declared as unconstitutional it is void ab initio and Article 31-B cannot validate an invalid act without the State re-enacting its provisions and that the State did not have the legislative competence to enact this act.
ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT:Whether the defects in the Madras Land Reforms (Fixation of Ceiling on Land) Act, 1961 regarding violation of constitutional provisions have been cured by placing the act in the Ninth Schedule to the Constitution read with Article 31-B?Is it a constitutional mandate to re-enact an act when the defects in that act have been corrected by a constitutional amendment?
RATIO OF THE COURT:The court observed that after the 17th amendment, Article 31-B and the Ninth Schedule have cured the defect, if any, in the acts mentioned in the said Schedule regarding any unconstitutionality on the ground of infringement of fundamental rights.
The express words of Article 31-B cured the defect and has retrospective operation right from the dates mentioned in the statute book.
Even if these acts were void or inoperative at the time when they were enacted for impeaching the provisions of Article 13(2), they would have full force from the dates of their enactment after being included in the Ninth Schedule read with Article 31-B of the Constitution.It was noticed that a constitutional invalidity can be cured only by the Parliament and in no circumstance can be cured by the State Legislature.
The States do not have the power to cure any defect arising from the violation of the provisions of Part III of the Constitution.
Thus, the objection that the Madras Legislature should have re-enacted the impugned act after the Seventeenth Amendment came into force cannot be accepted.This court was of the view that Entry 18 in List II like any other Entry in the three Lists only gives the outline of the subject matter of legislation and therefore the words in the entry are to be construed in their widest amplitude.
The field of legislation covered by the entry is not to be narrowed down in any way unless there is anything in the entry itself which defines the limits thereof.In order to give effect to the directive principles in Article 39(b) and (c) of the Constitution, the State Government can adopt a practice of acquiring lands of people who hold areas over a certain ceiling limit and distribute the same among the landless and other persons and it will be well covered by the scope of Entry 18 of List II read with Entry 42 in List III.
Such measures can be described as a measure of agrarian reform or land improvement whereby persons who have small holdings and work on the lands themselves would be more likely to put in greater efforts to make the land productive than those who held large blocks of land and are only interested in getting a return without much effort.These measures do not transgress the legislative limits and helps in removing the disparity in the ownership of land.
It was held that persons who lose the ownership of land in excess of the ceiling imposed are to be compensated for the same by the State.
Acquisition of land is not directly covered by Entry 18 but when read with Entry 42 in List III the State is competent to acquire surplus land and give effect to the provisions contained in Article 39 In Atma Ram vs.
The State of Punjab &amp; Others, it was held by this Court that “rights in or over land” and “land tenures” occurring in Entry 18 in List II were wide enough to include measures of land-tenure reforms.
It was argued that the since the act has been declared to be unconstitutional by this Court in previous judgements the same cannot become operative unless it is re-enacted by the State Legislature and gives protection against violation of fundamental rights.
The respondents on the other hand contended that no re-enactment of the act was necessary.It was held that when a law is made by the State Legislature on a subject which is not within its competence then the law is absolutely null and void, and a subsequent cession of that subject matter to the legislature will not make the law that was void a valid one and a fresh legislation on the subject is mandatory. However, when the law made by the State Legislature is on a subject matter which is under its competence but its provisions disregarded constitutional prohibitions, then such a law would be unenforceable but would become operative when these prohibitions are removed.
In this case there would be no mandate for reenactment of the law.The constitution expressly states that the laws made by the State cannot be inconsistent with the provisions contained in Part III of the Constitution.
A law made in derogation or in excess of the powers conferred by the Constitution would be void ab initio wholly or to the extent of the contravention as the case may be.
In the case of The State of Bombay &amp; Anr. vs. F N Balsara it was held that the validity of the entire act will not be affected merely because some of the provisions of the act are invalid.
In Behram Khrushed Pesikaka vs. State of Bombay it was held that when a provision of a statute has been declared as unconstitutional it becomes null and void and ceases to have any legal effect in determining the rights and obligations of the citizens.The doctrine of eclipse can be invoked only in the case when a law was valid when it was made but later on a shadow was casted on it as it became inconsistent with the constitutional provisions and the law would again become valid if the shadow is removed.
This court in Saghir Ahmed vs.
The State of UP &amp;Orsheld that an amendment to the Constitution that comes into force at a later point of time cannot be invoked to validate an earlier legislation which was declared as unconstitutional at the time when it was passed.It was observed that when certain provisions of a statute were valid when they were passed but after the enforcement of the Constitution became inconsistent with the constitution then Article 13 (1) does not say that the entire statute must be deleted and such law would be valid for all the past transactions and for enforcement of rights and liabilities accrued before enforcement of the Constitution [as observed in Keshavan Madhava Menon’s case].
DECISION HELD BY COURT:It was held that the attacks on the Madras Ceilings Act fail, and the act is a totally valid piece of legislation.The defects in the impugned act regarding infringement of fundamental rights were cured by putting the act in the Ninth Schedule read along with Article 31-B of the Constitution.The present appeals thus fail and were accordingly dismissed.