Rule 11(d) of the Civil Procedure Code (CPC) stipulates that the plaint shall be rejected where the suit appears from the statement in the plaint to be barred by any law.
This was reiterated by the Hon’ble Justice Sabyasachi Bhattacharyya in the case of Nirmalendu Mishra alias Jyotin Mishra and others Vs. Sri Swapan Raj and others [CO No1115 of 2021] on the 2nd of August 2021 before the Hon’ble High Court of Calcutta [appellate side].
The brief facts of the case are, the dispute arises out of a suit for cancellation of a Deed of Exchange dated November 10, 1983 and for recovery of possession in respect of ‘ka’ schedule property against the predecessor of defendant nos. 1 to 8.
The opposite party nos. 1 and 2 were arrayed as proforma defendant nos. 25 and 26 in the suit, bearing Title Suit No. 22 of 2003.
By the first impugned order, dated June 16, 2020, the trial court accepted the belated written statement filed by the defendant nos. 25 and 26/opposite party nos. 1 and 2 on contest with costs of Rs.9,000/.
By the subsequent order dated March 9, 2021, the two applications of the revisionist petitioners, both under Order VIII Rule 6-C of the Code of Civil Procedure, were rejected on contest and the written statement, along with counter-claim, dated September 6, 2019 of opposite party nos. 1 and 2 was accepted.
Aggrieved by this, the present plaint is filed.
The counsel for the petitioner submits that the counter-claim was ex facie barred by limitation since the same was filed after about 17 years from the date impugned in the counter-claim.
The show-cause of the opposite party nos. 1 and 2 as well as their written statement were accepted after about 17 years’ delay.
It is argued that the information of the suit, received by the advocate for the opposite party nos. 1 and 2, was allegedly received after an order was passed by this court, rejecting the plaintiff’s application for amendment of plaint under Order VI Rule 17 of the Code, seeking to introduce a similar relief as sought in the counter-claim.
Hence, the opposite party nos. 1 and 2, being proforma defendants in the suit, were set up by the plaintiffs to defeat the order of the High Court by introducing a time-barred counter-claim.
The counsel for the respondents submits that at the stage of accepting the written statement and entertaining the counter-claim, the court cannot go into the merits of the counter-claim.