Upon the petitioner returning to India, in terms of the above order, the surety furnished by the petitioner would be duly returned to him or the surety provider as the case may be was upheld by the High Court Of Delhi through the learned bench led by HON’BLE MR. JUSTICE V KAMESWAR RAO in the case of JAYANT NANDA Vs UNION OF INDIA, THROUGH SECRETARY, MINISTRY OF FINANCE, GOI &amp; ORS. (WP(C) 4081/2021, CM No. 10777/2022) on March 11, 2022.
Brief facts of the case are that the petioner seeks Court to permit the Petitioner to travel to UAE and Thailand from March – April, 2022 and pass any other order(s) as the Hon’ble Court deems fit and proper and in the interest of justice and equity Learned counsel for the petitioner stated that the petitioner intends to travel to UAE from New Delhi on March 04, 2022; from UAE to Thailand on March 14, 2022 staying in Thailand till March 27/28, 2022 when he shall again fly to UAE and return back to New Delhi on April 06, 2022. the petitioner intends to travel to UAE as he is a Non-Resident since 1989 and his place of residence is Dubai from where he carries his business, which is spread over various countries and his presence is required for taking various business decisions.
He is travelling to Thailand to restart the construction of a hotel / resort on the land owned by his company at a place called Koh Samui, Thailand, which construction was halted due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
The statement of the petitioner has been recorded by the Income Tax Department.
He has submitted all the documents as sought from him.
The Court observed “Learned counsel for the respondents have not stated that the petitioner has misused the permission granted by this Court to the petitioner to visit UAE and UK.
If that be so, this Court is inclined to allow the present application and permit the petitioner to travel to UAE and Thailand, with a further direction that he shall return to India on or before April 06, 2022 subject to conditions.” In view of facts and circumstances, court held Needless to say, upon the petitioner returning to India, in terms of the above order, the surety furnished by the petitioner would be duly returned to him or the surety provider as the case may be.