Section 27 (2) provides freedom of action unfettered by Section 105 for passing off action, in relation to goods, where no mark is involved The suit was for a permanent injunction to restrain the petitioners from carrying on business in the name of “Victory Press Offset Printers” or any other name likely to mislead or deceive the public into the belief that the press run by defendants is the same as the plaintiff’s business known as ‘Victory Offset Printers’ or any such other name allied to that.According to the plaintiff he started a Press at Kunnamkulam by name Victory Offset Printers.
This press earned a name and reputation throughout Kerala and outside as one of the best printing establishments.
Several leading institutions and the public were impressed with the excellence of the printing and the business methods adopted by the plaintiff.The defendants knowing about this, in an attempt to divert the plaintiff’s business to them, made arrangements to start another press at M G Road, Ernakulam, with the name “Victory Press Offset Printers”.
According to the plaintiff, this act of the defendants was clearly to pass off the new business as that of the plaintiff.PROCEDURAL HISTORY:The defendants, inter alia, contended that the suit was in effect a passing off action within the meaning of Section 105 of the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act and as such the suit should have been instituted in the District Court and no court subordinate to it could entertain the same.ISSUE BEFORE THE COURT:Whether the passing off action in this case relates to a name in goods or not?
RATIO OF THE COURT:The court contended about the section 2 and stated that section 105 excludes the jurisdiction of ordinary Courts and confers jurisdiction only in the District The ouster of jurisdiction of ordinary Courts cannot be assumed simply because an action is a passing off action.
An ordinary Court can entertain a suit for passing off action when no trade mark is involved.
A strict construction of the sections is necessary before denying the ordinary Courts of its jurisdiction to entertain a suit.Section 105 (a) and (b) relate to infringement of a registered trade mark and Section 105 (c) relates to passing off actions arising out of the use by the defendant of any trade mark.
The section therefore specifically relates to trade mark which in turn relates to goods.
Unless therefore the party who is attempting to oust the ordinary Court’s jurisdiction satisfactorily establishes that the user complained of relates to goods, the ouster of jurisdiction of ordinary Courts cannot be assumed.
According to this court the services that a printing press render to its customers cannot come within the concept of goods under the Trade and Merchandise Marks Act 1958.The court stated after reffering to the case Teju Singh v. Shanta Devi (AIR 1973 Andh Pra51) that it is not necessary for us to consider whether the definition of the word ‘goods’ in the Trade Marks Act takes in the word ‘Business’.
This is not an action for infringement of a trademark.
It is a common law action for passing off in relation to the plaintiff’s business.The court observed that the rule is well settled in England, viz. that the same principles as are applied to actions relating to passing for goods equally apply to actions for passing off business names.
This court wished to clarify that the remedies of the plaintiff for infringement of a trade-mark are left open as that is not the subject-matter of the suit.”The principle enunciated by the learned single Judge was pressed into service by the defendants to contend that a printing press, though caters to its customers in the form of a service by printing materials, does really deal in goods in the same manner as a dry cleaner docs service.The court stated that this court disagrees with the principle in the decision reported in AIR 1973 Andh Pra 51 either.
The learned single Judge has held that the services that a launderer or a drycleaner gives to its customers is goods.
It is on this finding that the jurisdiction of the Court was decided in that case.
This court indicated the meaning to be given to the word “goods’ in the Act Goods, according to me, will not take in service.
Ordinary Courts have jurisdiction to entertain and try suits for passing off action.In the generality of cases, remedies are kept in fact.
Section 105 deals with a particular type of suits.
It is the peculiar nature of the litigation involved in suits for infringement of trade marks that decides whether Section 105 is attracted or not.
Section 27 (2) provides freedom of action unfettered by Section 105 for passing off action, in relation to goods, where no mark is involved.The plaintiff in this case has only exercised a common law right to enforce a cause of action against an erring party in relation to the service rendered by his press under a particular business name.
To enforce this right, he can seek the ordinary Civil Court’s jurisdiction and his rights are not fettered by Section 105 (c).DECISION HELD BY COURT:At last the court stated that the learned Subordinate Judge was justified in his conclusion that the suit was properly laid before it.This court dismissed the civil revision petition and confirm the finding entered by the Court below and told parties to bear the costs.