“Death or injuries caused in live action and its grant for natural death would diminish the sheen of sacrifice of militants killed in live action” [CASE BRIEF] KANCHAN DUA V UNION OF INDIA AND ANOTHERCase name: Kanchan Dua v. Union of India and anotherCase number: Civil Appeal Nos.7459-7460 of 2010Court: Supreme Court of IndiaBench: L Nageswara Rao, Hemant Gupta JJDecided on: 23rd September, 2019Relevant Act/ Sections: Army Act, 1950, Article 226 of the Constitution of India• Brief Facts and Procedural History:  1.
The husband of the appellant was commissioned in army and later on promoted as a colonel in 1990.
When he was moved to Rajouri for operation Ran Vijay, he was found dead on 25th January 1992 in his room.
The cause of death was found to be cardiac failure due to stress for which ordinary family pension was granted followed by special family pension.
Appellant complained that entry in her husband’s service record was changed from ‘Physical casualty in Operation Rakshak’ to ‘physical casualty’.
2.
Due to absence of any response, she filled a writ petition in Chandigarh high court seeking change in service record which was allowed on the ground of the proofs that the deceased was acting in bonafide military services for operation Rakshak and further directed to consider Liberalised Family Pension (LFP) of appellant.
On non-receipt of LFP, the writ petition was transferred to Armed Forces Tribunal, Chandigarh by request of appellant but was rejected as tribunal opined that cardiac failure does not fall under Category ‘E’ of Part II of the Instructions issued by the Government of India on 31012001. • Issue before the Court:  a) Whether the appellant is entitled to receive Liberalised Family Pension on the death of her husband and if the writ was maintainable before this Court?
• Ratio of the Court: 1.
The learned amicus curiae on the behalf of appellant has submitted that according to section 3 and 9 of the Army Act, 1950 the deceased was in active service at the time of his death as he was working on Operation Rakshak which was a notified operation under Category ‘E’ Para 41 of the instructions.
Even though he was a commander of the Animal Transport Battalion and thus, he is entitled to LFP under para 6 of the instructions relying upon the judgement of High Court of Jammu and Kashmir and Punjab and Haryana.
2.
On the other hand, counsel on the behalf of respondent placed reliance to the judgment in Brij Mohan Lal v Union of India 2012 (6) SCC 502, that LFP is associated with respect to death or injuries caused in live action and its grant for natural death would diminish the sheen of sacrifice of militants killed in live action.
Instead, the death will fall under Category ‘B’ of the instructions under which Special Family Pension has already been granted by the court.
3.
However, the notification issued by the Government extending concessions to the Armed Forces personnel deployed in Operation Rakshak provides that Liberalized Pensionary Awards are extended only to those troops in active Operations against militants in terms of para I of the letter dated 24021972.
The court considered the cases cited by the amicus curiae on the behalf of appellant but did not rely upon them as the high courts did not consider letter dated 24021972 and notification dated 07.05.1990 in which the government declined recommendations of a committee of experts appointed by the Defence Ministry which were not acceptable.
Decision held:  Considering the facts and circumstances, the court following the judgement passed by the tribunal decided that the appellant is not entitled to Liberalised Pension Scheme.