There is a need to indicate in the order, reasons for prima facie concluding why bail was being granted particularly where an accused was charged of having committed a serious offence.
The above mentioned has been the verdict in the case of Chaman Lal v. State of UP and the same vein has been the premise of the present case of  Nikhil Jain v. State [BAIL APPLN. 1668/2021] which was decided by a single member bench of the Delhi High Court comprising Justice Suresh Kumar Kait on 4th June 2021.
In the present case, the petitioner had been in judicial custody since 23rd July 2020 due to a complaint filed by his wife.
The facts of the case are as follows.
The complainant’s marriage was scheduled to be held with petitioner’s brother, but on the incident of his suicidal death and with the mutual decision of both the families, a marriage alliance was solemnized between the petitioner (Nikhil) and the complainant.
The allegations raised by the complainant were that she was forced by the petioner and his parents to enter into illicit relations with other men the names of whom were disclosed by the complainant in her statement.
She was forced to enter into such relations even when she was pregnant and was coerced to do the same under constant threat by her husband to publish one of her obscene video on YouTube if she refused to indulge in the same.
It is also alleged that on 05042020, Nikhil (petitioner), on the pretext of taking her and their son for outing, took them to Rudrapur, Uttrakhand.
Thereafter, petitioner took her to the residence of one Dinesh Khanna, where four five friends of Nikhil made her drink alcohol and thereafter, made sexual relations with her one by one.
The arguments presented by the learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that since petitioner is married to respondent No.2, no offence under Section 376 IPC is made out and Sections 323/506/109/34 IPC are bailable offences and so, petitioner deserves to be released on bail.
On the other hand, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for State opposed the present petition and submitted that charge sheet in this case has been filed and FSL report regarding mobile and laptop of petitioner is still awaited.
Further submitted that statement of complainant in this case is yet to be recorded and if petitioner is released on bail, there is strong possibility of his threating the complainant.