Solicitor was claimed of concealing their generally existing marriage of his and had gone into a bogus relationship with the witness.
He had likewise hitched the source and compromised her on being familiar with reality.
The Court denied the pre-capture bail to the solicitor and said that the case might be considered for bail matter on its own benefits later on.
The Hon’ble High Court of Patna before Justice Mr. Ahsanuddin Amanullah in the matter Akhilesh Singh v. The State of Bihar[Criminal Miscellaneous No. 40409 of 2020].  The Facts of the case were that the candidate was captured capture under Section 420, 376, and 506 of the Indian Penal Code.
It was claimed against the applicant that the witness had before hitched a man and had 2 youngsters from him.
After whose demise they came to know one another on Facebook and had experienced passionate feelings for.
It was additionally expressed that they had an actual connection with one another.
The source added that they were in contact with one another and that the candidate had put the vermilion on her brow also.
Later on, the source came to realize that he was at that point wedded to another person and when she raised her voice she was compromised.
The candidate presented that the source who had sought after the relationship with the solicitor and further that she was completely mindful of the conditions.
It was presented that on the grounds that there may host been some contact between the gatherings yet that was simply consensual and the witness was attempting to separate cash from the candidate because of which she has stopped this bogus case.
Learned Counsel for the source presented that she being the mother of two youngsters, couldn’t have gone into such relationship all things considered against normal human conduct and further that the solicitor didn’t have to put vermilion on her brow in a sanctuary as that was what had made her sure that the candidate had hitched her.
The Hon’ble High Court of Patna held,” Having thought about current realities and conditions of the case and entries of learned insight for the gatherings, the Court isn’t leaned to allow pre-capture bail to the candidate.” The Pre-Arrest Bail was denied by the Court and the Petition was excused.