The only difference is that AYUSH doctors are using indigenous systems of medicine like Ayurveda, Unani, etc. and CHS doctors are using Allopathy for tending to their patients.
The mode of treatment by itself under the prevalent scheme of things, does not qualify as an intelligible differentia.
Therefore, such unreasonable classification and discrimination based on it would surely be inconsistent with Article 14 of the Constitution.
This was decreed by the Hon’ble Justice L Nageshwara Rao and Hon’ble Justice Hrishikesh Roy in the case of North Delhi Municipal Corporation vs. Dr. Ram Naresh Sharma &amp; Ors. [Civil Appeal No. 4578 of 2021] on the 03rd of August 2021, before the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India.
The brief facts of the case are, the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued the order dated 31052016, with immediate effect, enhancing up to 65 years, the age of superannuation of the specialists of Non­teaching and public health sub­cadres of CHS and GDMOs of CHS.
The ayurvedic doctors were not seen to have been covered by the Ministry’s order dated 31052016.
AYUSH (including ayurvedic doctors).
At that stage, the Government of India, Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued the order dated 31052016, with immediate effect, enhancing upto 65 years, the age of superannuation of the specialists of Non­teaching and public health sub­cadres of CHS and GDMOs of CHS.
By the common final order dated 24.08.2017, the Tribunal accepted the discrimination argument advanced by the ayurvedic doctors vis­à­vis the allopathic doctors.
Accordingly, it was held that the applicants were entitled to same service conditions including the enhanced age of superannuation to 65 years, as made applicable to doctors (GDMOs) working under the CHS, in terms of the order dated 31052016 of Ministry of Health and Family Welfare.
Thus, the employer was directed to allow the ayurvedic doctors to continue in service till the age of 65 years.
It was clarified that in case any of the applicants had been made to superannuate at the age of 60 years, he/she shall be reinstated and be permitted to serve until the age of 65 years.
Aggrieved by the above decision of the Tribunal, the appellant NDMC preferred Writ Petitions before the High Court of Delhi.
During the pendency of writ petition, on 24.11.2017, the Ministry of Ayurveda, Yoga, Naturopathy, Unani, Siddha and Homeopathy (‘AYUSH’ for short), Government of India, issued an order whereby it was communicated that the superannuation age of AYUSH doctors is also enhanced to 65 years w.e.f.
27.09.2017, i.e. the date of approval of Union Cabinet.
It was however directed that the doctors shall hold administrative positions only until age of 62 years and thereafter, their service shall be placed in non­administrative positions.
The counsel for the petitioner submitted that, respondent doctors are not entitled to remuneration and unpaid arrears as they were serving in the hospitals on the strength of the Court’s interim order.
Such argument for appellants cannot however be accepted in light of the principle ‘Actus Curiae Neminem Gravabit’ In these matters, for almost 5 years, the respondent doctors have been providing service to countless patients, without remuneration or benefits.
Their services are utilized by the employer in Government establishments, without demur.
In this regard, the learned senior counsel for appellant submits that paying arrear unpaid wages to the respondent doctors will impose substantial financial burden upon the State.
The learned counsel for respondents argue that relief to the respondents was granted by the Tribunal and by the High Court by concluding that the action of the authorities in treatment of the allopathic doctors vis­à­vis the ayurvedic doctors was discriminatory and violative of Art. 14 of Constitution.
Accordingly, it is argued that there can be no separate service condition in so far as the superannuation age is concerned between allopathic and other category doctors, particularly when the AYUSH Ministry itself on 24.11.2017 has enhanced the retirement age for the non­allopathic doctors w.e.f.
27.09.2017, in tune with the Ministry’s order dated 31052016.
It was also submitted that the arrears must be cleared up since respondent­ doctors have been working continuously without break, pursuant to the Interim order of the Delhi High Court dated 26.09.2017.