In its revisional jurisdiction, the High Court can call for and examine the record of any proceedings for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness, legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order.
In other words, the jurisdiction is one of supervisory jurisdiction exercised by the High Court for correcting miscarriage of justice.
But the said revisional power cannot be equated with the power of an appellate court nor can it be treated even as a second appellate jurisdiction.
Ordinarily, therefore, it would not be appropriate for the High Court to reappreciate the evidence and come to its own conclusion on the same when the evidence has already been appreciated by the Magistrate as well as the Sessions Judge in appeal, unless any glaring feature is brought to the notice of the High Court which would otherwise be tantamount to gross miscarriage of justice.
The aforementioned has been relied upon by the Delhi High Court while adjudicating the case of Ram Kishan V The State [CRL.REV.P.659/2018] which was decided by the single judge bench comprising Justice Subramonium Prasad on 25th June 2021.
The facts of the case are as follows.
In 2010, an accident took place whereby a bus came from Badarpur side at a high speed in a rash and negligent manner and hit the right side of the bus against one motorcycle.
The occupants of motorcycle fell down and sustained injuries.
There were two persons on the motorcycle.
The bus driver tried to flee from the spot.
PCR van reached on the spot and removed one of the injured who was alive to Apollo hospital and the other person who had already passed away was removed to AIIMS Trauma Centre by PCR van through HC Bhim Singh.
The bus was chased and stopped by public near Police Station Sarita Vihar.
The bus driver fled the spot.
Photograph of the site, body of the deceased, offending vehicle and the motorcycle were taken from the spot.
The accident had taken place due to rash and negligent driving of the bus driver.
Based on the statement of PW-1, FIR No.162/2010 was registered.
The second occupant of the motorcycle who had been taken to the hospital also passed away.
The bus driver was given a simple imprisonment of 6 months and 2 years under the particular sections.
The same has been challenged in the instant petition.