This Act may be cited as the ``Coastal Resources Enhancement and Restoration Act of 2000''.
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION RESEARCH GRANTS FOR COASTAL ENGINEERING AND SHORELINE PROTECTION.
Section 3 of the National Science Foundation Act of 1950 (42 United States Code 1862) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Beginning in fiscal year 2001, not less than 10 percent of the amounts appropriated for a fiscal year for making grants for engineering research under subsection (a)(1) shall be used by the Foundation for making grants for coastal engineering and coastline protection research.''.
SUPPLEMENTAL ENVIRONMENTAL PROGRAMS IN COASTAL AREAS.
Section 313 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1323) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Artificial Reefs and Aquatic Habitat Restoration Projects.--A department, agency, or instrumentality of the Federal Government that is found to have violated this Act in connection with the discharge or runoff of pollutants into coastal waters of the United States and that, as a result of the violation, is ordered to undertake a supplemental environmental program in lieu of paying fines shall be given the option of constructing artificial reefs and undertaking aquatic habitat restoration projects.''.
ACCESS TO PUBLICLY OWNED SHORES.
Eligibility of Shoreline Protection Projects.--Subsection (d) of the first section of the Act entitled ``An Act authorizing Federal participation in the cost of protecting the shores of publicly owned property'', approved August 13, 1946 (33 United States Code 426d), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In making determinations under this subsection, the Secretary shall consider a publicly owned shore with insufficient public access (as determined in accordance with rules issued by the Secretary) to be a privately owned shore.''.
Cost Sharing.--Section 103(d) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2213(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Privately owned shores defined.--In this subsection, the term `privately owned shores' includes a publicly owned shore with insufficient public access, as determined in accordance with rules issued by the Secretary.''.
Rules.--The Secretary of the Army shall issue rules to carry out the amendments made by this subsection.
In issuing such rules, the Secretary shall seek to ensure public access to every one-half mile of publicly owned shore for which assistance is provided by the Secretary.
The Secretary may allow for exceptions to such access requirements in cases of shores located in areas of extreme environmental sensitivity.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a separate account to be known as the Beach Nourishment Account (in this section referred to as the ``account''), which shall consist of such funds as may be deposited or credited to the account under this section.
Source of Funds for Account.--For fiscal year 2001 and each fiscal year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall periodically transfer to the account amounts equivalent to 2 percent of the funds deposited in the general fund of the Treasury under section 9 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1338).
Use of Account.--Funds in the account shall be available without further appropriation-- (1) in the amounts specified in section 6, to the Secretary of Commerce and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration to carry out the pilot program authorized by section 6; and (2) in the amounts remaining after funds are made available under paragraph (1), to the Secretary of the Army to carry out projects for beach nourishment, shore protection, and beach erosion control; Funds in the account shall remain available until expended.
Applicability of Requirements.--The Secretary of the Army shall carry out beach nourishment, shore protection, and beach erosion control projects using amounts in the account in accordance with the cost-sharing requirements under section 103 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2213) and other requirements applicable to such projects.
Reporting of Transactions.--Receipts, obligations, and expenditures of funds in the account shall be reported in annual estimates submitted to Congress by the Secretary of the Army.
Investment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the account established by subsection (a) as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest- bearing obligations of the United States.
For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired-- (A) on original issue at the issue price; or (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the account may be sold at the market price.
Interest on certain proceeds.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the account shall be credited to and form part of the account.
COMPREHENSIVE OCEAN OBSERVING SYSTEM PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce (acting through the Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere) and the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall jointly carry out a pilot program to institute the mission of the Global Ocean Observing System in the United States by establishing a comprehensive monitoring network of ocean conditions.
Partnerships.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary and the Administrator shall enter into partnerships with local and regional interests to monitor and collect the widest range of data possible about the coastal oceans and inland waterways in order to make such information available to interested persons in real time or near real time.
Information To Be Collected.--Information collected under the pilot program shall include the following: (1) Wave heights, periods, swell direction and water temperature.
Coastal currents and their directions.
Large mammal movement via implanted sensors.
Water quality, such as bacteria counts, sediment movement, and red tides.
Beaconed fishing boat tracking (for tracking illegal foreign whalers).
River mouth outflow sediment observation.
Global Information System coastal mapping.
Federal Cooperation.--The Secretary and the Administrator shall carry out the pilot project in cooperation with the Geological Survey, the Navy, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Regional Test Projects.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary and the Administrator shall establish 2 regional test projects.
One of the test projects shall be located at the Southern California Bight from Encinitas, Mexico, to Point Dume, California, with Orange County, California, serving as the focal point.
The second test project shall be carried out at a location to be determined by the Secretary and the Administrator.
Coordination of Existing Efforts.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary and the Administrator shall not replace or duplicate existing efforts of Federal, State, and local entities in monitoring ocean conditions, but shall seek to coordinate such efforts and to obtain information that is not currently collected.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There shall be available from the Beach Nourishment Account established by section 5 $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2006 to carry out this section.
Allocation.--Of the amounts made available under paragraph (1), $2,000,000 per fiscal year shall be available for carrying out each of the 2 regional test projects referred to in subsection (e).