This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Charity Reform Act''.
CREDIT FOR CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN PRIVATE CHARITIES PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO THE POOR.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
23. CREDIT FOR CERTAIN CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified charitable contributions which are paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitation.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $500 ($1,000 in the case of a joint return under section 6013).
Qualified Charitable Contribution.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified charitable contribution' means any charitable contribution (as defined in section 170(c)) made in cash to a qualified charity but only if the amount of each such contribution, and the recipient thereof, are identified on the return for the taxable year during which such contribution is made.
Qualified Charity.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified charity' means, with respect to the taxpayer, any organization which is described in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 501(a), and-- ``(A) which, upon request by the organization, is certified by the Secretary as meeting the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3), or ``(B)(i) which is organized to solicit and collect gifts and grants which, by agreement, are distributed to qualified charities described in subparagraph (A), ``(ii) with respect to which at least 85 percent of the funds so collected are distributed to qualified charities described in subparagraph (A), and ``(iii) which meets the requirements of paragraph (5).
Charity must primarily assist the poor.--An organization meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the Secretary reasonably expects that the predominant activity of such organization will be the providing of services to individuals and families which are designed to prevent or alleviate poverty among such individuals and families.
Minimum expense requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--An organization meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the Secretary reasonably expects that the annual poverty program expenses of such organization will not be less than 70 percent of the annual aggregate expenses of such organization.
Poverty program expense.--For purposes of subparagraph (A)-- ``(i) In general.--The term `poverty program expense' means any expense in providing program services referred to in paragraph (2).
Exceptions.--Such term shall not include-- ``(I) any management or general expense, ``(II) any expense for the purpose of influencing legislation (as defined in section 4911(d)), ``(III) any expense primarily for the purpose of fundraising, and ``(IV) any expense for a legal service provided on behalf of any individual referred to in paragraph (2).
Election to treat poverty programs as separate organization.-- ``(A) In general.--An organization may elect to treat one or more programs operated by it as a separate organization for purposes of this section.
Effect of election.--If an organization elects the application of this paragraph, the organization, in accordance with regulations, shall-- ``(i) maintain separate accounting for revenues and expenses of programs with respect to which the election was made, ``(ii) ensure that contributions to which this section applies be used only for such programs, and ``(iii) provide for the proportional allocation of management, general, and fundraising expenses to such programs to the extent not allocable to a specific program.
Reporting requirements.--An organization shall not be required to file any return under section 6033 with respect to any programs treated as a separate organization under this paragraph, except that if the organization is otherwise required to file such a return, such organization shall include on such return the percentages described in the last sentence of section 6033(b) which are determined with respect to such separate organization.
Additional requirements for solicitation organizations.--The requirements of this paragraph are met if the organization-- ``(A) maintains separate accounting for revenues and expenses, and ``(B) makes available to the public its administrative and fundraising costs and information as to the organizations receiving funds from it and the amount of such funds.
Coordination With Deduction for Charitable Contributions.-- ``(1) Credit in lieu of deduction.--The credit provided by subsection (a) for any qualified charitable contribution shall be in lieu of any deduction otherwise allowable under this chapter for such contribution.
Election to have section not apply.--A taxpayer may elect for any taxable year to have this section not apply.''
Returns.-- (1) Qualified charities required to provide copies of annual return.--Subsection (e) of section 6104 of such Code (relating to public inspection of certain annual returns and applications for exemption) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Qualified charities required to provide copies of annual return.-- ``(A) In general.--Every qualified charity (as defined in section 23(d)) shall, upon request of an individual made at an office where such organization's annual return filed under section 6033 is required under paragraph (1) to be available for inspection, provide a copy of such return to such individual without charge other than a reasonable fee for any reproduction and mailing costs.
If the request is made in person, such copies shall be provided immediately and, if made other than in person, shall be provided within 30 days.
Period of availability.--Subparagraph (A) shall apply only during the 3-year period beginning on the filing date (as defined in paragraph (1)(D) of the return requested).''
Additional information.--Section 6033(b) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new flush sentence: ``Each qualified charity (as defined in section 23(d)) to which this subsection otherwise applies shall also furnish each of the percentages determined by dividing the following categories of the organization's expenses for the year by its total expenses for the year: program services; management and general; fundraising; and payments to affiliates.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
23. Credit for certain charitable contributions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made after the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.
DEDUCTION FOR CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS TO BE ALLOWED TO INDIVIDUALS WHO DO NOT ITEMIZE DEDUCTIONS.
In General.--Section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to charitable, etc., contributions and gifts) is amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) the following new subsection: ``(m) Deduction for Individuals Not Itemizing Deductions.--In the case of an individual who does not itemize deductions for the taxable year, the amount allowable under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall be taken into account as a direct charitable deduction under section 63.''
Direct Charitable Deduction.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (b) of section 63 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) the deduction for charitable contributions under section 170(m).''
Conforming amendment.--Subsection (d) of section 63 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) the deduction for charitable contributions under section 170(m).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTION DEDUCTION NOT SUBJECT TO OVERALL LIMITATION ON ITEMIZED DEDUCTIONS.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 68 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to overall limitation on itemized deductions) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) the deduction under section 170 (relating to charitable, etc., contributions and gifts).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS MADE BEFORE FILING OF RETURN.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Time when contributions deemed made.--The taxpayer may elect to treat any charitable contribution which is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for the taxable year (not including extensions thereof) as being made on the last day of such taxable year.
Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.
FINANCIAL ACCOUNTABILITY REPORTING REQUIREMENT FOR GOVERNMENTAL POVERTY AND WELFARE PROGRAMS.
In General.--Each applicable welfare program shall publish in the Federal Register and other publications generally available to the public within a reasonable period of time following the end of a fiscal year the following information for the fiscal year: (1) Information required to be included on a return under section 6033 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 by an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of such Code, including expenses for program services, administrative and general costs, and fundraising.
The percentages determined by dividing the following categories of the program's expenses for the year by its total expenses for the year: program services; management and general; and fundraising.
Additional Availability.--Each applicable welfare program shall make the information described in subsection (a) available at its principal office and at any of its regional or district offices.
Upon request of an individual made at any such office, the program shall provide a copy of the information to such individual without charge other than a reasonable fee for any reproduction and mailing costs.
Such request shall be met within 30 days (or immediately if made in person).
Applicable Welfare Program.--For purposes of this section, an applicable welfare program is a Federal, State, or local welfare or public assistance program for which Federal funds are appropriated.
STANDARDS FOR DETERMINING SUCCESS OF GOVERNMENTAL WELFARE PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study with respect to applicable welfare programs to develop standards to determine-- (1) whether such programs meet the needs for which the programs were established, and (2) if such programs meet such needs, whether they do so in a cost-effective manner.
For purposes of this subsection, the term ``applicable welfare program'' has the meaning given such term by section 6(c).
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall report to the Congress the results of the study conducted under subsection (a), including the standards described therein.