This Act may be cited as the ``Civil Justice Reform Act of 1993''.
DIVERSITY OF CITIZENSHIP JURISDICTION; AWARD OF ATTORNEYS' FEES TO PREVAILING PARTY.
Award of Fees.--Section 1332 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f)(1) The prevailing party in an action under this section shall be entitled to attorneys' fees only to the extent that such party prevails on any position or claim advanced during the action.
Attorneys' fees under this paragraph shall be paid by the nonprevailing party but shall not exceed the amount of the attorneys' fees of the nonprevailing party with regard to such position or claim.
If the nonprevailing party receives services under a contingent fee agreement, the amount of attorneys' fees under this paragraph shall not exceed the reasonable value of those services.
In order to receive attorneys' fees under paragraph (1), counsel of record in any actions under this section shall maintain accurate, complete records of hours worked on the matter regardless of the fee arrangement with his or her client.
The court may, in its discretion, limit the fees recovered under paragraph (1) to the extent that the court finds special circumstances that make payment of such fees unjust.
This subsection shall not apply to any action removed from a State court under section 1441 of this title, or to any action in which the United States, any State, or any agency, officer, or employee of the United States or any State is a party.
As used in this subsection, the term `prevailing party' means a party to an action who obtains a favorable final judgment (other than by settlement), exclusive of interest, on all or a portion of the claims asserted in the action.''.
Study and Report.--(1) The Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall conduct a study regarding the effect of the requirements of subsection (f) of section 1332 of title 28, United States Code, as added by subsection (a) of this section, on the caseload of actions brought under such section, which study shall include-- (A) data on the number of actions, within each judicial district, in which the nonprevailing party was required to pay the attorneys' fees of the prevailing party; and (B) an assessment of the deterrent effect of the requirements on frivolous or meritless actions.
No later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall submit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress containing-- (A) the results of the study described in paragraph (1); and (B) recommendations regarding whether the requirements should be continued or applied with respect to additional actions.
Repeal.--No later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, this section and the amendment made by this section shall be repealed.
In General.--Part V of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 113 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 114--PRETRIAL PROVISIONS ``Sec.
Offer of judgment ``(a)(1) In any civil action filed in a district court, any party may serve upon any adverse party a written offer to allow judgment to be entered for the money or property specified in the offer.
If within 14 days after service of the offer, the adverse party serves written notice that the offer is accepted, either party may file the offer and notice of acceptance and the clerk shall enter judgment.
An offer not accepted within such 14-day period shall be deemed withdrawn and evidence thereof is not admissible, except in a proceeding to determine reasonable attorney fees.
If the final judgment obtained by the offeree is not more favorable than the offer made under paragraph (1) which was not accepted by the offeree, the offeree shall pay the offeror's reasonable attorney fees incurred after the expiration of the time for accepting the offer, to the extent necessary to make the offeror whole.
In no case shall an award of attorney fees under this section exceed the amount of the judgment obtained.
The court may reduce the award of costs and attorney fees to avoid the imposition of undue hardship on a party.
The fact that an offer is made under this section shall not preclude a subsequent offer.
(A) Subject to the provisions of subparagraph (B), when the liability of 1 party has been determined by verdict, order, or judgment, but the amount or extent of the liability remains to be determined by further proceedings, any party may make an offer of judgment, which shall have the same effect as an offer made before trial.
The court may shorten the period of time an offeree may have to accept an offer under subparagraph (A), but in no case shall such period be less than 7 days.
A party making an offer shall not be deprived of the benefits of an offer it makes by an adverse party's subsequent offer, unless the subsequent offer is more favorable than the judgment obtained.
If the judgment obtained includes nonmonetary relief, a determination that it is more favorable to the offeree than was the offer shall be made only when the terms of the offer included all such nonmonetary relief.
This section shall not apply to class or derivative actions under rules 23, 23.1 and 23.2 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
(1) Except as provided under paragraph (2), the provisions of this section shall not be construed to prohibit an award or reduce the amount of an award a party may receive under a statute which provides for the payment of attorney's fees by another party.
The amount a party may receive under this section may be set off against the amount of an award made under a statute described in paragraph (1).''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of chapters for part IV of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 113 the following: ``114.
PRIOR NOTICE AS A PREREQUISITE OF FILING A CIVIL ACTION IN THE UNITED STATES DISTRICT COURT.
In General.--Chapter 23 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Prior notice of civil action ``(a)(1) No less than 30 days before filing a civil action in a court of the United States the claimant intending to file such action shall transmit written notice to any intended defendant of the specific claims involved, including the amount of actual damages and expenses incurred and expected to be incurred.
The claimant shall transmit such notice to any intended defendant at an address reasonably expected to provide actual notice.
For purposes of this section, the term `transmit' means to mail by first class-mail, postage prepaid, or contract for delivery by any company which physically delivers correspondence as a commercial service to the public in its regular course of business.
The claimant shall at the time of filing a civil action, file in the court a certificate of service evidencing compliance with this subsection.
If the applicable statute of limitations for such action would expire during the period of notice required by subsection (a), the statute of limitations shall expire on the thirtieth day after the date on which written notice is transmitted to the intended defendant or defendants under subsection (a).
The parties may by written agreement extend that 30-day period for an additional period of not to exceed 90 days.
The requirements of this section shall not apply-- ``(1) in any action to seize or forfeit assets subject to forfeiture or in any bankruptcy, insolvency, receivership, conservatorship, or liquidation proceeding; ``(2) if the assets that are the subject of the action or would satisfy a judgment are subject to flight, dissipation, or destruction, or if the defendant is subject to flight; ``(3) if a written notice prior to filing an action is otherwise required by law, or the claimant has made a prior attempt in writing to settle the claim with the defendant; ``(4) in proceedings to enforce a civil investigative demand or an administrative summons; ``(5) in any action to foreclose a lien; or ``(6) in any action pertaining to a temporary restraining order, preliminary injunctive relief, or the fraudulent conveyance of property, or in any other type of action involving exigent circumstances that compel immediate resort to the courts.
If the district court finds that the requirements of subsection (a) have not been met by the claimant, and such defect is asserted by the defendant within 60 days after service of the summons or complaint upon such defendant, the claim shall be dismissed without prejudice and the costs of such action, including attorneys' fees, shall be imposed upon the claimant.
Whenever an action is dismissed under this subsection, the claimant may refile such claim within 60 days after dismissal regardless of any statutory limitations period if-- ``(1) during the 60 days after dismissal, notice is transmitted under subsection (a); and ``(2) the original action was timely filed in accordance with subsection (b).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 23 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``483.
Prior notice of civil action.''.
CIVIL RIGHTS OF INSTITUTIONALIZED PERSONS ACT.
Exhaustion of Administrative Remedies.--Section 7 of the Civil Rights of Institutionalized Persons Act (42 United States Code 1997e) is amended-- (1) by amending subsection (a) to read as follows: ``(a) In any action brought pursuant to section 1979 of the Revised Statutes of the United States, by any adult convicted of a crime confined in any jail, prison, or other correctional facility, the court shall continue such case for a period not to exceed 180 days in order to require exhaustion of such plain, speedy, and effective administrative remedies as are available.
''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively; and (B) by inserting immediately after ``(b)'' the following: ``(1) Upon the request of a State or local corrections agency, the Attorney General of the United States shall provide the agency with technical advice and assistance in establishing plain, speedy, and effective administrative remedies for inmate grievances.''.
Proceedings in Forma Pauperis.--Section 1915(d) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(d) The court may request an attorney to represent any such person unable to employ counsel and may dismiss the case if the allegation of poverty is untrue, or if satisfied that the action fails to state a claim upon which relief can be granted or is frivolous or malicious.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--Chapter 119 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1828 the following new section: ``Sec.
Multiple expert witnesses ``In any civil action filed in a district court, the court shall not permit opinion evidence on the same issue from more than 1 expert witness for each party, except upon a showing of good cause.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 119 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1828 the following new section: ``1829.
If any provision of this Act or the amendments made by this Act or the application of any provision or amendment to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this Act and such amendments and the application of such provision and amendments to any other person or circumstance shall not be affected by that invalidation.
Except as expressly provided otherwise, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall become effective 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
This Act shall not apply to any action or proceeding commenced before such effective date.