This Act may be cited as the ``Back to Work Act of 2001''.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY GRANTS TO RESPOND TO THE TERRORIST ATTACKS OF SEPTEMBER 11, 2001.
In General.--Section 173(a) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2918(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) to the Governor of any State who applies for assistance under subsection (f) to provide employment and training assistance to workers affected by major economic dislocations, such as plant closures, mass layoffs, or multiple layoffs, caused by the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001.''.
Requirements.--Section 173 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2918) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Relief for Dislocations Caused by the Terrorist Attacks of September 11, 2001.-- ``(1) Grant recipient eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a)(4), a Governor shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Such application shall contain a certification by the Governor that the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, contributed importantly to plant closures, mass layoffs of workers, multiple layoffs of workers, or other major economic dislocations in the State.
State administration.--The Governor may designate one or more local workforce investment boards or other entities with the capability to respond to the circumstances relating to the particular closure, layoff, or other dislocation to administer the grant under subsection (a)(4).
Participant eligibility.-- ``(A) In general.--An individual shall be eligible to receive assistance described in subparagraph (B) under a grant awarded under subsection (a)(4) if such individual is a dislocated worker and the Governor has certified that the terrorist attacks of September 11, 2001, contributed importantly to the dislocation.
Types of assistance.--Assistance described in this subparagraph is-- ``(i) employment and training assistance, including employment and training activities described in section 134; and ``(ii) temporary health care coverage assistance described in paragraph (4).
Temporary health care coverage assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--Temporary health care coverage assistance described in this paragraph consists of health care coverage premium assistance provided to qualified individuals under this paragraph.
Qualified individuals.--For purposes of this paragraph, a qualified individual is an individual who-- ``(i) is a dislocated worker referred to in paragraph (3)(A) with respect to whom the Governor has made the certification regarding the dislocation as required under such paragraph, and ``(ii) has enrolled in a program for health care coverage premium assistance established by the Governor for purposes of this paragraph.
Provision of assistance.--Health care coverage premium assistance provided under the program established by the Governor for purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) shall be not in excess of 75 percent of the full amount of the premium for the health care coverage, ``(ii) shall be provided with respect to not more than the first 10 months of the period of dislocation of the qualified individual, and ``(iii) shall be credited against the premium otherwise owed with respect to the qualified individual.
Limitation on entitlement.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as establishing any entitlement of qualified individuals to premium assistance under this subsection.
Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) Health care coverage.--The term `health care coverage' means health insurance coverage other than coverage under-- ``(I) title XVIII of the Social Security Act, ``(II) title XIX of the Social Security Act (other than section 1928), ``(III) title XXI of the Social Security Act, ``(IV) chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, ``(V) chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, ``(VI) chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code (other than coverage which is comparable to continuation coverage under section 4980B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986), or ``(VII) the Indian Health Care Improvement Act.
Such term also does not include coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract and health insurance coverage in the individual market.
Premium.--The term `premium' means, in connection with health care coverage, the premium which would (but for this section) be charged for the cost of coverage.
Authorization of appropriations.-- ``(A) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 for the award of grants under subsection (a)(4) in accordance with this subsection.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subparagraph (A)-- ``(i) are in addition to amounts made available under section 132(a)(2)(A) or any other provision of law to carry out this section; and ``(ii) are authorized to remain available until 18 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection.''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS TO PROMOTE SERVICES UNDER THE WORKFORCE INVESTMENT ACT OF 1998.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) In the wake of the terrorist attacks against the United States on September 11, 2001, many workers and their families are dealing with job loss and other effects of an economic slowdown.
The Workforce Investment Act of 1998 was enacted to create the Nation's coordinated workforce development system, under which assistance is provided for workers who have been laid off, including job training assistance.
The Workforce Investment Act of 1998 provides services such as-- (A) one-stop career centers, which provide integrated resources for job seekers and businesses, including job search, job placement services and job referrals to employers; (B) individual training accounts, which are job training vouchers established by local areas and given to individuals to allow them to choose where they would like to receive their job training; and (C) rapid response services, under which States establish on-site offices at affected businesses to make immediate contact with employees and employers to provide assistance in the areas of job search and training activities.
The Nation's workforce development system is designed to help individual dislocated workers and provide rapid response services in times of mass layoffs or dislocations.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of Labor should continue efforts to encourage Americans to take advantage of existing services under the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 in order to assist workers during these times of unemployment.