SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR HIGH TECHNOLOGY JOB TRAINING EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR HIGH TECHNOLOGY JOB TRAINING.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the high technology job training credit determined under this section is an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified high technology job training expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitation.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) shall not exceed $2,500 for the taxable year with respect to each substantially full-time employee.
Qualified High Technology Job Training Expense.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified high technology job training expense' means any expense for educational assistance described in paragraph (1) of section 127(c) for the training of a substantially full-time employee in an information technology occupation.
Exceptions.--Such term does not include-- ``(A) expenses for which any other Federal or State credit or payment is made; or ``(B) expenses paid or incurred for a professional conference or for an orientation program.
Information Technology Occupation.--For purposes of this section, the term `information technology occupation' means an occupation specializing in the study, design, development, implementation, support, or management of computer based information systems, such as computer scientist, computer engineer, systems analyst, or computer programmer.
Substantially Full-Time Employee.--For purposes of this section, the term `substantially full-time employee' means an employee of the taxpayer who is normally employed for at least 30 hours per week.
Aggregation Rules.--All persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 or subsection (m) or (o) of section 414 shall be treated as one person for purposes of this section.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any expenses paid or incurred after December 31, 2003.''
Current Year Business Credit Calculation.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended-- (1) by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(13) the high technology job training credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Disallowance of Deduction by Amount of Credit.--Section 280C of such Code (relating to certain expenses for which credits are allowable) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Credit for Certain Job Training Expenses.--No deduction shall be allowed for that portion of the qualified high technology job training expenses (as defined in section 45D(c)) paid or incurred during the taxable year that is equal to the amount of credit determined for the taxable year under section 45D(a).
In the case of a corporation which is a member of a controlled group of corporations (within the meaning of section 52(a)) or a trade or business which is treated as being under common control with other trades or businesses (within the meaning of section 52(b)), this subsection shall be applied under rules prescribed by the Secretary similar to the rules applicable under subsections (a) and (b) of section 52.''
Deduction for Unused Credit.--Subsection (c) of section 196 of such Code is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (6); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(8) the high technology job training credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Limitation on Carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(8) No carryback of high technology job training credit before effective date.--No amount of unused business credit available under section 45D may be carried back to a taxable year beginning on or before the date of the enactment of this paragraph.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 45C the following: ``Sec.
Credit for high technology job training.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.