This Act may be cited as the ``Americas Free Trade Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The countries of the Western Hemisphere have enjoyed more success in the twentieth century in the peaceful conduct of their relations among themselves than have the countries in the rest of the world.
The economic prosperity of the United States and its trading partners in the Western Hemisphere is increased by the reduction of trade barriers.
Trade protection endangers economic prosperity in the United States and throughout the Western Hemisphere and undermines civil liberty and constitutionally limited government.
The successful establishment of a North American Free Trade Area sets the pattern for the reduction of trade barriers throughout the Western Hemisphere, enhancing prosperity in place of the cycle of increasing trade barriers and deepening poverty that results from a resort to protectionism and trade retaliation.
The reduction of government interference in the foreign and domestic sectors of a nation's economy and the concomitant promotion of economic opportunity and freedoms promote civil liberty and constitutionally limited government.
Countries that observe a consistent policy of free trade, the promotion of free enterprise and other economic freedoms (including effective protection of private property rights), and the removal of barriers to foreign direct investment, in the context of constitutionally limited government and minimal interference in the economy, will follow the surest and most effective prescription to alleviate poverty and provide for economic, social, and political development.
FREE TRADE AREA FOR THE WESTERN HEMISPHERE.
In General.--The President shall take action to initiate negotiations to obtain trade agreements with the sovereign countries located in the Western Hemisphere, the terms of which provide for the reduction and ultimate elimination of tariffs and other nontariff barriers to trade, for the purpose of promoting the eventual establishment of a free trade area for the entire Western Hemisphere.
Reciprocal Basis.--An agreement entered into under subsection (a) shall be reciprocal and provide mutual reductions in trade barriers to promote trade, economic growth, and employment.
Bilateral or Multilateral Basis.--Agreements may be entered into under subsection (a) on a bilateral basis with any foreign country described in that subsection or on a multilateral basis with all of such countries or any group of such countries.
FREE TRADE WITH FREE CUBA.
Restrictions Prior to Restoration of Freedom in Cuba.--The provisions of this Act shall not apply to Cuba unless the President certifies to Congress that-- (1) freedom has been restored in Cuba; and (2) the claims of United States citizens for compensation for expropriated property have been appropriately addressed.
Standards for the Restoration of Freedom in Cuba.--The President shall not make the certification that freedom has been restored in Cuba, for purpose of subsection (a), unless the President determines that-- (1) a constitutionally guaranteed democratic government has been established in Cuba with leaders chosen through free and fair elections; (2) the rights of individuals to private property have been restored and are effectively protected and broadly exercised in Cuba; (3) Cuba has a currency that is fully convertible domestically and internationally; (4) all political prisoners have been released in Cuba; and (5) the rights of free speech and freedom of the press in Cuba are effectively guaranteed.
Priority for Free Trade With Free Cuba.--Upon making the certification described in subsection (a), the President shall give priority to the negotiation of a free trade agreement with Cuba.
INTRODUCTION AND FAST-TRACK CONSIDERATION OF IMPLEMENTING BILLS.
Introduction in House and Senate.--When the President submits to Congress a bill to implement a trade agreement described in section 3, the bill shall be introduced (by request) in the House and the Senate as described in section 151(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191(c)).
Restrictions on Content.--A bill to implement a trade agreement described in section 3-- (1) shall contain only provisions that are necessary to implement the trade agreement; and (2) may not contain any provision that establishes (or requires or authorizes the establishment of) a labor or environmental protection standard or amends (or requires or authorizes an amendment of) any labor or environmental protection standard set forth in law or regulation.
Point of Order in Senate.-- (1) Applicability to all legislative forms of implementing bill.--For the purposes of this subsection, the term ``implementing bill'' means the following: (A) The bill.--A bill described in subsection (a), without regard to whether that bill originated in the Senate or the House of Representatives.
Amendment.--An amendment to a bill referred to in subparagraph (A).
Conference report.--A conference report on a bill referred to in subparagraph (A).
Amendment between houses.--An amendment between the Houses of Congress in relation to a bill referred to in subparagraph (A).
Motion.--A motion in relation to an item referred to in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D).
Making of point of order.-- (A) Against single item.--When the Senate is considering an implementing bill, a Senator may make a point of order against any part of the implementing bill that contains material in violation of a restriction under subsection (b).
Against several items.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or rule of the Senate, when the Senate is considering an implementing bill, it shall be in order for a Senator to raise a single point of order that several provisions of the implementing bill violate subsection (b).
The Presiding Officer may sustain the point of order as to some or all of the provisions against which the Senator raised the point of order.
Effect of sustainment of point of order.-- (A) Against single item.--If a point of order made against a part of an implementing bill under paragraph (2)(A) is sustained by the Presiding Officer, the part of the implementing bill against which the point of order is sustained shall be deemed stricken.
Against several items.--In the case of a point of order made under paragraph (2)(B) against several provisions of an implementing bill, only those provisions against which the Presiding Officer sustains the point of order shall be deemed stricken.
Stricken matter not in order as amendment.-- Matter stricken from an implementing bill under this paragraph may not be offered as an amendment to the implementing bill (in any of its forms described in paragraph (1)) from the floor.
Waivers and appeals.-- (A) Waivers.--Before the Presiding Officer rules on a point of order under this subsection, any Senator may move to waive the point of order as it applies to some or all of the provisions against which the point of order is raised.
Such a motion to waive is amendable in accordance with the rules and precedents of the Senate.
Appeals.--After the Presiding Officer rules on a point of order under this subsection, any Senator may appeal the ruling of the Presiding Officer on the point of order as it applies to some or all of the provisions on which the Presiding Officer ruled.
Three-fifths majority required.-- (i) Waivers.--A point of order under this subsection is waived only by the affirmative vote of at least the requisite majority.
Appeals.--A ruling of the Presiding Officer on a point of order under this subsection is sustained unless at least the requisite majority votes not to sustain the ruling.
Requisite majority.--For purposes of clauses (i) and (ii), the requisite majority is three-fifths of the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn.
Applicability of Fast Track Procedures.--Section 151 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)-- (A) by inserting ``section 5 of the Americas Free Trade Act,'' after ``the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988,''; and (B) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows: ``(C) if changes in existing laws or new statutory authority is required to implement such trade agreement or agreements or such extension, provisions, necessary to implement such trade agreement or such extension, either repealing or amending existing laws or providing new statutory authority.
''; and (2) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting ``or under section 5 of the Americas Free Trade Act,'' after ``the Uruguay Round Agreements Act,''.