This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Deal for Northern New Mexico of 1998''.
PURPOSE, DEFINITIONS AND FINDINGS.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to create a mechanism for the settlement of Spanish and Mexican land grant claims in New Mexico as claimed under the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo.
Definitions.--For purposes of this Act: (1) Treaty of guadalupe-hidalog.--The term ``Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalogo'' means the Treaty of Peace, Friendship, Limits, and Settlement (Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo), between the United States and the Republic of Mexico, signed February 2, 1848 (TS 207; 9 Bevans 791); (2) Community land grant.--The term ``community land grant'' means a village, town, settlement, or pueblo consisting of land held in common (accompanied by lesser private allotments) by three or more families under a grant from the King of Spain (or his representative) before the effective date of the Treaty of Cordova, August 24, 1821, or from the authorities of the Republic of Mexico before May 30, 1848, in what became the State of new Mexico, regardless of the original character of the grant.
Land grant claim.--The term ``land grant claim'' means a claim of title to land by a community land grant under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo.
Eligible descendants.--The term ``eligible descendant'' means a descendant of a person who-- (A) was a Mexican citizen before the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo; (B) was a member of a community land grant; and (C) became a United States citizen within ten years after the effective date of the Treaty of Guadalupe- Hidalgo, May 30, 1848, pursuant to the terms of the Treaty.
Settlement committee.--The term ``settlement committee'' refers to committee, or one of the county specific subcommittees as appropriate, authorized in Section 3 of this Act.
Reconstituted.--The term ``reconstituted,'' with regard to a valid community land grant, means restoration to full status as a municipality with rights properly belonging to a municipality under State law, including the nontaxability of municipal property (common lands) and the right of local self- government.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) New Mexico has a unique and complex history regarding land ownership due to the substantial number of Spanish and Mexican land grants that were an integral part of the colonization of New Mexico before the United States acquired the area in the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo.
Under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo, these land grant claims were recognized as valid property claims under United States law.
Several studies, including the New Mexico Land Grant Series published by the University of New Mexico, have documented that the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in regards to these land grant claims in New Mexico was never well implemented.
Whether because of a lack of knowledge of Spanish land law on the part of the judicial system in the then new Territory of New Mexico, whether because of inadequate or conflicting documentation of these claims, or whether it was due to sharp legal practices, many of the former citizens of Mexico, and then new citizens of the United States, lost title to lands that had been guaranteed to them by treaty.
Following the United States war with Mexico, the economy of the Territory of New Mexico was dependent on the use of land resources, and that held true for much of this century as well.
When the land grant claimants lost title to their land, the predominantly Hispanic communities in northern New Mexico lost a keystone to their economy.
The effects of this loss have had long lasting economic consequences and are in part the cause that these communities remain some of the poorest in the United States.
The history of the implementation of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo has been a source of continuing controversy for generations and has left a lingering sense of injustice in the communities in northern New Mexico, which has periodically led to armed conflicts.
The Government of the United States has an obligation to try to find an equitable remedy for the inadequate implementation of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo and the consequences that has had on the communities and people of New Mexico.
This should be done as expeditiously as possible.
However, reconstructing the one hundred and fifty year history of land title claims and transfers in these communities is likely to prove lengthy and costly.
In some cases it may never be possible to adequately reconstruct the title history.
The Secretary of the Interior has had an experience in administratively developing settlement packages to resolve large and complex Tribal water rights claims as an alternative to lengthy and expensive litigation.
This experience may be invaluable in resolving the large, complex, and sometimes conflicting Spanish and Mexican land grant claims in northern New Mexico.
The history of colonial Spanish America, the system of land distribution under Spanish and Mexican law, and the subsequent impacts to that system following the transfer of territory from Mexico to the United States under the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo is a requisite body of knowledge in determining an appropriate settlement of land grant claims.
It is also an integral part of the national history and culture of the United States of America and, as such, deserves formal recognition and interpretation by our institutions of historical preservation.
CREATION OF SETTLEMENT COMMITTEES.
Within one hundred and eighty (180) days of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior working through the Bureau of Land Management and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and the Secretary of Agriculture working through the Forest Service are hereby authorized and directed to establish a ``Settlement Committee'' to develop comprehensive settlements for land grant claims on a county by county basis.
The Settlement Committee will be comprised of separate subcommittees for each county in which there are land grant claims in New Mexico.
Each county subcommittee shall by comprised of seven members including: (1) a representative of the Secretary of the Interior; (2) a representative of the Secretary of Agriculture; (3) a representative of the State Commissioner of Public Lands; and (4) four residents of the particular county in question.
The four county representatives are to be appointed their county commissions: Provided, That in counties with federally recognized Native American Indian Tribes that at least one county representative shall be an enrolled member of a tribe whose reservation pueblo boundaries come within that county: Provided further, That at least one county representative shall be an eligible descendent who is not an enrolled member of a Native American Indian Tribe.
Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Settlement Committee.
A vacancy in the Settlement Committee shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
SUBMISSION OF LAND GRANT CLAIMS.
Within ninety (90) days of the creation of the settlement committee it shall establish a set of guidelines for the submission of land grant claims, and publish these guidelines within papers of general circulation in each of the counties in New Mexico.
Land grant claims must be submitted to the appropriate county settlement committee within one year of the publication of the guidelines.
REVIEW AND SETTLEMENT PACKAGE.
The settlement committee for each county shall review all of the submitted claims in the county and, based on the documentation at its disposal, make an initial determination concerning their potential validity including: possible past conveyances, the accuracy of the boundaries of the land claimed, and the number of eligible heirs affected.
Upon completing this review, the settlement committee shall develop a proposed settlement package in satisfaction of land grant claims within that county.
In creating the settlement package, the settlement committee shall take into account: the degree of certainty with which it has determined that various claims are valid, the impacts, including economic and social impacts, that any unfulfilled land grant claims may have had on the communities within that county, the relative benefits of various settlement options on those communities, and whether there is a legal entity that can accept settlement.
The elements of a proposed settlement package may include, but are not limited to: (1) restoration of lands to a given land grant community or communities; (2) reconstitution of a given land grant community or communities; (3) the setting aside of certain lands for communal use for fuel wood, building materials, hunting, recreation, etc.
These lands could be set aside as special managerial units within existing Federal land management agencies or transferred to local county, tribal, or municipal, governments; (4) trust funds for scholarships or home and business loans; or (5) land for commercial use with the proceeds to be deposited into the trust funds.
The settlement committee shall complete its review and proposed settlement package within three years of the deadline for submission of land grant claims under this Act, and submit them in a report to the Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs, and to the House Resources Committee.
Any proposal that requires action by the government of the State of New Mexico shall be submitted to the Governor, to the Speaker of the State House of Representatives, and to the President Pro Tem of the State Senate for New Mexico.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE SETTLEMENT COMMITTEE.
To complete its tasks the settlement committee may use a variety of methods to gather information and to build community consensus on the form of a proposed settlement package, including: the use of town meetings, holding formal hearings, the solicitation of written comments, and the use of mediators trained in alternative dispute resolution methods.
The settlement committee is also authorized to hire consultants as it may choose for historical, economic, and legal analysis.
In its efforts to develop a consensus on a settlement package, the Settlement Committee is not subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (Public Law 92-462; 5 United States Code Ap.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Settlement Committee may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Settlement Committee.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Settlement Committee.
For purposes of the Federal income, estate, and gift taxes, property accepted under this subsection shall be considered as a gift, bequest, or devise to the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Settlement Committee, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Settlement Committee, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Settlement Committee to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Immunity.--The Settlement Committee is an agency of the United States for the purpose of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to the immunity of witnesses).
Compensation.--Members of the Settlement Committee shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of level V of the Executive Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Settlement Committee.
SPANISH LAND GRANT STUDY PROGRAM.
The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution and the Settlement Committee working in conjunction with the University of New Mexico, and Highlands University shall establish a Spanish Land Grant Study program with a research archive at the Onate Center in Alcalde, New Mexico.
This program shall be designed to meet the requirements of the Smithsonian Institution's Affiliated Institutions Program.
The purposes of the Spanish Land Grant Study Program are to assist the Settlement Committee in the performance of its activities under section 5, and to archive and interpret the history of land distribution in the southwestern United States under Spanish and Mexican law, and the changes to this land distribution system following the transfer of territory from Mexico to the United States under the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe-Hidalgo in 1848.
The Settlement Committee shall terminate on 180 days after submitting its final report to Congress under section 5.
There is authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2003 for the purpose of carrying out the activities of the Settlement Committee created in section 3, and the Spanish Land Grant Study Program created in section 7.