The Congress finds that-- (1) the superlative natural and scenic resources of the Yellowstone area lead Congress in 1872 to establish Yellowstone National Park as the world's first national park; (2) in recognition of its resource values and international importance, Yellowstone National Park has been designated a World Heritage Site; (3) the Absaroka-Beartooth National Wilderness Area was designated in 1978 to protect the wilderness and ecological values of certain lands north and east of Yellowstone National Park; (4) a 20.5 mile segment of the Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone River was designated in 1990 as a component of the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, the only such designation within the State of Wyoming, in order to preserve and enhance the natural, scenic, and recreational resources of such segment; (5) Henderson Mountain and certain lands of the Beartooth Mountains contain important recreational, ecological, fish and wildlife, scenic, and historical resource values; (6) Henderson Mountain and certain lands of the Beartooth Mountains which are located upstream and adjacent to Yellowstone National Park, the Absaroka-Beartooth National Wilderness Area, and the Clarks Fork of the Yellowstone National Wild and Scenic River, form the source of the headwaters of 3 important river systems; (7) past and ongoing mining practices have degraded the resource values of Henderson Mountain and the Beartooth Mountains area; and (8) proposed mining activities in the area present a clear and present danger to the resource values of the area as well as those of Yellowstone National Park, the Absaroka-Beartooth National Wilderness Area and the Clarks Fork National Wild and Scenic River, and it is, therefore, in the public interest to protect these lands from such mining activities.
In General.--In order to conserve, protect, and restore the recreational, ecological, and wildlife resources of the Yellowstone headwaters area and provide for the protection of the adjacent Yellowstone National Park, Absaroka-Beartooth National Wilderness Area, and Clarks Fork National Wild and Scenic River, there is hereby established the Yellowstone Headwaters National Recreation Area within the Gallatin and Custer National Forests in the State of Montana (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``recreation area'').
Area Included.--The recreation area shall consist of the lands, waters, and interests therein within the area generally depicted on the map entitled ``Boundary Map, ...........'', numbered ____, and dated ____.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the United States Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
The Secretary of Agriculture (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') may from time to time make minor revisions in the boundary of the recreation area to promote management effectiveness and efficiency in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary shall publish notice of any such revision in the Federal Register.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the recreation area in accordance with this Act and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the national forest system.
In the administration of such recreation area, the Secretary may utilize such statutory authority as may be available to him for the conservation of wildlife and natural resources as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Management of natural resources within the recreation area shall be permitted only to the extent such management is compatible with, and does not impair, the purposes for which the recreation area is established.
Management Plan.--The Secretary shall, not later than 3 years after the enactment of this Act, develop a management plan for the recreation area, as an amendment to the Gallatin and Custer National Forest Management Plans, to reflect the establishment of the recreation area and to conform to the provisions of this Act.
Such plan shall contain, but not be limited to, measures to maintain and enhance traditional recreational use of the area, including use for such activities as hunting, fishing, hiking, camping, and snowmobiling.
Nothing in this Act shall require the Secretary to revise the Gallatin or Custer National Forest Management Plan pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974.
Hunting and Fishing.--The Secretary shall permit hunting and fishing on lands and waters within the recreation area in accordance with applicable Federal and State law.
The Secretary may designate zones where, and establish periods when, such activities will not be permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, fish and wildlife management or public use and enjoyment.
Except in emergencies any regulations issued by the Secretary under this subsection shall be put into effect only after consultation with the appropriate State agencies responsible for hunting and fishing activities.
The Secretary is directed to acquire lands or interests in lands within the boundaries of the recreation area that are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Lands within the boundaries of the recreation area which are owned by the State of Montana or any political subdivision thereof may only be acquired by donation or exchange.
Withdrawals.--After the enactment of this Act: (1) Lands within the recreation area shall not be open to location of mining claims under the mining laws of the United States.
The Secretary of the Interior shall not issue any lease under the mineral leasing or geothermal leasing laws of the United States for lands within the recreation area.
Lands within the recreation area shall not be available for disposal of mineral materials under the Act of July 31, 1947, commonly known as the Materials Act of 1947 (30 United States Code 601 and following).
Limitation on Patent Issuance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no patents shall be issued after June 14, 1995, for any location or claim made in the recreation area under the mining laws of the United States.
Prohibition.--No Federal lands may be used in connection with any mining or mining-related activity within the recreation area.
Reclamation.--No mining or mining-related activity involving any surface disturbance of lands or waters within such area, including disturbance through subsidence, shall be permitted except in accordance with requirements imposed by the Secretary, including requirements for reasonable reclamation of disturbed lands to a visual and hydrological condition as close as practical to their premining condition.
Mining Claim Validity Review.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall undertake and complete within 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act an expedited program to examine all unpatented mining claims, including those for which a patent application has been filed, within the recreation area.
Upon determination by the Secretary of Agriculture that the elements of a contest are present, the Secretary of the Interior shall expeditiously determine the validity of such claims.
If a claim is determined to be invalid, the Secretary shall promptly declare the claim to be null and void.
Mining Remediation.--No department or agency of the United States or any officer or employee thereof may issue any permit, license, or other authorization to any person, for any mining or mining related activity within the recreation area until the Secretary has determined that previous mining related environmental damage that has occurred on lands owned or used by such person or any person who controls, is controlled by or under common control with, such person, has been remediated in accordance with applicable Federal and State requirements.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.