This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Conservation Corps Authorization Act''.
In this Act: (1) Corps.--The term ``corps'' means the veterans conservation corps established under section 3(a).
Eligible veteran.--The term ``eligible veteran'' means a veteran (as the term is defined in section 101 of title 38, United States Code) that, as of the date on which the application for the corps is submitted-- (A) is unemployed; (B) is not enrolled in any other Federal training program; and (C) meets any other criteria that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Establishment.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Commerce, shall establish a veterans conservation corps-- (1) to provide training and employment to eligible veterans; (2) to assist eligible veterans in the transition from service in the Armed Forces to civilian life; and (3) to assist the Federal Government in maintaining Federal land and water.
Employment of Eligible Veterans.-- (1) Long-term employment.-- (A) Initial period.--The Secretary shall employ in the corps eligible veterans for a 1-year period to carry out work projects assigned under subsection (c).
Extension of employment.--The Secretary may, on a case-by-case basis and as the Secretary considers appropriate, extend the employment of an eligible veteran under subparagraph (A) for an additional 1-year period.
Temporary employment for student veterans.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may establish a program in the corps for the short-term employment of eligible veterans that are attending institutions of higher education.
Terms.--The employment of an eligible veteran under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed 16 weeks in total.
Compensation.--An eligible veteran employed by the corps under paragraph (1) or (2) shall receive a stipend and living allowance in an amount to be determined by the Secretary, in consultation with Secretary of Veteran Affairs.
Work Projects.-- (1) Assignment.--Each eligible veteran employed under subsection (b)(1) shall be assigned to a work project that-- (A) furthers the purposes described in subsection (a); and (B) falls within 1 or more of the following categories: (i) Transportation improvements, such as improving wilderness trails.
Habitat protection and restoration, including removal of invasive species.
Any other specific project category identified under paragraph (2).
Specification of additional project categories.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce shall identify additional project categories that the Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce consider appropriate to further the purposes described in subsection (a).
Leveraging of military skills.--To the maximum extent practicable, an eligible veteran in the corps shall be assigned to a work project under paragraph (1) that enables the eligible veteran to use the skills that the eligible veteran developed as a member of the Armed Forces.
Development and supervision of work projects.--The Secretary and the Secretary of Commerce shall develop and supervise the work projects under the corps that relate to the respective jurisdiction of the Secretary and the Secretary.
Education and Training.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Commerce, shall establish a program as part of the corps to provide to eligible veterans employed under the corps any education or training that is necessary to enable the eligible veterans to carry out the work projects assigned under subsection (c)(1).
Use of existing facilities.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and the Secretary of Commerce shall use existing facilities of the Federal Government to provide the education and training required under paragraph (1).