This Act may be cited as the ``Accountable Budgeting Commission Act of 2006''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) President Lyndon Johnson created the Commission on Budget Concepts in 1967 by executive order to assess the basic budget concepts that underlie the Federal budget process; (2) the Commission's report provided a common framework for the development, presentation, and execution of the Federal budget for the ensuing decades; (3) since the release of that report, the Government has experienced major changes in the scope of its financial commitments, the nature of its various budget transactions, the role of Congress in budget decisions, and the imposition of special controls over spending and revenue; and (4) in view of these changes, a new Accountable Budgeting Commission should be created to assess the present state of budget concepts and forge a bipartisan consensus for necessary changes.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish the Accountable Budgeting Commission to review, evaluate, and make recommendations respecting the budget concepts that underlie the Federal budget and the Federal budget process.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ACCOUNTABLE BUDGETING COMMISSION.
There is established a commission to be known as the Accountable Budgeting Commission (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission'').
POWERS AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
Duties of the Commission.-- (1) The duties of the Commission shall include-- (A) an identification of activities, entities, and transactions to be included in the Federal budget and the criteria for making such determinations; (B) an assessment of the appropriate measures of Federal financial commitments to allocate resources and establish fiscal policy; (C) an evaluation of the differences between user fees and revenue, and between various forms of user fees, and the circumstances when such fees should be accounted for as offsetting spending or adding to revenue; (D) an appraisal of the appropriate usage of cash and accrual-based measures for various types of Federal financial commitments, such as Government insurance, loan guarantees, and leasing; (E) recommendations of the appropriate means for recognizing the cost of acquisition and disposition of various types of nonfinancial assets; (F) an evaluation of appropriate measures of Federal debt, borrowing, and means of financing; (G) an assessment of the adequacy of the current account and fund structure for recording revenue and expenditures for specific classes of governmental activities; (H) recommendations for changes in Federal budget practices to accommodate the Federal Accounting Standards Advisory Board's recommended accounting standards; (I) recommendations for changes in budget practices to reflect the Government's multi-year acquisitions; (J) the appropriate means of accounting for the financial risk the Government incurs from contractual and implied commitments; and (K) an evaluation of the usage of dynamic scoring analysis.
Exceptions.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Commission shall make no findings, conclusions, or recommendations respecting the following: (A) Social security and medicare.
Powers of the Commission.-- (1) Conduct of business.--The Commission may hold hearings, take testimony, receive evidence, and undertake such other activities necessary to carry out its duties.
Access to information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to carry out its duties.
Upon request of the Chair of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Postal service.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 voting members and 4 nonvoting members, as follows: (1) Two members appointed by the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate.
Two members appointed by the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives.
Two members appointed by the ranking member of the Committee on the Budget of the Senate.
Two members appointed by the ranking member of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the President of the Senate.
One member appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget (or his designee), who shall be a nonvoting member.
The Secretary of the Treasury (or his designee), who shall be a nonvoting member.
The Comptroller General of the United States (or his designee), who shall be a nonvoting member.
The Director of the Congressional Budget Office (or his designee), who shall be a nonvoting member.
Qualifications and Term.-- (1) Qualifications.--Members appointed to the Commission pursuant to subsection (a) shall-- (A) have expertise and experience in the fields or disciplines related to the subject areas to be considered by the Commission; and (B) not be Members of Congress, or officers or employees of the Government (other than those nonvoting members described in paragraphs (9) through (12) of subsection (a)).
Term of appointment.--The term of an appointment to the Commission shall be for the life of the Commission.
Chair and vice chair.--A Chair and Vice Chair shall be elected from among the voting members of the Commission.
The Vice Chair shall assume the duties of the Chair in the Chair's absence.
Meetings; Quorum; and Vacancies.-- (1) Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least once a month on a day to be decided by the Commission.
The Commission may meet at such other times at the call of the Chair or of a majority of its voting members.
The meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, unless by public vote, the Commission shall determine to close a meeting or any portion of a meeting to the public.
Quorum.--A majority of the voting membership shall constitute a quorum of the Commission, except that 3 or more voting members may conduct hearings.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was filled under subsection (a).
Compensation and Expenses.--Members of the Commission shall serve without pay for their service on the Commission, but may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Staff.--With the advance approval of the Commission, the executive director may appoint such personnel as is appropriate.
The staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to political affiliation and without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classifications and General Schedule pay rates.
Executive Director.--The Chairman shall appoint an executive director, who shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level II of the Executive Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--With the advance approval of the Commission, the executive director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Technical and Administrative Assistance.--Upon the request of the Commission-- (1) the head of any agency, office, or establishment within the executive or legislative branches of the United States shall provide, without reimbursement, such technical assistance as the Commission determines is necessary to carry out its duties; and (2) the Administrator of the General Services Administration shall provide, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the Commission may require.
Detail of Federal Personnel.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of an agency, office, or establishment in the executive or legislative branch of the United States is authorized to detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of that agency, office, or establishment to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the employment status or privileges of that employee.
CBO and OMB.--The Directors of the Congressional Budget Office and the Office of Management and Budget shall provide the Commission with their latest research on the accuracy of its past budget and economic projections.
The Commission shall work with the Directors of the Congressional Budget Office and the Office of Management and Budget in their efforts to explain the factors affecting the accuracy of budget projections.
Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall transmit a report to the President and to each House of Congress.
The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislative or administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
No finding, conclusion, or recommendation may be made by the Commission unless approved by a majority of those voting and at least two members serving under paragraph (1) or (4) of such section, a quorum being present.
At the request of any Commission member, the report shall include that member's dissenting findings, conclusions, or recommendations.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of transmission of the report required in section 7.
There are authorized to be appropriated not more than $1,500,000 to carry out this Act.
Sums so appropriated shall remain available until expended.