This Act may be cited as the ``Training for Future Jobs Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Local nonprofit organizations are effective providers of job training for adults and out-of-school youth.
Twelve Federal departments and independent agencies administer over 100 Federal programs that provide over $10,000,000,000 for job training for adults and out-of-school youth.
These multiple programs and multiple agencies-- (A) create confusion on the part of local service providers and individuals seeking assistance; and (B) lead to waste and inefficiency in Federal programs.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a 5-year demonstration of the economy and efficiency of centralizing Federal job training programs.
Composition.--There is established the Job Training Council, which shall be comprised of-- (1) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, (2) the Secretary of Agriculture, (3) the Secretary of Commerce, (4) the Secretary of Defense, (5) the Secretary of Education, (6) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and (7) the Secretary of Labor.
Chairperson.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall be the Chairperson of the Council.
General Authority.--The Council, subject to the availability of appropriations, may make grants to-- (1) nonprofit organizations for the retraining of dislocated workers; and (2) nonprofit educational telecommunications organizations to pay the Federal share of the costs of the development, production, and distribution of instructional telecommunications materials and services for use in local vocational and technical educational schools and colleges.
Such organizations referred to in paragraph (1) may provide for the recruitment of unemployed workers, vocational evaluation, assessment and counseling services, vocational and technical training, support services, and job placement assistance.
The design and operation of each organization referred to in paragraph (1) shall provide for the utilization of appropriate existing Federal, State, and local programs.
Use of Funds.--Grants awarded pursuant to this Act may be used to provide-- (1) a sequential course of study that includes either preproduced video courseware or direct interactive teaching delivered via satellite, accompanied by a variety of print and computer-based instructional materials; (2) the development of individual videocassettes or a series of videocassettes that supplement instruction, which shall be distributed both via broadcast and nonbroadcast means; (3) videodiscs that produce simulated hands-on training; (4) teacher training programs for vocational educators and administrators and correctional educators; and (5) high technology manufacturing equipment and the installation of such equipment in a nonprofit organization for the purpose of training machine tool operators in skills critical to building, operating, and maintaining such equipment.
Priority of Persons Served.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Council shall give priority to programs or projects which serve-- (1) students in area vocational and technical schools; (2) teachers, administrators, and counselors in need of training or retraining; (3) out-of-school adults in need of basic skills improvement or a high school equivalency diploma to improve the employability of such individuals; (4) college students, particularly college students who are working toward a 2-year associate degree from a technical or community college; (5) civilian workers in need of basic skills, vocational instruction, or career counseling to retain employment; and (6) civilian workers or military personnel who need to improve their skills to obtain jobs in high-growth industries.
Priority of Geographic Areas.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Council shall give priority to areas of the country with high rates of labor unemployment.
Federal Share.-- (1) The Federal share of the cost of each project assisted under this Act shall be 50 percent.
The non-Federal share of the cost of each project assisted under this Act shall be provided from non-Federal sources.
The Council may waive for a nonprofit organization those requirements of different existing Federal job training assistance programs for adults and out-of-school youth that are inconsistent, if-- (1) such a waiver is likely to make the organization's job training program more efficient; and (2) the chief executive of the local government of the area in which the organization is located certifies that the organization's job training program is part of an economic development plan adopted by the local government.
The Council shall disseminate information on successful retraining models developed by any recipient of a grant under this Act.
There is authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000,000 for grants by the Council for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998.
TERMINATION AND REPEAL; EVALUATION.
Termination and Repeal.--This Act shall not be effective after, and is repealed on, the date that is 5 years after the date of its enactment.
Evaluation.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the Congress, by no later than 4 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, a report describing the extent to which grants under this Act have served to train people for jobs, including recommendations with respect to extending the effectiveness of this Act.
The Council shall issue regulations to implement this Act within 180 days after the date of its enactment.
In this Act-- (1) the term ``Council'' means the Job Training Council established in section 4; (2) the term ``local government'' means any subdivision of a State that is a unit of general local government (as that term is defined in section 6501 of title 31, United States Code); and (3) the term ``nonprofit organization'' means any organization that is owned and operated by 1 or more corporations or associations whose net earnings do not benefit, and cannot lawfully benefit, any private shareholder or entity.