This Act may be cited as the ``Community College Teacher Preparation Enhancement Act of 2004''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Well qualified teachers and paraprofessionals are critical to the success of the Nation's students.
In order to meet the changing demands of their jobs and the Federal requirements under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-110), teachers and prospective teachers must have access to high-quality teacher training.
The 1,200 community colleges across the United States play an important role in training teachers, offering professional development, and continuing education.
Community colleges enroll more than 6,000,000 credit students or 44 percent of all undergraduates in the United States.
At least 25 percent of undergraduates receiving a teaching degree began their postsecondary education at a community college.
Due to teacher attrition, teacher retirement, and a growing student population, the Nation will require an additional 2,400,000 teachers over the next decade.
If left unchanged, the production rate of teachers is 200,000 short of meeting the expected future demand.
In subjects such as mathematics, science, special education, and bilingual education, the Nation risks a severe teacher shortfall.
Community colleges offer accessibility and a link to education opportunities present at 4-year institutions of higher education.
There is no systematic infrastructure or resources in place to advance more students from community colleges to 4- year institutions of higher education and into the teaching profession.
Many 4-year institutions of higher education and community colleges have engaged in collaborative agreements for teacher training.
To meet the Nation's needs for highly qualified teachers, it is appropriate that the community college role in teacher training be enhanced and that cooperation between community colleges and 4-year institutions of higher education be increased.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) foster collaboration between 4-year institutions of higher education and community colleges to enhance teacher preparation as required under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (Public Law 107-110); (2) enhance the opportunity for community college students in teacher training programs to complete a baccalaureate degree in kindergarten through grade 12 education; (3) promote the development of best practices for coordinating teacher training between community colleges and 4- year institutions of higher education; and (4) expand community college teaching infrastructure to provide, among other things, professional development as called for under the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (Public Law 107- 110) to existing teachers.
Title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1021 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART C--TEACHER TRAINING ENHANCEMENT ``SEC.
``In this part: ``(1) 4-year institution of higher education.--The term `4- year institution of higher education' means an institution of higher education, as defined in section 101(a), whose highest undergraduate degree offered is predominantly the baccalaureate degree.
Community college.--The term `community college' has the meaning given the term `junior or community college' in section 312(f).
Eligible entity.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible entity' means-- ``(i) a statewide governing or coordinating board with jurisdiction over community colleges and 4-year institutions of higher education; ``(ii) a partnership between a statewide governing or coordinating board with jurisdiction over community colleges and a statewide governing or coordinating board with jurisdiction over 4-year institutions of higher education; ``(iii) a partnership between 1 or more community colleges and 1 or more 4-year institutions of higher education; or ``(iv) a community college offering a teacher preparation program that provides all, or a significant portion of, teacher training, postbaccalaureate certification, and professional development.
Inclusions.--The term `eligible entity' under clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A) may include other institutions with responsibility for teacher preparation or teacher standards.
Highly qualified.--The term `highly qualified' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Professional development.--The term `professional development' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
``The Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to pay the Federal share of the costs of carrying out teacher training or preparation programs.
``An eligible entity that desires to receive a grant under this part shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information or assurances as the Secretary may require.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this part, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that propose any of the following: ``(1) Grant funds will be used to provide for teacher preparation in geographic areas with shortages of highly qualified teachers.
Grant funds will be used to prepare teachers in kindergarten through grade 12 subject content areas that have a shortage of highly qualified teachers.
Grant funds will be used to carry out innovative programs to address teacher training or teacher preparation.
Grant funds will be used to conduct outreach into secondary schools.
Grant funds will be used to carry out a plan to disseminate information.
Geographic Diversity.--The Secretary shall ensure that grants are awarded in a geographically diverse manner.
Duration.--Grants awarded under this part shall be for 5 years in duration.
Mandatory Use.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall use the grant funds to carry out not less than 1 of the following: ``(1) Enhancing the collaboration of teacher training between community colleges and 4-year institutions of higher education.
The development of programs that provide opportunities for community college students to complete a baccalaureate degree in kindergarten through grade 12 education.
The establishment of partnerships in teacher training between community colleges and 4-year institutions of higher education.
The establishment of programs at community colleges that prepare students to enter teacher preparation programs at 4-year institutions of higher education.
Developing programs to provide pathways for secondary school students to pursue careers in teaching.
Establishing postbaccalaureate teacher certification programs.
Permissive Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this section may use the grant funds to carry out any of the following: ``(1) The creation of kindergarten through grade 12 teacher education programs and teacher aid programs to meet requirements under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
The coordination of teacher and paraprofessional curricula for use at community colleges and 4-year institutions of higher education.
The establishment of curricula and programs for professional development for teachers.
Annual Report.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall submit an annual report to the Secretary on-- ``(1) the progress made toward the goals of the grant; ``(2) the activities supported by the grant; ``(3) the number of students served; ``(4) when applicable, the ability to place students graduating from schools supported by a grant under this part; and ``(5) when applicable, the number of students graduating from schools supported by a grant under this part who meet the requirements for highly qualified teachers under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Evaluation.--The Secretary shall review and evaluate the reports submitted under subsection (a).
In General.--The Federal share of the costs of carrying out a teacher training or preparation program shall be-- ``(1) 65 percent for the first year of the grant; ``(2) 60 percent for the second year of the grant; ``(3) 55 percent for the third year of the grant; ``(4) 50 percent for the fourth year of the grant; and ``(5) 45 percent for the fifth year of the grant.
In Cash or In-Kind.--The non-Federal share of the costs of carrying out a teacher training or preparation program may be provided in cash or in the form of in-kind contributions.
REPORT BY THE SECRETARY.
``The Secretary shall review and submit an annual report to Congress on the activities supported under this part and the impact of this part with respect to-- ``(1) producing highly qualified teachers and teachers aids; ``(2) helping address teacher shortages, particularly in rural and urban areas; and ``(3) enhancing the diversity of the Nation's teaching force.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.