That this Act may be cited as ``The Small Business Prepayment Penalty Relief Act of 1993''.
Buy-Downs and Interest Rate Reductions.--(a) Upon the request of the issuer, annually the Administration is authorized to buy-down the interest rate on any debenture purchased by the Federal Financing Bank (1) which has been issued by a development company pursuant to the provisions of section 503 of the Investment Act or (2) which has been issued by a small business investment company pursuant to the provisions of section 303 of such Act.
The buy-down shall be limited to the current year only.
As used in this section, the term ``buy-down'' means a payment from the Administration to the Federal Financing Bank in an amount determined by the Administration to reduce the interest payment for that year to an amount equal to 7.5 per centum of the outstanding principal amount of the debenture.
Upon the request of the issuer, annually the Administration is authorized to reduce the interest rate on any debenture issued by a small business investment company licensed pursuant to the provisions of section 301(d) of the Investment Act.
The reduction shall be limited to the current year only.
The amount of the reduction shall be an amount determined by the Administration to make the interest payment for that year equal to 7.5 per centum of the outstanding principal amount of the debenture, less the amount of any other reductions or credits otherwise provided by law.
Prepayments.--(a) Annually, after the regular Appropriations Act has been signed into law providing funding for the Administration, the Administration shall calculate the amount needed to carry out the provisions of section 201 of this Act.
If it determines that it has sufficient funding to fully carry out the buy-downs and reductions authorized by such section, it shall obtain from the Federal Financing Bank a computation of the amount of the prepayment penalty which would be required from the issuer of each such debenture if it was prepaid as of the end of the current fiscal year.
The Administration shall also compute the amount of the prepayment penalty on 301(d) debentures as if such debentures had been sold to the Federal Financing Bank.
After making the above determinations, the Administration shall promptly notify the issuer of each debenture subject to the provisions of section 201 of this Act that it will receive offers from any interested issuer to prepay the debenture in full.
The issuer shall include in any offer amount of the full prepayment penalty, or assumed prepayment penalty in the case of a debenture from a 301(d) issuer, less any amount proposed by the issuer to be paid by the Administration pursuant to the provisions of this title.
The notification to the issuer shall include such information as the Administration determines to be appropriate, but shall include-- (1) the amount of funds available to carry out this title; (2) a computation of the total amount of the prepayment penalties and assumed prepayment penalties if all issuers prepaid; (3) the amount of the prepayment penalty or assumed prepayment penalty for the issuer receiving the notification; (4) the time period during which the Administration will accept offers; and (5) a description of the process under which the Administration will evaluate, give priority to, and accept submission of offers pursuant to this title.
Within 30 days after termination of the period for submission of offers, the Administration shall evaluate each offer and shall assign each a priority.
The priority shall be based upon the per centum of the prepayment penalty which the issuer offers to pay, with the highest per centum receiving the highest priority.
The Administration shall approve offers beginning with the one with the highest priority and continuing until it utilizes all funds available to carry out this title in the current fiscal year.
Prepaying Development Company Debentures.--(a) For purposes of this section, the term ``issuer'' means the issuer of a debenture which has been purchased by the Federal Financing Bank pursuant to section 503 of the Investment Act, and the term ``borrower'' means the small business concern whose loan secures a debenture issued pursuant to such section.
The issuer of a debenture purchased by the Federal Financing Bank and guaranteed by the Small Business Administration under section 503 of the Investment Act may offer to prepay such debenture pursuant to section 301 of this Act: Provided, That-- (1) the debenture is outstanding on the date of enactment of this Act, and neither the loan that secures the debenture nor the debenture is in default on the date the prepayment is made; (2) State or personal funds, which may include refinancing under the programs authorized by sections 504 and 505 of the Investment Act are used to prepay the debenture; and (3) the issuer certifies that the benefits, net of fees and expenses authorized herein, associated with prepayment of the debenture are entirely passed through to the borrower.
No fees or penalties other than those specified in this section may be imposed as a condition of such prepayment against the issuer or the borrower, or the Administration or any fund or account administered by the Administration, except as provided in this Act.
If the debenture is prepaid or refinanced other than through section 504, the issuer may require the borrower or pay a fee to the issuer in an amount equal to one-half of one percent of the unpaid principal balance of the debenture.
If a debenture is refinanced with a guarantee pursuant to section 504, the issuer may require the borrower to pay a fee to the issuer in an amount equal to one-fourth of one percent of the unpaid balance of the debenture.
Debentures refinanced under section 504 shall be subject to all of the other provisions of sections 504 and 505 of the Investment Act and the rules and regulations of the Administration promulgated thereunder, including, but not limited to, payment of authorized expenses and commissions, fees and discounts to brokers and dealers in trust certificates issued pursuant to section 505: Provided however, That the issuer shall be deemed to have waived any origination fee on the new debenture to which it otherwise would have been entitled.
Prepaying Specialized Small Business Investment Company Debentures.--(a) Any specialized small business investment company which is the issuer of a debenture purchased by the Administration under title III of the Investment Act may offer to prepay the debenture pursuant to the provisions of section 301 of this Act: Provided, That-- (1) the debenture is outstanding on the date of enactment of this Act and is not in default on the date the prepayment is made; and (2) personal funds, which may include refinancing with proceeds of debentures under title III of the Investment Act, are used to prepay the debenture, except that if new guaranteed debenture proceeds are utilized, the length of time of the interest rate reduction authorized by such title shall be reduced by the length of time the issuer received an interest rate reduction on the debenture being prepaid.
No fees or penalties other than those specified in this section may be imposed as a condition of such prepayment against the issuer, the Administration or any fund or account administered by the Administration, except as expressly provided herein.
Prepaying Regular Small Business Investment Company Debentures.--(a) Any small business investment company which is the issuer of a debenture guaranteed by the Administration under title III of the Investment Act and purchased by the Federal Financing Bank may offer to prepay the debenture pursuant to section 301 of this Act: Provided, That-- (1) the debenture is outstanding on the date of enactment of this Act and is not in default on the date the prepayment is made; and (2) personal funds, which may include refinancing with proceeds of guaranteed debentures under title III of the Investment Act, are used to prepay the debenture.
No fees or penalties other than those specified in this section may be imposed as a condition of such prepayment against the issuer, the Administration or any fund or account administered by the Administration, except as expressly provided herein.
Debentures refinanced under title III of the Investment Act shall be subject to all of the other provisions of such Act, including, but not limited to, payment of authorized expenses and commissions, fees or discounts to brokers and dealers in trust certificates issued pursuant to section 321.
Miscellaneous Provisions.--(a) The provisions of this Act are exercisable at the option of the borrower under section 302 of this Act or at the option of a small business investment company under sections 303 and 304 of this Act and are in addition to any prepayment options otherwise authorized by law.
Within sixty days of the date of enactment of this Act, the Small Business Administration shall issue regulations to implement this Act.
Any new credit or spending authority provided for in this Act is subject to amounts provided for in advance in appropriations acts.
Authorization.--(a) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
In the administration of this Act, the Administration shall not obligate any funds pursuant to title III of this Act in any fiscal year unless it has provided the full amount of assistance authorized and requested pursuant to title II of this Act.
If sufficient funds are not appropriated for any fiscal year to fully carry out the buy-downs and reductions authorized and requested pursuant to title II of this Act, the Administration shall buy-down and reduce the interest rates to the extent that funds are available for that year, but may not utilize any funds to carry out title III.
As used in this Act-- (a) the term ``Administration'' means the Small Business Administration; and (b) the term ``Investment Act'' means the Small Business Investment Act of 1958.