SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR EXPENDITURES TO PROVIDE LANGUAGE TRAINING TO EMPLOYEES.
General Rule.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
EXPENDITURES TO PROVIDE LANGUAGE TRAINING TO EMPLOYEES.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the amount of the language training credit determined under this section for the taxable year is 50 percent of the qualified language training expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Qualified Language Training Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the term `qualified language training expenses' means-- ``(A) amounts paid or incurred by the taxpayer with respect to expenses incurred by or on behalf of an employee for qualified language training of such employee (including but not limited to tuition, fees, and similar payments, books and supplies); and ``(B) the following expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer-- ``(i) wages (as defined in section 41(b)(2)(D)) paid or incurred by the taxpayer to an employee for services consisting of providing qualified language training to employees of the taxpayer, and ``(ii) expenses of books and supplies used in connection with the provision of such training; and ``(C) wages (as so defined) paid to any employee receiving qualified language training to the extent allocable to the time when such employee is receiving such training.
Only domestic employment qualified.--Amounts may be taken into account under paragraph (1) with respect to any employee receiving qualified language training only if substantially all of the services performed by such employee during the taxable year for the taxpayer are performed in the United States or any possession of the United States.
Qualified Language Training.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified language training' means--``(1) training in English language and literacy to individuals with limited English proficiency, and ``(2) remedial training in English language and literacy.''
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(9) the language training credit determined under section 45A(a).''
Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Credit for Literacy Enhancement Expenses.--No deduction shall be allowed for that portion of the qualified literacy education expenses (as defined in section 45A(b)) otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the credit determined for such taxable year under section 45A(a).''
Credit Allowable Against Minimum Tax.--Subsection (c) of section 38 of such Code is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) Language training credit allowed against minimum tax.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount determined under paragraph (1)(A) shall be reduced by the portion of the language training credit not used against the normal limitation.
Portion of language training credit not used against normal limitation.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the portion of the language training credit not used against the normal limitation is the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) the portion of the credit allowable under subsection (a) which is attributable to the language training credit, over ``(ii) the limitation of paragraph (1) (determined without regard to this paragraph) reduced by the portion of the credit under subsection (a) which is not so attributable.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.