SIOUX NATION ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL.
Title IV of the Omnibus Indian Advancement Act (Public Law 106-568) is amended-- (1) in section 401-- (A) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (6), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) the establishment of a Native American Economic Development Council will assist in promoting economic growth and reducing poverty on reservations of the Sioux Nation by-- ``(A) coordinating economic development efforts; ``(B) centralizing expertise concerning Federal assistance; and ``(C) facilitating the raising of funds from private donations to meet matching requirements under certain Federal assistance programs.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``Subtitle C--Sioux Nation Economic Development Council ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SIOUX NATION ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COUNCIL.
Establishment.--There is established the Sioux Nation Economic Development Council (in this subtitle referred to as the `Council') as a part of the Wakpa Sica Reconciliation Place.
The Council shall be a charitable and nonprofit corporation and shall not be considered to be an agency or establishment of the United States.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Council are-- ``(1) to encourage, accept, and administer private gifts of property; ``(2) to use those gifts as a source of matching funds necessary to receive Federal assistance; ``(3) to provide members of Indian tribes with the skills and resources necessary for establishing successful businesses; ``(4) to provide grants and loans to members of Indian tribes to establish or operate small businesses; ``(5) to provide scholarships for members of Indian tribes who are students pursuing an education in business or a business-related subject; and ``(6) to provide technical assistance to Indian tribes and members thereof in obtaining Federal assistance.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE COUNCIL.
Establishment and Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Council shall have a governing Board of Directors (in this subtitle referred to as the `Board').
Membership.--The Board shall consist of 11 directors, who shall be appointed by the Secretary as follows: ``(A)(i) Nine members appointed under this paragraph shall represent the 9 reservations of South Dakota.
Each member described in clause (i) shall-- ``(I) represent 1 of the reservations described in clause (i); and ``(II) be selected from among nominations submitted by the appropriate Indian tribe.
One member appointed under this paragraph shall be selected from nominations submitted by the Governor of South Dakota.
One member appointed under this paragraph shall be selected from nominations submitted by the most senior member of the South Dakota Congressional delegation.
Citizenship.--Each member of the Board shall be a citizen of the United States.
Appointments and Terms.-- ``(1) Appointment.--Not later than December 31, 2001, the Secretary shall appoint the directors of the Board under subsection (a)(2).
Terms.--Each director shall serve for a term of 2 years.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Board shall be filled not later than 60 days after that vacancy occurs, in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Limitation on terms.--No individual may serve more than 3 consecutive terms as a director.
Chairman.--The Chairman shall be elected by the Board from its members for a term of 2 years.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of the Chairman at least once a year.
If a director misses 3 consecutive regularly scheduled meetings, that individual may be removed from the Board by the Secretary and that vacancy filled in accordance with subsection (b)(3).
Reimbursement of Expenses.--Members of the Board shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary traveling and subsistence expenses incurred by them in the performance of the duties of the Council in accordance with section 434(a).
General Powers.-- ``(1) Powers.--The Board may complete the organization of the Council by-- ``(A) appointing officers and employees; ``(B) adopting a constitution and bylaws consistent with the purposes of the Council under this subtitle; and ``(C) carrying out such other actions as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of the Council under this subtitle.
Effect of appointment.--Appointment to the Board shall not constitute employment by, or the holding of an office of, the United States for the purposes of any Federal law.
Limitations.--The following limitations shall apply with respect to the appointment of officers and employees of the Council: ``(A) Officers and employees may not be appointed until the Council has sufficient funds to pay them for their service.
Officers and employees of the Council-- ``(i) shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service; and ``(ii) may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Secretary of the board.--The first officer or employee appointed by the Board shall be the Secretary of the Board.
The Secretary of the Board shall-- ``(A) serve, at the direction of the Board, as its chief operating officer; and ``(B) be knowledgeable and experienced in matters relating to economic development and Indian affairs.
POWERS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE COUNCIL.
Corporate Powers.--To carry out its purposes under section 431(b), the Council shall have, in addition to the powers otherwise given it under this subtitle, the usual powers of a corporation acting as a trustee under South Dakota law, including the power-- ``(1) to accept, receive, solicit, hold, administer, and use any gift, devise, or bequest, either absolutely or in trust, of real or personal property or any income therefrom or other interest therein; ``(2) to acquire by purchase or exchange any real or personal property or interest therein; ``(3) unless otherwise required by the instrument of transfer, to sell, donate, lease, invest, reinvest, retain, or otherwise dispose of any property or income therefrom; ``(4) to borrow money and issue bonds, debentures, or other debt instruments; ``(5) to sue and be sued, and complain and defend itself in any court of competent jurisdiction, except that the directors shall not be personally liable, except for gross negligence; ``(6) to enter into contracts or other arrangements with public agencies and private organizations and persons and to make such payments as may be necessary to carry out its function; and ``(7) to carry out any action that is necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of the Council.
Other Powers and Obligations.-- ``(1) In general.--The Council-- ``(A) shall have perpetual succession; ``(B) may conduct business throughout the several States, territories, and possessions of the United States and abroad; ``(C) shall have its principal offices in South Dakota; and ``(D) shall at all times maintain a designated agent authorized to accept service of process for the Council.
Service of notice.--The serving of notice to, or service of process upon, the agent required under paragraph (1)(D), or mailed to the business address of such agent, shall be deemed as service upon or notice to the Council.
Seal.--The Council shall have an official seal selected by the Board, which shall be judicially noticed.
Certain Interests.--If any current or future interest of a gift, devise, or bequest under subsection (a)(1) is for the benefit of the Council, the Council may accept the gift, devise, or bequest under such subsection, even if that gift, devise, or bequest is encumbered, restricted, or subject to beneficial interests of 1 or more private persons.
ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES AND SUPPORT.
Provision of Services.--The Secretary may provide personnel, facilities, and other administrative services to the Council, including reimbursement of expenses under section 432(f), not to exceed then current applicable Federal Government per diem rates, for a period ending not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this subtitle.
Reimbursement.-- ``(1) In general.--The Council may reimburse the Secretary for any administrative service provided under subsection (a).
The Secretary shall deposit any reimbursement received under this subsection into the Treasury to the credit of the appropriations then current and chargeable for the cost of providing such services.
Continuation of certain assistance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Secretary is authorized to continue to provide facilities, and necessary support services for such facilities, to the Council after the date specified in subsection (a), on a space available, reimbursable cost basis.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may accept, without regard to the civil service classification laws, rules, or regulations, the services of the Council, the Board, and the officers and employees of the Board, without compensation from the Secretary, as volunteers in the performance of the functions authorized under this subtitle.
Incidental Expenses.--The Secretary is authorized to provide for incidental expenses, including transportation, lodging, and subsistence to the officers and employees serving as volunteers under subsection (a).
AUDITS, REPORT REQUIREMENTS, AND PETITION OF ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR EQUITABLE RELIEF.
Audits.--The Council shall be subject to auditing and reporting requirements under section 10101 of title 36, United States Code, in the same manner as is a corporation under part B of that title.
Report.--As soon as practicable after the end of each fiscal year, the Council shall transmit to Congress a report of its proceedings and activities during such year, including a full and complete statement of its receipts, expenditures, and investments.
Relief With Respect to Certain Council Acts or Failure To Act.--If the Council-- ``(1) engages in, or threatens to engage in, any act, practice, or policy that is inconsistent with the purposes of the Council under section 431(b); or ``(2) refuses, fails, or neglects to discharge the obligations of the Council under this subtitle, or threatens to do so; then the Attorney General of the United States may petition in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia for such equitable relief as may be necessary or appropriate.
UNITED STATES RELEASE FROM LIABILITY.
The United States shall not be liable for any debts, defaults, acts, or omissions of the Council, the Board, or the officers or employees of the Council.
The full faith and credit of the United States shall not extend to any obligation of the Council, the Board, or the officers or employees of the Council.
GRANTS TO COUNCIL; TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--Not less frequently than annually, the Secretary shall award a grant to the Council, to be used to carry out the purposes specified in section 431(b) in accordance with this section.
Grant agreements.--As a condition to receiving a grant under this section, the secretary of the Board, with the approval of the Board, shall enter into an agreement with the Secretary that specifies the duties of the Council in carrying out the grant and the information that is required to be included in the agreement under paragraphs (3) and (4).
Matching requirements.--Each agreement entered into under paragraph (2) shall specify that the Federal share of a grant under this section shall be 80 percent of the cost of the activities funded under the grant.
No amount may be made available to the Council for a grant under this section, unless the Council has raised an amount from private persons or State or local government agencies equivalent to the non-Federal share of the grant.
Prohibition on the use of federal funds for administrative expenses.--Each agreement entered into under paragraph (2) shall specify that a reasonable amount of the Federal funds made available to the Council (under the grant that is the subject of the agreement or otherwise), but in no event more that 15 percent of such funds, may be used by the Council for administrative expenses of the Council, including salaries, travel and transportation expenses, and other overhead expenses.
Technical Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--Each agency head listed in paragraph (2) shall provide to the Council such technical assistance as may be necessary for the Council to carry out the purposes specified in section 431(b).
Agency heads.--The agency heads listed in this paragraph are as follows: ``(A) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
The Secretary of the Interior.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
The Assistant Secretary for Economic Development of the Department of Commerce.
The Administrator of the Small Business Administration.
The Administrator of the Rural Development Administration.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006, to be used in accordance with section 438.
Additional Authorization.--The amounts authorized to be appropriated under this section are in addition to any amounts provided or made available to the Council under any other provision of Federal law.
``In this section the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Commerce.