SHORT TITLE; FINDINGS; PURPOSE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement Review Commission Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The United States joined the World Trade Organization (in this Act referred to as the ``WTO'') as an original member with the goal of creating an improved global trading system and providing expanded economic opportunities for United States firms and workers, while preserving United States sovereignty.
The American people must receive assurances that United States sovereignty will be protected, and United States interests will be advanced, within the global trading system which the WTO will oversee.
The WTO's dispute settlement rules are meant to enhance the likelihood that governments will observe their WTO obligations.
These dispute settlement rules will help ensure that the United States will reap the full benefits of its participation in the WTO.
United States support for the WTO depends on obtaining mutual trade benefits through the openness of foreign markets and the maintenance of effective United States and WTO remedies against unfair and otherwise harmful trade practices.
Congress passed the Uruguay Round Agreements Act based on its understanding that effective trade remedies would not be eroded.
These remedies are essential to continue the process of opening foreign markets to imports of goods and services and to prevent harm to American industry and agriculture.
In particular, WTO dispute panels and the Appellate Body should-- (A) operate with fairness and in an impartial manner; (B) not add to the obligations, or diminish the rights, of WTO members under the Uruguay Round Agreements; and (C) observe the terms of reference and any applicable WTO standard of review.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide for the establishment of the WTO Dispute Settlement Review Commission to achieve the objectives described in subsection (b)(6).
In this Act: (1) Adverse finding.--The term ``adverse finding'' means-- (A) in a panel or Appellate Body proceeding initiated against the United States, a finding by the panel or the Appellate Body that, any law or regulation of, or application thereof by, the United States, or any State, is inconsistent with the obligations of the United States under a Uruguay Round Agreement (or nullifies or impairs benefits accruing to a WTO member under such an Agreement); or (B) in a panel or Appellate Body proceeding in which the United States is a complaining party, any finding by the panel or the Appellate Body that a measure of the party complained against is not inconsistent with that party's obligations under a Uruguay Round Agreement (or does not nullify or impair benefits accruing to the United States under such an Agreement).
Affirmative report.--The term ``affirmative report'' means a report described in section 234(b)(2) which contains affirmative determinations made by the Commission under paragraph (3) of section 4(a).
Appellate body.--The term ``Appellate Body'' means the Appellate Body established by the Dispute Settlement Body pursuant to Article 17.1 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding.
Dispute settlement body.--The term ``Dispute Settlement Body'' means the Dispute Settlement Body established pursuant to the Dispute Settlement Understanding.
Dispute settlement panel; panel.--The terms ``dispute settlement panel'' and ``panel'' mean a panel established pursuant to Article 6 of the Dispute Settlement Understanding.
Dispute settlement understanding.--The term ``Dispute Settlement Understanding'' means the Understanding on Rules and Procedures governing the Settlement of Disputes referred to in section 101(d)(16) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act.
Terms of reference.--The term ``terms of reference'' has the meaning given such term in the Dispute Settlement Understanding.
Trade representative.--The term ``Trade Representative'' means the United States Trade Representative.
Uruguay round agreement.--The term ``Uruguay Round Agreement'' means any of the Agreements described in section 101(d) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act.
World trade organization; wto.--The terms ``World Trade Organization'' and ``WTO'' mean the organization established pursuant to the WTO Agreement.
WTO agreement.--The term ``WTO Agreement'' means the Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization entered into on April 15, 1994.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement Review Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 5 members, all of whom shall be retired judges of the Federal judicial circuits, and who shall be appointed by the President, after consultation with the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, the Majority Leader and Minority Leader of the Senate, the chairman and ranking member of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and the chairman and ranking member of the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
Date of appointment.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.-- (1) In general.--Members of the Commission first appointed shall each be appointed for a term of 5 years.
Subsequent terms.--After the initial 5-year term, 3 members of the Commission shall be appointed for terms of 3 years and the remaining 2 members shall be appointed for terms of 2 years.
Vacancies.-- (A) In general.--Any vacancy on the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment and shall be subject to the same conditions as the original appointment.
Unexpired term.--An individual chosen to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member replaced.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Subsequent meetings.--The Commission shall meet subsequently at the call of the chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its members.
Affirmative Determinations.--An affirmative vote by a majority of the members of the Commission shall be required for any affirmative determination by the Commission under section 4.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Review of World Trade Organization Dispute Settlement Reports.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall review-- (A) all reports of dispute settlement panels or the Apellate Body of the WTO in proceedings initiated by other parties to the WTO that are adverse to the United States and that are adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body; and (B) upon request of the Trade Representative, the chairman or ranking member of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, or the chairman or ranking member of the Committee on Finance of the Senate, any other report of a dispute settlement panel, or the Appellate Body that is adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body.
Scope of review.--In the case of a report described in paragraph (1), the Commission shall conduct a complete review and determine whether the panel or Appellate Body, as the case may be-- (A) exceeded its authority or its terms of reference; (B) added to the obligations, or diminished the rights of the United States under the Uruguay Round Agreement that is the subject of the report; (C) acted arbitrarily or capriciously, engaged in misconduct, or demonstrably departed from the procedures specified for panels and Appellate Bodies in the applicable Uruguay Round Agreement; and (D) deviated from the applicable standard of review, including in antidumping, countervailing duty, and other unfair trade remedy cases, the standard of review set forth in Article 17.6 of the Agreement on Implementation of Article VI of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, 1994.
Affirmative determination.--If the Commission makes an affirmative determination with respect to the action of a panel or an Appellate Body under subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (2), the Commission shall determine whether the action of the panel or Appellate Body materially affected the outcome of the report of the panel or Appellate Body.
Determination; Report.-- (1) Determination.--Not later than 120 days after the date that a report of a panel or Appellate Body described in subsection (a) is adopted by the Dispute Settlement Body, the Commission shall make a written determination with respect to matters described in subsection (a) (2) and (3).
Reports.--The Commission shall report the determination described in paragraph (1) to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold any hearings, sit and act at any time and place, take any testimony, and receive any evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
The Commission shall provide reasonable notice of a hearing held pursuant to this subsection.
Information From Interested Parties and Federal Agencies.-- (1) Notice of panel or appellate body report.--The Trade Representative shall advise the Commission not later than 5 days after the date the Dispute Settlement Body adopts the report of a panel or Appellate Body that is adverse to the United States and shall immediately publish notice of that advice in the Federal Register, along with notice of an opportunity for interested parties to submit comments to the Commission.
Submissions and requests for information.--Any interested party may submit comments to the Commission regarding the panel or Appellate Body report.
The Commission may also secure directly from any Federal department or agency any information the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish the requested information to the Commission.
Access to panel and appellate body documents.-- (A) In general.--The Trade Representative shall make available to the Commission all submissions and relevant documents relating to the panel or Appellate Body report, including any information contained in submissions identified by the provider of the information as proprietary information or information treated as confidential by a foreign government.
Public access.--Any document which the Trade Representative submits to the Commission shall be available to the public, except information which is identified as proprietary or confidential.
Assistance from federal agencies; confidentiality.-- (A) Administrative assistance.--Any agency or department of the United States that is designated by the President shall provide administrative services, funds, facilities, staff, or other support services to the Commission to assist the Commission with the performance of the Commission's functions.
Confidentiality.--The Commission shall protect from disclosure any document or information submitted to it by a department or agency of the United States which the agency or department requests be kept confidential.
The Commission shall not be considered to be an agency for purposes of section 552 of title 5, United States Code.