This Act may be cited as the ``Point Reyes Farmland Protection Act of 1999''.
POINT REYES FARMLAND PROTECTION.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Eligible lands.-- (A) In general.--The term ``eligible lands'' means parcels of land in Marin or Sonoma Counties in the State of California that are located wholly or partially in what is known as-- (i) the Marin County coastal zone, unit II, per Marin County Agricultural Zoning Map, file designation, MALT-AGDWG, PLT.HPG, extending from Lagunitas Creek north along the east shore of Tomales Bay to the boundary with Sonoma County; or (ii) the Sonoma County coastal zone, per the Sonoma County Post-Local Coastal Plan Certification Map of January 1981, extending from the boundary with Marin County north to Highway 1 and Doran Beach Road.
Exclusion.--The term does not include any lands described in subparagraph (A) that are zoned solely or exclusively for commercial or residential use.
Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means-- (A) a State or local government agency; or (B) a nonprofit organization having substantial experience in the holding, monitoring, and managing of conservation easements on eligible lands, including the Marin Agricultural Land Trust, the Sonoma County Agricultural Preservation and Open Space District, and the Sonoma Land Trust.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- (1) to promote the acquisition of conservation easements on eligible lands from willing sellers, which will protect agricultural lands and prevent incompatible development, while still maintaining the lands in private ownership; (2) to create a voluntary public/private partnership among the Federal Government, the State of California, local governments, eligible entities, and participating citizens, which can serve as a model for other farmland, watershed, and open space preservation efforts; and (3) to protect the substantial Federal investment in the Point Reyes National Seashore by protecting nearby eligible lands and water resources that maintain the relatively undeveloped nature of the lands adjacent to Tomales and Bodega Bays.
Grants for Purchase of Easements.--To promote the purposes of this section, the Secretary may make grants to eligible entities to provide the Federal share of the cost of purchasing permanent conservation easements on eligible lands from willing sellers for the purpose of preserving agricultural lands.
Negotiation, Acquisition, and Administration of Easements.-- (1) Acquisition of permanent easements.--Easements acquired using funds provided by the Secretary under subsection (c) shall be in perpetuity.
Negotiation.--The acquisition of an easement using funds provided by the Secretary under subsection (c) shall be negotiated and transacted between the willing seller and the eligible entity.
Administration.--Easements acquired by an eligible entity using funds provided by the Secretary under subsection (c) shall be held by the eligible entity.
Executory limitation.--If an eligible entity holding an easement acquired using funds provided by the Secretary under subsection (c) ceases to exist or ceases to be a nonprofit organization, the eligible entity's rights and obligations under the easement shall vest in the United States.
Protection of Private Property.-- (1) Consent of owner required.--No interest in eligible lands may be acquired using funds provided by the Secretary under subsection (c) without the consent of the owner of the eligible lands.
Prohibition on land purchases.--Funds provided by the Secretary under subsection (c) may not be used, or combined with other funds, to acquire land in fee title.
Regulation.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize the Secretary or any other Federal agency or official to regulate the use or enjoyment of privately owned eligible lands, including lands subject to easements held by an eligible entity.
Matching Funds.-- (1) Matching requirement.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Federal share of the costs for acquiring a conservation easement in eligible lands may not exceed one half of the total costs of such acquisition.
The non-Federal share of the acquisition costs may be provided in the form of property, monies, services, or in-kind contributions, fairly valued.
Recognition of previous conservation efforts.--To the extent that an eligible entity holds conservation easements on eligible lands as of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall waive the match requirement of paragraph (1) for that eligible entity until such time as Federal funds are provided to that eligible entity under subsection (c) in an amount equal to the fair market value of the conservation easements, as determined by the Secretary.
Relationship to Other Land Preservation Efforts.--The authority provided by this section is in addition to, and shall not preclude the use of, other authorities that may be available to the Federal Government to preserve eligible lands.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $60,000,000 to the Secretary to make grants under this section.