This Act may be cited as the ``Two Strikes and You're Out Child Protection Act''.
MANDATORY LIFE IMPRISONMENT FOR REPEAT SEX OFFENDERS AGAINST CHILDREN.
Section 3559 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Mandatory Life Imprisonment for Repeated Sex Offenses Against Children.-- ``(1) In general.--A person who is convicted of a Federal sex offense in which a minor is the victim shall be sentenced to life imprisonment if the person has a prior sex conviction in which a minor was the victim, unless the sentence of death is imposed.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) the term `Federal sex offense' means-- ``(i) an offense under section 2241 (relating to aggravated sexual abuse), 2242 (relating to sexual abuse), 2243(a) (relating to sexual abuse of a minor), 2244(a)(1) or (2) (relating to abusive sexual contact), 2245 (relating to sexual abuse resulting in death), or 2251A (relating to selling or buying of children); or ``(ii) an offense under section 2423(a) (relating to transportation of minors) involving prostitution or sexual activity constituting a State sex offense; ``(B) the term `State sex offense' means an offense under State law that consists of conduct that would be a Federal sex offense if, to the extent or in the manner specified in the applicable provision of this title-- ``(i) the offense involved interstate or foreign commerce, or the use of the mails; or ``(ii) the conduct occurred in any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States, within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States, in a Federal prison, on any land or building owned by, leased to, or otherwise used by or under the control of the Government of the United States, or in the Indian country (as defined in section 1151); ``(C) the term `prior sex conviction' means a conviction for which the sentence was imposed before the conduct occurred constituting the subsequent Federal sex offense, and which was for a Federal sex offense or a State sex offense; ``(D) the term `minor' means an individual who has not attained the age of 17 years; and ``(E) the term `State' has the meaning given that term in subsection (c)(2).''.
STUDY OF IMPACT OF LEGISLATION.
In each case in which a life sentence is imposed under section 3559(e), the judge shall make and transmit to the Administrative Office of the United States Courts findings with regard to each of the following: (1) The applicable range under the Federal Sentencing Guidelines if the statutory minimum life sentence had not applied.
The sentence that the court would have imposed on the defendant if the statutory minimum life sentence had not applied, in light of the nature and circumstances of the offense, the history and characteristics of the defendant, and the other factors set forth in section 3553(a).
The race, gender, age, and ethnicity of the victim and defendant.
The reason for the Government's decision to prosecute this defendant in Federal court instead of deferring to prosecution in State or tribal court, and the criteria used by the Government to make that decision in this and other cases.
The projected cost to the Federal Government of the life sentence, taking into account capital and operating costs associated with imprisonment.
To assist the court to make the findings required in subsections (a)(4) and (a)(5), the Government attorney shall state on the record such information as the court deems necessary to make such findings, including cost data provided by the Bureau of Prisons.
In making the required findings, the court shall not be bound by the information provided by the Government attorney.
The Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall annually compile and report the findings made under subsection (a) to the Congress.
Sections 2247 and 2426 of title 18, United States Code, are each amended by inserting ``, unless section 3559(e) applies'' before the final period.
Passed the House of Representatives March 14, 2002.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.