This Act may be cited as the ``Secure Democracy for All Americans Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Despite Federal efforts to increase uniformity in voting procedures for elections for Federal office, there remains much variation in such procedures among the States.
A major goal of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (commonly known as the ``Motor-Voter Act'') was the standardization of voter registration procedures for elections for Federal office to prevent voter fraud and provide an accurate list of eligible voters.
Under the provisions of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act, absent uniformed services voters and overseas voters can vote by absentee ballot in elections for Federal office and, if a State does not provide an official State absentee ballot in response to a timely request, can write in the names of candidates on a Federal write-in absentee ballot.
In North Dakota and in some counties in Wisconsin, individuals may vote without registering.
Individuals in Idaho, New Hampshire, Maine, Minnesota, Wisconsin, and Wyoming may register to vote on the day of the election.
The duration of the residency requirement for voter registration varies from State to State from 1 to 30 days.
In 7 States disability or illness does not provide sufficient grounds for registering as an absentee voter, and in 4 States disability or illness does not provide sufficient grounds for voting as an absentee.
A few States allow any citizen who is out of the United States or the State to register as an absentee voter.
At least 7 different types of voting equipment are used to carry out Presidential elections throughout the United States, and the type of equipment used is determined on the county level.
The opening time for polling places in Federal elections varies from 6:00 a.m. to 11:00 a.m., and the closing time for such polling places varies from 6:00 p.m. to 9:00 p.m.. SEC.
There is established the Commission on the Comprehensive Study of Voting Procedures (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall complete a thorough study of all issues relating to voting procedures in Federal, State, and local elections, including the following: (1) Voting procedures in Federal, State, and local government elections.
Voting procedures that represent the best practices in Federal, State, and local government elections.
Legislation and regulatory efforts that affect voting procedures issues.
The implementation of standardized voting procedures, including standardized technology and procedures for voter registration, absentee voting, early voting, and voting hours on the day of the election, for Federal, State, and local government elections.
The speed and timeliness of vote counts in Federal, State and local elections.
The accuracy of vote counts in Federal, State and local elections.
The security of voting procedures in Federal, State and local elections.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall develop recommendations on the matters studied under subsection (a).
Reports.-- (1) Final report.--Not later than 180 days after the expiration of the period referred to in subsection (a), the Commission shall submit a report which has been approved by a majority of the members of the Commission to the President and Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
Interim reports.--The Commission may submit to the President and Congress any interim reports that are approved by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Additional reports.--The Commission may include in any of the reports submitted under paragraph (1) or paragraph (2) additional reports that contain any dissenting or minority opinions of the members of the Commission.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 5 members of whom-- (1) 1 shall be appointed by the President; (2) 1 shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; (3) 1 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate; (4) 1 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; and (5) 1 shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Members.--The Commission shall include at least 1 member from each of the following: (1) The National Institute of Standards and Technology.
The Department of Justice.
The National Academy of Sciences.
Date of Appointment.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority if its members.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may hold such hearings for the purpose of carrying out this Act, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this Act.
The Commission may administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Website.--For purposes of conducting the study under section 4(a), the Commission shall establish a website to facilitate public comment and participation.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the Administrator of the General Services Administration shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services that are necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Contracts.--The Commission may contract with and compensate persons and Federal agencies for supplies and services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Gifts and Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property to carry out this Act.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The chair of the Commission may appoint staff of the Commission, request the detail of Federal employees, and accept temporary and intermittent services in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code, except that the rate of pay of any staff may not exceed the annual rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Special rule regarding appointment of executive director.--The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 4(c)(1).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to the Commission to carry out this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.