This title may be cited as the ``Gila River Indian Community-- Phelps Dodge Corporation Water Rights Settlement Act of 1999'' and is herein referred to as ``this Act''.
The Constitutional authority upon which this Act rests is the power of Congress to regulate commerce with foreign nations and among the Several States and with the Indian tribes, as set forth in section 8 of Article I of the United States Constitution.
It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to ratify, approve and confirm the Settlement Agreement among the Gila River Indian Community, Phelps Dodge Corporation, and the United States of America; (2) to authorize and direct the Secretary of the interior to execute and perform his duties under the Settlement Agreement and this Act; and (3) to authorize and direct the Secretary to perform certain actions which will assist in achieving a settlement of the water rights claims of certain Indian tribes in the Little Colorado River Basin in Arizona.
As used in this Act, the following terms have the following meaning: (1) ``Allottees'' shall mean the owners of beneficial interests in allotted land within the Gila River Indian Reservation.
``Blue Ridge Reservoir'' means that Reservoir in Navajo County, Arizona, owned by Phelps Dodge, as more fully described in the Settlement Agreement.
``CAP'' shall mean the Central Arizona Project, a reclamation project constructed by the United States pursuant to the Colorado River Basin Project Act of September 30, 1968, 82 United States Statutes at Large 885, as amended.
``CAWCD'' shall mean the Central Arizona Water Conservation District, a political subdivision of the State of Arizona, which has executed a contract to repay to the United States the reimbursable costs of the CAP.
``Community'' shall mean the Gila River Indian Community, an Indian community organized under section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, 48 United States Statutes at Large 987, duly recognized by the Secretary, and its members.
``Community's CAP Contract'' shall mean that contract between the Gila River Indian Community and the United States, dated October 22, 1992, providing for the delivery to the Gila River Indian Community of up to 173,100 acre-feet per annum of CAP water.
59'' shall mean the decree entered June 29, 1935, in that action styled as The United States of America v. Gila Valley Irrigation District, et alii, Globe Equity No.
59 in the District Court of the United States in and for the District of Arizona, as amended and supplemented.
``Hopi tribe'' shall mean the federally recognized Indian tribe of that name.
``Navajo Nation'' shall mean the federally recognized Indian tribe of that name.
``Phelps Dodge'' shall mean Phelps Dodge Corporation, a New York corporation, its subsidiaries, affiliates, predecessors, successors and assigns.
``Pueblo of Zuni'' shall mean the federally recognized Indian tribe of that name.
``Reservation'' shall mean the Gila River Indian Reservation, as it existed on the Initial Effective Date of the Settlement Agreement, as shown on the map attached to the Settlement Agreement as exhibit ``B'' thereto.
``San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe'' shall mean the federally recognized Indian tribe of that name.
``Secretary'' shall mean the Secretary of the Interior or his lawful designee.
``Settlement Agreement'' shall mean that agreement dated as of May 4, 1998, among Phelps Dodge, the Community and the United States.
``SRP'' shall mean the Salt River Project Agricultural Improvement and Power District, a political subdivision of the State of Arizona, and the Salt River Valley Water Users' Association, an Arizona corporation.
``United States'' shall mean the United States of America, in its capacity as trustee for the Community and of the Reservation; as trustee for the Allottees and of allotted lands on the Reservation; and, with respect to section 5.2 of the Settlement Agreement, in all other capacities required in order to execute the agreements and other instruments and to take the actions referred to in section 5.2 of the Settlement Agreement, including acting for the part of Defense Plant Corporation.
APPROVAL OF SETTLEMENT AGREEMENT.
The Settlement Agreement is ratified, approved and confirmed.
The Secretary shall execute the Settlement Agreement within sixty days of the enactment of this Act and shall perform all of the Secretary's duties thereunder as provided herein and in the Settlement Agreement.
The Secretary shall take all actions specified in section 5.0 of the Settlement Agreement necessary on the Secretary's part to obtain title to Blue Ridge Reservoir from Phelps Dodge.
The title to Blue Ridge Reservoir, once acquired by the Secretary, shall be held by the Secretary in trust for the benefit of the Navajo Nation.
In connection with the Secretary's performance of his obligations under section 5.0 of the Settlement Agreement, the Navajo Nation, the Hopi Tribe, the San Juan Southern Paiute Tribe, the Pueblo of Zuni, and the United States, on behalf of each of them, are authorized to execute waivers of claims against Phelps Dodge and agreements not to object to certain uses of water by Phelps Dodge in substantially the form of exhibits ``E'' and ``J'' to the Settlement Agreement, which waivers and agreements are hereby ratified, approved and confirmed.
The Navajo Nation, and the United States on behalf of the Navajo Nation, is further authorized to enter into an agreement with the Arizona Game & Fish Department confirming a minimum pool of water in Blue Ridge Reservoir and for other purposes in substantially the form of exhibits ``G'' and ``I'' to the Settlement Agreement, which agreements are hereby ratified, approved and confirmed.
REALLOCATION OF CAP WATER.
Simultaneously with the transfer of Blue Ridge Reservoir to the United States as provided for in section 6 of this Act, the Secretary shall: (i) reallocate to the Community 12,000 acre-feet of the CAP water available to the Secretary pursuant to section 406(b) of title IV of Public Law 101-628, 104 United States Statutes at Large 4483; (ii) amend the Community's CAP Contract to include the CAP water reallocated to the Community pursuant to this section; and, (iii) amend the Community's CAP Contract to extend the term thereof to 100 years, plus such additional term as may result from the exercise of the option provided for in, or other extension of, the Lease referred to in section 8 of this Act.
All water service capital charges and other capital charges of any nature associated with the CAP water reallocated to the Community pursuant to this Act shall be non-reimbursable to the United States by the Community.
All water service capital charges and other capital charges of any nature associated with 10,000 acre-feet of that CAP water currently available to the Community under the Community's CAP Contract which shares a priority with 510,000 acre-feet of non-Indian municipal and industrial CAP water shall be non-reimbursable to the United States by the Community.
For purposes of determining the allocation and repayment of costs of the CAP as provided in article 9.3 of Contract Number 14-0906-09W-09245, amendment No.
1, between the United States and CAWCD dated December 1, 1988, and any amendment or revision thereof, all of the water service capital charges and other capital charges of any nature associated with the water described in subsections 7(a) and 7(b) of this Act shall be non-reimbursable and shall be excluded from CAWCD's repayment obligation.
The United States shall either-- (A) not charge operation, maintenance, and replacement (OM&R) charges to the Community on the first 8,000 acre-feet of CAP water made available to the Community pursuant to this Act, and shall itself pay any such charges as are associated with such 8,000 acre-feet of CAP water; or (B) charge the Community only that portion of the OM&R charges associated with electrical energy pumping for the entire 12,000 acre-feet of CAP water made available to the Community pursuant to this Act, and shall itself pay other OM&R charges associated with such 12,000 acre-feet of CAP water.
In the event the CAP water made available to the Community pursuant to this Act is leased to Phelps Dodge as provided for in section 8 of this Act, the charges by the United States to Phelps Dodge for such water when delivered under the Lease shall be as provided in subsections (d)(1) or (d)(2) of this section 6.
In the event the exchange provided for in section 8 of this Act is not approved, the Secretary shall reallocate to Phelps Dodge 8,000 acre-feet of the CAP water referred to in subsection 6(b) hereof, shall amend the Community's CAP contract to reflect such reallocation, and shall enter into a contract with Phelps Dodge for permanent service for the delivery of such water to Phelps Dodge through the works of the CAP.
The CAP water shall be free of all capital charges as provided in subsections 7(b) and 7(c) of this Act.
The United States shall charge Phelps Dodge OM&R charges for such water only as provided in either subsections 7(d)(1) or 7(d)(2) hereof and shall itself pay such portions of the OM&R charges as are not paid by Phelps Dodge.
The provisions of section 226 of Public Law 97-293 (96 United States Statutes at Large 1273, 43 United States Code 485h(f)) shall not apply to actions taken by the Secretary pursuant to sections 7, 8, or 9 of this Act.
The Lease referred to in section 7.0 of the Settlement Agreement and attached thereto as exhibit ``M'' is hereby ratified, approved and confirmed.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, the Lease shall not be effective as to the United States, and the Secretary shall not execute the Lease, until all environmental compliance associated with the Secretary's execution of the Lease has been completed and the exchange referred to in section 9 of this Act has been approved as provided in that section.
In the event the Lease becomes effective, the Secretary and the Community may renew or extend the Lease at the end of the initial term, or any extended term of the Lease provided for in the initial Lease, upon such terms as the Community, the Secretary and Phelps Dodge may agree, provided that any such renewal or extension shall not exceed 100 years in term.
Subject to the completion of environmental compliance, CAP water made available pursuant to the Lease may be used in the manner and at the locations provided for therein, including exchange for use in any county in Arizona outside the CAWCD service area.
The Secretary and the Community are authorized to enter into an exchange agreement with Phelps Dodge pursuant to which the CAP water leased to Phelps Dodge by the Community under the Lease authorized under section 8 of this Act is delivered by Phelps Dodge to the Community in return for the right to divert water from the Gila River upstream of the Reservation.
The term of any such exchange agreement, if approved as required by this section, shall be for 100 years, plus any additional term occasioned by the exercise of the option contained in the Lease or other extension authorized in the Lease or this Act.
The Secretary shall commence negotiations with respect to the exchange agreement forthwith upon the enactment of this Act and shall process all environmental compliance associated with the exchange agreement and the Lease in an expeditious manner.
The Secretary shall not execute the exchange agreement until all such environmental compliance has been finally concluded as provided in the Settlement Agreement and any necessary order approving the exchange, or any aspect of the exchange, has been obtained from the United States District Court in Globe Equity No.
59 and the order is final and subject to no further appeal.
The waivers set forth in section 9.0 of the Settlement Agreement shall be effective, and shall be binding upon, the Community, and the United States, on behalf of the Community and the Allottees, from and after the date either of the conditions set forth in section 4(c) of the Settlement Agreement occurs.
The United States is authorized and directed to execute the Settlement Agreement on behalf of the Allottees in its capacity as trustee for the Allottees and of allotted lands on the Reservation, and the Settlement Agreement shall be binding upon the Allottees.
Execution of the Settlement Agreement by the Secretary as required by this Act, and the Secretary's performance of the actions necessary to acquire title to Blue Ridge Reservoir for the benefit of the Navajo Nation pursuant to section 5.0 of the Settlement Agreement shall not constitute major Federal actions under the National Environmental Policy Act (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
The Secretary shall carry out all environmental compliance required by sections 8 and 9 of this Act.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as exempting the United States from carrying out environmental compliance associated with the use of water from Blue Ridge Reservoir by the United States for the benefit of the Navajo Nation in the Little Colorado River Basin in Arizona.
The Navajo Nation, and the United States on behalf of the Navajo Nation, are authorized to enter into an agreement with the Town of Payson, Arizona, and the unincorporated communities of Pine and Strawberry, Arizona (``the Towns'') or any one of them, to subordinate water rights held in Blue Ridge Reservoir by the United States for the benefit of the Navajo Nation to rights to the use of not to exceed a cumulative total of 3,000 acre-feet per annum of water in Blue Ridge Reservoir acquired by the Towns pursuant to the law of the State of Arizona.
The Navajo Nation, and the United States on behalf of the Navajo Nation, are authorized to enter into an agreement with Phelps Dodge to subordinate water rights held in Blue Ridge Reservoir by the United States on behalf of the Navajo Nation to water rights acquired by Phelps Dodge in Blue Ridge Reservoir subsequent to the date of the enactment of this Act pursuant to the law of the State of Arizona for use on land owned by Phelps Dodge around Blue Ridge Reservoir identified in the Settlement Agreement.
The term of any such agreement and the consideration to be paid therefor shall be as agreed to among the Navajo Nation and Phelps Dodge.
With regard to the environmental compliance required for the actions contemplated in sections 8 and 9 of this Act, the Bureau of Reclamation shall be designated as the lead agency, and shall coordinate and cooperate with the other affected Federal agencies as required under applicable Federal environmental laws.
The Secretary and the Community are authorized to execute any amendments of the Settlement Agreement and to perform any action required by any amendments to the Settlement Agreement which may be mutually agreed upon by the parties.
Except for the waivers authorized by section 6 of this Act, nothing in this Act or the Settlement Agreement shall be construed to quantify or otherwise affect the water rights, claims or entitlement to water of any Arizona tribe, band or community or of any claimant in the Gila River Adjudication, other than the Community, the United States on behalf of the Community and the Allottees, and Phelps Dodge.
Any party to the Settlement Agreement, and to the Lease and the exchange agreement referred to in sections 8 and 9 of this Act, respectively, if the same are approved, may bring an action or actions exclusively in the United States District Court for the District of Arizona for the interpretation and enforcement of this Act, the Settlement Agreement, the Lease and the exchange agreement, naming the United States and the Community as parties, and in any such action or actions, any claim by the United States or the Community to sovereign immunity from suit is hereby waived.