LOUISIANA COASTAL AREA ECOSYSTEM RESTORATION, LOUISIANA.
In General.--The Secretary may carry out a program for ecosystem restoration, Louisiana Coastal Area, Louisiana, substantially in accordance with the report of the Chief of Engineers, dated January 31, 2005.
Priorities.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out the program under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to-- (A) any portion of the program identified in the report described in subsection (a) as a critical restoration feature; (B) any Mississippi River diversion project that-- (i) protects a major population area of the Pontchartain, Pearl, Breton Sound, Barataria, or Terrebonne Basin; and (ii) produces an environmental benefit to the coastal area of the State of Louisiana or the State of Mississippi; and (C) any barrier island, or barrier shoreline, project that-- (i) is carried out in conjunction with a Mississippi River diversion project; and (ii) protects a major population area.
Non-Federal Share.-- (1) Credit for integral work.--The Secretary shall provide credit (including in-kind credit) toward the non-Federal share for the cost of any work carried out by the non-Federal interest on a project that is part of the program under subsection (a) if the Secretary determines that the work is integral to the project.
Carryover of credits.--A credit provided under paragraph (1) may be carried over between authorized projects in the Louisiana Coastal Area ecosystem restoration program.
Nongovernmental organizations.--A nongovernmental organization shall be eligible to contribute all or a portion of the non-Federal share of the cost of a project under this section.
Comprehensive Plan.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in coordination with the Governor of the State of Louisiana, shall-- (A) develop a plan for protecting, preserving, and restoring the coastal Louisiana ecosystem; and (B) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 5 years thereafter, submit to Congress the plan, or an update of the plan.
Inclusions.--The comprehensive plan shall include a description of-- (A) the framework of a long-term program that provides for the comprehensive protection, conservation, and restoration of the wetlands, estuaries (including the Barataria-Terrebonne estuary), barrier islands, shorelines, and related land and features of the coastal Louisiana ecosystem, including protection of a critical resource, habitat, or infrastructure from the effects of a coastal storm, a hurricane, erosion, or subsidence; (B) the means by which a new technology, or an improved technique, can be integrated into the program under subsection (a); and (C) the role of other Federal agencies and programs in carrying out the program under subsection (a).
Consideration.--In developing the comprehensive plan, the Secretary shall consider the advisability of integrating into the program under subsection (a)-- (A) a related Federal or State project carried out on the date on which the plan is developed; (B) an activity in the Louisiana Coastal Area; or (C) any other project or activity identified in-- (i) the Mississippi River and Tributaries program; (ii) the Louisiana Coastal Wetlands Conservation Plan; (iii) the Louisiana Coastal Zone Management Plan; or (iv) the plan of the State of Louisiana entitled ``Coast 2050: Toward a Sustainable Coastal Louisiana''.
Task Force.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a task force to be known as the ``Coastal Louisiana Ecosystem Protection and Restoration Task Force'' (referred to in this subsection as the ``Task Force'').
Membership.--The Task Force shall consist of the following members (or, in the case of the head of a Federal agency, a designee at the level of Assistant Secretary or an equivalent level): (A) The Secretary.
The Secretary of the Interior.
The Secretary of Commerce.
The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The Secretary of Agriculture.
The Secretary of Transportation.
The Secretary of Energy.
The Secretary of Homeland Security.
3 representatives of the State of Louisiana appointed by the Governor of that State.
Duties.--The Task Force shall make recommendations to the Secretary regarding-- (A) policies, strategies, plans, programs, projects, and activities for addressing conservation, protection, restoration, and maintenance of the coastal Louisiana ecosystem; (B) financial participation by each agency represented on the Task Force in conserving, protecting, restoring, and maintaining the coastal Louisiana ecosystem, including recommendations-- (i) that identify funds from current agency missions and budgets; and (ii) for coordinating individual agency budget requests; and (C) the comprehensive plan under subsection (d).
Working groups.--The Task Force may establish such working groups as the Task Force determines to be necessary to assist the Task Force in carrying out this subsection.
Application of the federal advisory committee act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Task Force or any working group of the Task Force.
Mississippi River Gulf Outlet.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a plan for modifying the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet that addresses-- (A) wetland losses attributable to the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet; (B) channel bank erosion; (C) hurricane storm surges; (D) saltwater intrusion; (E) navigation interests; and (F) environmental restoration.
Report.--If the Secretary determines necessary, the Secretary, in conjunction with the Chief of Engineers, shall submit to Congress a report recommending modifications to the Mississippi River Gulf Outlet, including measures to prevent the intrusion of saltwater into the Outlet.
Science and Technology.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a coastal Louisiana ecosystem science and technology program.
Purposes.--The purposes of the program established by paragraph (1) shall be-- (A) to identify any uncertainty relating to the physical, chemical, geological, biological, and cultural baseline conditions in coastal Louisiana; (B) to improve knowledge of the physical, chemical, geological, biological, and cultural baseline conditions in coastal Louisiana; and (C) to identify and develop technologies, models, and methods to carry out this subsection.
Working groups.--The Secretary may establish such working groups as the Secretary determines to be necessary to assist the Secretary in carrying out this subsection.
Contracts and cooperative agreements.--In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary may enter into a contract or cooperative agreement with an individual or entity (including a consortium of academic institutions in Louisiana and Mississippi) with scientific or engineering expertise in the restoration of aquatic and marine ecosystems for coastal restoration and enhancement through science and technology.
Analysis of Benefits.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 209 of the Flood Control Act of 1970 (42 United States Code 1962-2) or any other provision of law, in carrying out an activity to conserve, protect, restore, or maintain the coastal Louisiana ecosystem, the Secretary may determine that the environmental benefits provided by the program under this section outweigh the disadvantage of an activity under this section.
Determination of cost-effectiveness.--If the Secretary determines that an activity under this section is cost- effective, no further economic justification for the activity shall be required.
Apportionment.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the non-Federal interest, shall enter into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences under which the National Academy of Sciences shall conduct a study.
Identification of causes and sources.--The study under paragraph (1) shall, to the maximum extent practicable, identify-- (A) each cause of degradation of the Louisiana Coastal Area ecosystem that is attributable to an action by the Secretary; (B) an apportionment of the sources of such degradation; (C) any potential reduction in the amount of Federal emergency response funds that would occur as a result of ecosystem restoration in the Louisiana Coastal Area; and (D) the reduction in costs associated with protection and maintenance of infrastructure that is threatened or damaged as a result of coastal erosion in Louisiana that would occur as a result of ecosystem restoration in the Louisiana Coastal Area.
Report.--Not later than July 1, 2006, the Secretary, in conjunction with the Chief of Engineers, shall submit to Congress a report describing the features included in table 3 of the report described in subsection (a).
Project Modifications.-- (1) Review.--The Secretary, in cooperation with any non- Federal interest, shall review each federally-authorized water resources project in the coastal Louisiana area in existence on the date of enactment of this Act to determine whether-- (A) each project is in accordance with the program under subsection (a); and (B) the project could contribute to ecosystem restoration under subsection (a) through modification of the operations or features of the project.
Public notice and comment.--Before modifying an operation or feature of a project under paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary shall provide an opportunity for public notice and comment.
Report.-- (A) In general.--Before modifying an operation or feature of a project under paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives a report describing the modification.
Inclusion.--A report under paragraph (2)(B) shall include such information relating to the timeline and cost of a modification as the Secretary determines to be relevant.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out modifications under this subsection $10,000,000.