This Act may be cited as the ``Opportunity-to-Learn Standards Implementation Act''.
GOALS 2000: EDUCATE AMERICA ACT.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this section an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a title, chapter, part, subpart, section, subsection, or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a title, chapter, part, subpart, section, subsection, or other provision of the Goals 2000: Educate America Act (20 United States Code 5801 et seq.).
Opportunity-To-Learn Development Grant.--The Act is amended-- (1) by redesignating parts B and C as parts C and D, respectively; and (2) by inserting after part A the following: ``PART B--OPPORTUNITY-TO-LEARN DEVELOPMENT GRANT ``SEC.
Opportunity-To-Learn Development Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award more than one grant, on a competitive basis, to consortia of individuals and organizations to develop voluntary national opportunity-to-learn standards, and to develop a listing of model programs for use, on a voluntary basis, by States, which standards and listing may be used to-- ``(A) provide all students with an opportunity to learn; ``(B) assess the capacity and performance of individual schools; and ``(C) develop appropriate actions to be taken in the event that the schools fail to achieve such standards.
Composition of consortia.--To the extent possible, each consortium shall include the participation of-- ``(A) State-level policymakers, such as Governors, State legislators, chief State school officers, and State school board members; ``(B) local policymakers and administrators, such as local school board members, superintendents, and principals; ``(C) teachers (especially teachers involved in the development of content standards) and related services personnel; ``(D) parents and individuals with experience in promoting parental involvement in education; ``(E) representatives of business; ``(F) experts in vocational-technical education; ``(G) representatives of regional accrediting associations; ``(H) individuals with expertise in school finance and equity, the education of at-risk students, and the preparation and training of teachers and school administrators; ``(I) curriculum and school reform experts; ``(J) representatives of advocacy groups, including student and civil rights advocacy groups; ``(K) representatives of higher education; and ``(L) secondary school students.
Duties of consortia.--In developing voluntary national opportunity-to-learn standards, each consortium shall-- ``(A) draw upon current research about student achievement and the necessary conditions for effective teaching and learning; and ``(B) provide for the development of more than one draft of standards which incorporate the comments and recommendations of educators and other knowledgeable individuals across the Nation.
Expertise or background.--One-third of the members of each consortium shall consist of individuals with expertise or background in the educational needs and assessment of children who are from low-income families, are from minority backgrounds, have limited-English proficiency, or have disabilities.
Geographic representation.--The membership of each consortium shall be geographically representative and reflect the racial, ethnic, and gender diversity of the United States.
Applications.--Each consortium that desires to receive a grant under this subsection shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information and assurances as the Secretary may require.
Report.--After the development of the voluntary national opportunity-to-learn standards, each consortium receiving assistance under this section shall submit a report to the Secretary which discusses the background, important issues, and rationale regarding such standards.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2002, to carry out this section.''.
Definitions.--Section 3(a) of the Act is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (7) through (13) as paragraphs (8) through (14), respectively; (2) by inserting after paragraph (6) the following: ``(7) the term `opportunity-to-learn standards' means the criteria for, and the basis of, assessing the sufficiency or quality of the resources, practices, and conditions necessary at each level of the education system (schools, local educational agencies, and States) to provide all students with an opportunity to learn the material in voluntary national content standards or State content standards.''.
National Education Goals Panel.--Section 202(j) of the Act is amended by striking ``or student performances'' and inserting ``, student performance, or opportunity-to-learn''.
Duties of the Goals Panel.--Section 203 of the Act is amended by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following: ``(2) report on State opportunity-to-learn standards and strategies and the progress of States that are implementing such standards and strategies to help all students meet State content standards and State student performance standards.''.
Powers of the Goals Panel.--Section 204(a)(2) of the Act is amended by inserting ``voluntary national opportunity-to-learn standards,'' before ``and State assessments.''.
State Improvement Plans.--Section 306 of the Act is amended-- (1) by inserting after subsection (c) the following: ``(d) Opportunity-To-Learn Standards and Strategies.-- ``(1) In general.--Each State improvement plan shall establish standards or strategies for providing all students with an opportunity to learn.
Such standards or strategies shall include such factors as the State deems appropriate to ensure that all students receive a fair opportunity to achieve the knowledge and skills as described in State content standards and State student performance standards adopted by the State.
Implementation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, the implementation of opportunity-to-learn standards or strategies shall be voluntary on the part of the States, local educational agencies, and schools.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to-- ``(A) mandate equalized spending per pupil for a State, local educational agency, or school; or ``(B) mandate national school building standards for a State, local educational agency, or school.
''; and (2) in subsection (e), by inserting ``State opportunity-to- learn standards or strategies,'' before ``and State assessments.''.
State Uses of Funds.--Section 308(b)(2)(A) of the Act is amended by inserting ``State opportunity-to-learn standards,'' before ``and State assessments''.
Assistance to Outlying Areas and Secretary of Interior.-- Section 315(b) of the Act is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(C) by inserting ``, including the requirements for timetables for opportunity-to-learn standards,'' after ``improvement plans''; (2) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2) Plan specifics.--The reform and improvement plan shall include, in addition to the requirements described above, specific provisions for-- ``(A) opportunity-to-learn standards pertaining to residential programs and transportation costs associated with programs located on or near reservations or serving students in off-reservation residential boarding schools; ``(B) review and incorporation of the National Education Goals and the voluntary national content standards, voluntary national student performance standards, and voluntary national opportunity-to-learn standards, provided that such review shall include the issues of cultural and language differences; and''.
in subsection (c)(1)(A) by inserting ``and to provide a framework for the implementation of opportunity-to-learn standards or strategies'' before the period.
Regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education shall promulgate regulations or guidelines regarding the implementation of opportunity- to-learn standards.
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION.
The amendments made to the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 702(b) of Public Law 104- 134, shall be restored or revised as if such provision in Public Law 104-134 had not been enacted.