This Act may be cited as the ``Cyber Security Enhancement Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The ability of the Federal Government to obtain information on threats and risks to the critical infrastructure of the United States, whether operated by the public sector or private sector and whether domestic or foreign, is vital to the maintenance of United States security and the economic well- being of the United States.
Persons in the private sector and non-Federal governmental agencies have expressed a willingness to voluntarily provide sensitive information on critical infrastructure threats and vulnerabilities to the Federal Government contingent on the ability of the Federal Government to protect such information from unrestricted disclosure.
The Federal Government needs critical infrastructure information from persons in the private sector and non-Federal governmental agencies in order to protect critical infrastructure from intentional acts of significant harm.
The public interest is best served by preserving the confidentiality of critical infrastructure information that is submitted to the Federal Government to the extent necessary to encourage the submittal of such information to the Federal Government.
Current Federal law does not provide persons in the private sector and non-Federal governmental agencies with clear assurance that information submitted to the Federal Government on threats and risks to critical infrastructure will be protected from disclosure under section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act).
There are currently more than 100 exemptions from disclosure of information under the Freedom of Information Act that have been approved by law for other purposes.
President Clinton has acknowledged the national security issues that result from the cyber vulnerabilities of the United States in stating that ``[w]e must be ready .
ready if our adversaries try to use computers to disable our power grids, banking, communications and transportation networks, police, fire and health services, or military assets''.
Information sharing among private sector organizations is critical to help identify vulnerabilities and threats to information networks.
Many companies are wary of participating in cyber security information sharing activities with one another due to concerns about antitrust penalties.
Currently, the maximum penalties for Federal computer crimes are inadequate to punish and deter the most serious computer crimes.
In order to catch cyber criminals, a cyber attack must be swiftly traced to its source.
A lack of standardization among law enforcement agencies has hindered effective information gathering from industry during investigation of cyber crimes.
Many cyber attacks are complicated by the criminal's use of a false Internet protocol (IP) address, thus masking the origin of the attack.
There is no legitimate use for a false IP address.
LIMITATION ON DISCLOSURE OF CERTAIN SENSITIVE INFORMATION UNDER THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
Limitation.--Critical infrastructure information, records relating to critical infrastructure information, and information on critical infrastructure protection derived from such information or records that is submitted voluntarily by a non-Federal source to a critical infrastructure protection office or program shall not be made available under section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act), if the person submitting such information or records expressly requests that such information or records, or information derived therefrom, not be made available under that section.
Designation of Office or Program.-- (1) Designation.--The President or the head of a Federal agency may designate an element in the agency as a critical infrastructure office or program for purposes of subsection (a).
The head of an agency may not delegate the authority in the preceding sentence.
Publication of notice.--The head of the Federal agency concerned shall publish in the Federal Register a notice of intent to designate an element in the Federal agency as a critical infrastructure office or program not later than 30 days before the effective date of such designation.
Request for Protection.-- (1) In general.--A person seeking the protection of information or records under subsection (a) shall be treated as having made an express request for protection under that subsection if the person marks the information or records substantially as follows: ``____________ is submitted to a critical infrastructure protection office or program under the provisions of section 3(a) of the Cyber Security Enhancement Act.''
(the blank being filled in with information sufficient to identify the information or records concerned).
Limitation.--A request with respect to information or records under subsection (a) may be made only by the person submitting such information or records to the Federal Government.
Independently Obtained Information.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit or otherwise affect the ability of the Federal Government to obtain and use under applicable law critical infrastructure information obtained by or submitted to the Federal Government in a manner not covered by subsection (a).
Operation of State and Local Law.-- (1) Control of united states.--Information or records protected from disclosure under subsection (a) shall be treated as under the control of the Federal Government even if made available to a State or local government.
Inapplicability of state or local disclosure law.--No State or local law requiring public disclosure of information or records shall apply to information or records obtained by the Federal Government that are protected from disclosure under subsection (a).
Treatment of Voluntary Submittal of Information.--The voluntary submission of information or records that are protected from disclosure by this section shall not be construed to constitute compliance with any requirement to submit such information to a Federal agency under any other provision of law.
Withdrawal of Request for Protection.-- (1) Withdrawal.--A request that information or records be protected from disclosure under subsection (a) may be withdrawn at any time by the person making the request.
Effect.--The withdrawal of a request under paragraph (1) shall take effect upon receipt of the withdrawal by the Federal agency concerned.
Time Limitations on Protection.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the protection of information or records under subsection (a) shall expire at the end of the five-year period beginning on the date of submittal of such information or records to the Federal Government.
Extension.--Upon the expiration of the protection of information or records under this section, including any extension of such protection under this subsection, such protection may be extended by an additional period of 5 years.
Procedure after expiration.--After expiration under this subsection of the period of protection of information or records under this section, the Federal agency concerned shall, upon receipt of a request for such information or records under section 552 of title 5, United States Code, determine whether the person who originally requested the protection of such information or records under this section seeks to continue the protection of such information or records under this section.
If such person does not seek continuation of the protection of such information or records under this section, the protection of such information or records under this section shall cease.
Penalties for Unauthorized Disclosure.-- (1) Investigation.--If a court finds that a Federal agency has violated this section, and finds that the circumstances of the violation raise questions whether or not an officer or employee of the agency acted willfully or intentionally with respect to the violation, the agency shall promptly investigate whether or not disciplinary action is warranted against the officer or employee.
Authority to act.--Appropriate disciplinary action may be imposed as a result of an investigation under paragraph (1).
Scope of Protection.--This section may not be construed to preclude a Federal agency from establishing procedures for sharing critical infrastructure protection information within and outside the Federal Government for purposes related to protecting critical infrastructure.
Antitrust Exemption.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the antitrust laws shall not apply to conduct engaged in, including making and implementing an agreement, solely for the purpose of and limited to-- (1) facilitating responses intended to correct or avoid a cyber security related problem; or (2) communicating or disclosing information to help correct or avoid the effects of a cyber security related problem.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to conduct that involves or results in an agreement to boycott any person, to allocate a market, or to fix prices or output.
Rule of Construction.--The exemption granted by subsection (a) shall be construed narrowly.
FRAUD AND RELATED ACTIVITY IN CONNECTION WITH COMPUTERS.
Enhanced Penalties.--Subsection (c) of that section is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``10 years''; (2) in paragraph (2)(C), by striking ``ten years'' and inserting ``20 years''; (3) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years''; and (4) in paragraph (3)(B), by striking ``ten years'' and inserting ``20 years''.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBPOENAS IN CASES INVOLVING CYBER CRIME.
In General.--Chapter 223 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3486A the following new section: ``Sec.
Administrative subpoenas in cases involving cyber crime ``(a) Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--In any investigation relating to any act or activity involving a violation of section 871, 879, 1029, 1030, 1362, 2511, 2701, 2702, or 2703 of this title, the Attorney General, or the designee of the Attorney General, may issue in writing and cause to be served a subpoena-- ``(A) requiring a provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service to disclose the name, address, Internet protocol address (IP address), local and long distance telephone toll billing records, telephone number or other subscriber number or identity, and length of service of a subscriber to or customer of such service and the types of services the subscriber or customer utilized, which may be relevant to an authorized law enforcement inquiry; or ``(B) requiring a custodian of records to give testimony concerning the production and authentication of such records or information.
Limitation on disclosure.--Information disclosed under paragraph (1) may not include content of an electronic communication.
Attendance of witnesses.--Witnesses summoned under this section shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses in the courts of the United States.
Procedures Applicable.--The same procedures for service and enforcement as are provided with respect to investigative demands under section 3486 of this title shall apply with respect to a subpoena issued under this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 223 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3486A the following new item: ``3486B.
Administrative subpoenas in cases involving cyber crime.''.
STANDARDIZED REQUESTS FOR ELECTRONIC INFORMATION AND RECORDS.
Plan To Encourage Standardized Requests.--Not later than six months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit to the President and to the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and House of Representatives a plan to encourage the standardization of requests of Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies to Internet service providers (ISPs) and other entities for electronic information and records used in the investigation of computer fraud and other computer-related crimes.
Consultation.--In preparing the plan, the Attorney General shall consult with the heads of other appropriate Federal agencies, appropriate representatives of State and local law enforcement agencies, and other interested persons.
Notice and Comment.--In preparing the plan, the Attorney General shall seek public notice and comment on the plan.
PREVENTION OF INTERNET PROTOCOL ADDRESS SPOOFING.
Plan To Encourage Prevention.--Not later than six months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General and the Secretary of Commerce shall jointly submit to Congress and the President a plan to encourage Internet service providers to take appropriate actions to prevent or impede the use of false Internet protocol addresses as a means of access to Internet servers (commonly referred to as ``IP spoofing''), including the installation and use of Internet servers and routers, and so-called ``firewall'' software, which prevent, impede, or otherwise provide protection against the use of such addresses for that purpose.
Consultation.--In preparing the plan, the Attorney General and the Secretary of Commerce shall jointly consult with the heads of other appropriate Federal agencies, appropriate representatives of State and governments, and other interested persons.
Notice and Comment.--In preparing the plan, the Attorney General and the Secretary of Commerce shall seek public notice and comment on the plan.
In this Act: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 551 of title 5, United States Code.
Antitrust laws.--The term ``antitrust laws''-- (A) has the meaning given such term in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12(a)), except that such term includes section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45) to the extent such section 5 applies to unfair methods of competition: and (B) includes any State law similar to the laws referred to in subparagraph (A).
Critical infrastructure.--The term ``critical infrastructure'' means physical and cyber-based systems, facilities, or services so essential to the United States or the United States economy that the disruption, incapacity, or destruction of such systems, facilities, or services would have a debilitating impact on the defense, security, economic prosperity, or health or safety of the United States.
Critical infrastructure information.--The term ``critical infrastructure information'' means information concerning threats, vulnerabilities, risks, and mitigation of same pertinent to critical infrastructure.
Critical infrastructure protection office or program.-- The term ``critical infrastructure protection office or program'' means an element of a Federal agency that is designated by the President or the head of the agency as having functions relating to the protection of critical infrastructure from intentional acts or significant harm.
Cyber security.--The term ``cyber security'' means the vulnerability of any computing system, software program, or critical infrastructure to, or their ability to resist, intentional interference, compromise, or incapacitation through the misuse of, or by unauthorized means of, the Internet, public or private telecommunications systems, or other similar conduct that violates Federal, State, or international law, that harms interstate commerce of the United States, or that threatens public health or safety.
Voluntary.--The term ``voluntary'', in the case of submittal of information or records to the Federal Government, means that the information or records were submitted-- (A) without mandate or compulsion; and (B) not as a condition of doing business with the Federal Government.