This Act may be cited as the ``Internal Revenue Service Accountability Act''.
CRIMINAL PENALTY FOR CERTAIN UNAUTHORIZED ACTIONS.
In General.--Section 7214 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to offenses by officers and employees of the United States) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (8), (2) by adding ``or'' at the end of paragraph (9), (3) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraph: ``(10) who willfully and maliciously disregards such law, or any regulation promulgated under such law, relating to any proceeding against any taxpayer;'', and (4) by striking ``$10,000, or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both'' and inserting ``$10,000 ($1,000, in the case of an offense under paragraph (10)), or imprisoned not more than 5 years (1 year, in the case of an offense under paragraph (10), or both''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to actions by officers or employees after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE EMPLOYEES PERSONALLY LIABLE FOR DAMAGES AND LITIGATION COSTS IN CERTAIN CASES.
Litigation Costs.--Section 7430 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to awarding of costs and certain fees) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Personal Liability of Internal Revenue Service Officers and Employees in Certain Cases.-- ``(1) In general.--In any proceeding in which the prevailing party is awarded a judgment for reasonable litigation costs under this section, the court may assess a portion of such costs against any Internal Revenue Service officer or employee (and such officer or employee shall not be reimbursed by the United States for the costs so assessed) if the court determines that such proceeding resulted from any arbitrary, capricious, or malicious act of such officer or employee.
For purposes of this section, the term `officer or employee' includes a former officer or employee.
Representation of officer or employee.--Upon the request of any Internal Revenue Service officer or employee, such officer or employee may be represented by the United States in any proceeding with respect to the issue of whether there is to be an assessment against such officer or employee under paragraph (1).
If, in any case in which such an officer or employee is so represented by the United States, it is finally determined that such officer or employee is liable for an assessment under paragraph (1), such officer or employee shall also be liable to repay the United States for the costs of its representation under this paragraph.''.
Civil Damages and Court Costs for Failure To Release Lien.-- Section 7432 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to civil damages for failure to release lien) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Personal Liability of Internal Revenue Service Officers and Employees in Certain Cases.-- ``(1) In general.--In any proceeding in which the prevailing plaintiff is awarded a judgment under this section for damages described in subsection (b), the court may assess a portion of such damages against any Internal Revenue Service officer or employee (and such officer or employee shall not be reimbursed by the United States for the damages so assessed) if the court determines that such proceeding resulted from any arbitrary, capricious, or malicious act of such officer or employee.
For purposes of this section, the term `officer or employee' includes a former officer or employee.
Representation of officer or employee.--Upon the request of any Internal Revenue Service officer or employee, such officer or employee may be represented by the United States in any proceeding with respect to the issue of whether there is to be an assessment against such officer or employee under paragraph (1).
If, in any case in which such an officer or employee is so represented by the United States, it is finally determined that such officer or employee is liable for an assessment under paragraph (1), such officer or employee shall also be liable to repay the United States for the costs of its representation under this paragraph.''.
Civil Damages and Court Costs for Certain Unauthorized Collection Actions.--Section 7433 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to civil damages for certain unauthorized collection actions) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Personal Liability of Internal Revenue Service Officers and Employees in Certain Cases.-- ``(1) In general.--In any proceeding in which the prevailing plaintiff is awarded a judgment for damages described in subsection (b), the court may assess a portion of such damages against any Internal Revenue Service officer or employee (and such officer or employee shall not be reimbursed by the United States for the damages so assessed) if the court determines that such proceeding resulted from any arbitrary, capricious, or malicious act of such officer or employee.
For purposes of this section, the term `officer or employee' includes a former officer or employee.
Representation of officer or employee.--Upon the request of any Internal Revenue Service officer or employee, such officer or employee may be represented by the United States in any proceeding with respect to the issue of whether there is to be an assessment against such officer or employee under paragraph (1).
If, in any case in which such an officer or employee is so represented by the United States, it is finally determined that such officer or employee is liable for an assessment under paragraph (1), such officer or employee shall also be liable to repay the United States for the costs of its representation under this paragraph.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply in the case of proceedings commenced after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PROTECTING THE PRIVACY OF TAXPAYERS.
Civil Penalty for Unauthorized Access of Returns and Return Information.--Section 7431 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to civil damages for unauthorized disclosure of returns and return information) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or accesses'' after ``discloses'' in subsection (a)(1), (2) by inserting ``or Access'' after ``Disclosure'' in the heading for subsection (a)(1), (3) by inserting ``(or former officer or employee)'' after ``officer or employee'' both places it appears in subsection (a), (4) by inserting ``or access'' after ``disclosure'' each place it appears in subsections (b), (c)(1), and (d), (5) by inserting ``the earlier of notification to or'' after ``after the date of'' in subsection (d), and (6) by inserting ``or access'' after ``disclosure'' in the heading.
Criminal Penalty for Unauthorized Access of Returns and Return Information.--Section 7213(a)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Federal employees and other persons) is amended-- (1) by striking ``this paragraph'' and inserting ``this subparagraph'', (2) by striking ``It shall be unlawful'' and inserting the following: ``(A) Disclosure.--It shall be unlawful'', and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) Access.--It shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, or other person described in subparagraph (A) willfully to access without authorization any return or return information (as defined in section 6103(b)).
Any violation of this subparagraph shall be punishable by dismissal from office or discharge from employment and, further, shall be a misdemeanor punishable upon conviction by a fine in any amount not exceeding $1,000, or imprisonment of not more than 1 year, or both, together with costs of prosecution, and, if necessary, by dismissal from office or discharge from employment.''.
Notification of Unauthorized Access.--Section 6103 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to confidentiality and disclosure of returns and return information) is amended by redesignating subsection (q) as subsection (r) and by inserting after subsection (p) the following new subsection: ``(q) Unauthorized Access Prohibited.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as authorized by this title, no officer or employee (or former officer or employee) of the United States shall access any return or return information.
Notification.--Upon discovery that a taxpayer's return or return information has been accessed in violation of paragraph (1), the taxpayer shall be notified immediately.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 76 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``or access'' after ``disclosure'' in the item relating to section 7431.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to actions by officers or employees after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--Section 7602 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to examination of books and witnesses) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Limitations on Authority To Examine.--In taking any action under subsection (a), the Secretary-- ``(1) shall demonstrate, upon demand of any person described in subsection (a), reasonable justification (and not random selection) for initiating an examination of a return, and ``(2) shall not-- ``(A) initiate an examination of a return or issue of a return if such return or issue of a return has previously been examined, or ``(B) extend back an examination under subsection (a), once initiated, beyond a 3-taxable-year period ending on the day before the beginning of the taxable year which includes the date of initiation, except upon court approval if in the course of an investigation into possible criminal activity.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to examinations initiated after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF TIME TO PAY TAX AFTER NOTICE AND DEMAND.
In General.--Section 6651(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to addition to the tax) is amended by striking ``21 calendar days'' and inserting ``90 calendar days''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to notices and demands given after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ENSURING THE INTEGRITY OF JUDICIAL PROCEEDINGS.
In General.--Subchapter B of chapter 76 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to proceedings by taxpayers and third parties) is amended by redesignating section 7436 as section 7437 and by inserting after section 7435 the following new section: ``SEC.
DECLARATORY JUDGMENTS RELATING TO SECRETARIAL NONACQUIESCENCE.
``In a case of actual controversy involving the Secretary's decision to not acquiesce with respect to conclusions of law in identical or similar cases to a case or cases previously decided within the same court jurisdiction or appellate circuit, upon the filing of an appropriate pleading and the exhaustion of administrative remedies available to the petitioner within the Internal Revenue Service, the district court for such jurisdiction may make a declaration with respect to the Secretary's decision.
Any such declaration shall have the force and effect of a final judgment or decree of the district court and shall be reviewable as such.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter B is amended by striking the item relating to section 7436 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Declaratory judgments relating to secretarial nonacquiescence.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to court proceedings initiated after the date of the enactment of this Act.
LIMITATIONS ON ASSET SEIZURES AND LEVIES.
In General.--Section 6331(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to levy and distraint) is amended by inserting ``, upon the consent of an appropriate court,'' after ``it shall be lawful for the Secretary''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to levies initiated after the date of the enactment of this Act.
NO INTEREST ON PENALTIES, ADDITIONAL AMOUNTS, AND ADDITIONS TO TAX.
In General.--Section 6601(e)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to applicable rules) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) No interest on penalties, additional amounts, and additions to tax.--Interest shall not be imposed under subsection (a) in respect of any assessable penalty, additional amount, or addition to tax.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to notices and demands given after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INTEREST RATE FOR OVERPAYMENTS TO EQUAL RATE FOR UNDERPAYMENTS.
In General.--Section 6621(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to determination of rate of interest) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) General Rule.--The overpayment rate and the underpayment rate established under this section shall be the Federal short-term rate determined under subsection (b).''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to determination of rate of interest) is amended by striking subsection (c).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply for purposes of determining interest to periods after the date of the enactment of this Act.
FAIRNESS WHEN COLLECTING A TAX DUE TO MATHEMATICAL AND CLERICAL ERRORS.
In General.--Section 6404(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to abatements) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Abatement of Interest, Penalty, Additional Amount, and Addition to Tax Attributable to Certain Mathematical or Clerical Errors.--In the case of an assessment of additional tax attributable to a mathematical or clerical error (as defined in section 6213(g)(2)), the Secretary shall abate any interest, penalty, additional amount, and addition to tax with respect to such assessment if, within 60 days after notice of such assessment is sent under section 6213(b)(1) by certified mail or registered mail, the taxpayer pays, or files a request for an abatement of, such assessment.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to notices filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.