That this Act may be cited as the ``Reserve Account for Administrative Savings Act of 1993''.
GOVERNMENT EFFICIENCY RESERVE ACCOUNTS.
Subchapter II of chapter 15 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Special rule for apportioning salaries and expenses within an appropriation ``(a) All appropriations for salaries and expenses shall be apportioned as necessary to carry out this section.
(1) Except as provided by paragraph (2), in apportioning any appropriation for salaries and expenses for a fiscal year under this section, a reserve shall be established in an amount that is equal to 5 percent of the actual amount incurred for those salaries and expenses in the immediately preceding fiscal year.
The size of each reserve to be established under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year shall (if applicable) be reduced by a dollar amount equal to the amount by which that fiscal year's appropriation for salaries and expenses is less than the actual amount incurred for those salaries and expenses in the immediately preceding fiscal year.
Each appropriation subject to this section shall be apportioned by the appropriate official referred to in section 1513 and within the applicable time parameters set forth in that section.
The head of each agency that has an appropriation for salaries and expenses for a fiscal year subject to this section shall, within 60 days after the beginning of that fiscal year or within 60 days after the date of enactment of the law by which the appropriation for that fiscal year is made available, whichever occurs later, and after consultation with it chief financial officer and the Deputy Director for Management (or his or her designee) of the Office of Management and Budget, make recommendations to the President of changes in laws or regulations or other changes that should be made to bring about a more efficient and cost-effective operation and thereby reduce salaries and expenditures without jeopardizing any programs that agency administers.
The President's annual budget submission for a budget year under section 1105(a) shall include a special message which sets forth on an agency-by-agency basis a recommendation for the current fiscal year of whether-- ``(1) for the programs that agency administers to be maintained at a proper administrative level the release of all or part of those funds held in reserve under subsection (b) is necessary; ``(2) those programs can function effectively at reduced levels and the funds held in reserve under subsection (b) should be rescinded and returned to the Treasury; or ``(3) supplemental appropriations for other programs are necessary and can be offset by rescissions of the funds held in reserve under subsection (b).
If that special message recommends the option set forth in paragraph (1) for any agency, then the President shall include with that special message a bill that, if enacted, would release specified amounts of funds held in reserve under subsection (b) as set forth in that bill.
Except to the extent that a law is enacted under section 1521 requiring the release of all or part of the money reserved under subsection (b), on August 1 of the calendar year during which a fiscal year ends, all funds held in any reserve under subsection (b) respecting that fiscal year are hereby rescinded and shall be promptly returned to the general fund of the Treasury.
Fast-track supplemental appropriation of amounts not to exceed aggregate amount rescinded under section 1520 ``(a)(1) Before the close of the second legislative day of the House of Representatives after the date of receipt of a special message transmitted to Congress under section 1520(e), the majority leader or minority leader of the House of Representatives shall introduce (by request) the draft bill accompanying that special message.
If the bill is not introduced as provided in the preceding sentence, then, on the third legislative day of the House of Representatives after the date of receipt of that special message, any Member of that House may introduce the bill.
The bill shall be referred to the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
The committee shall report the bill with or without recommendation.
The bill shall be reported not later than the seventh legislative day of that House after the date of receipt of that special message.
If the Committee on Appropriations fails to report the bill within that period, that committee shall be automatically discharged from consideration of the bill, and the bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
During consideration under this subsection, any Member of the House of Representatives may move to strike any provision of the bill or offer an amendment to reduce any amount proposed to be released.
A vote on final passage of the bill shall be taken in the House of Representatives on or before the close of the 10th legislative day of that House after the date of the introduction of the bill in that House.
If the bill is passed, the Clerk of the House of Representatives shall cause the bill to be engrossed, certified, and transmitted to the Senate within one calendar day of the day on which the bill is passed.
(A) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a bill under this section shall be highly privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the House of Representatives on a bill under this section shall not exceed 4 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable.
It shall not be in order to move to recommit a bill under this section or to move to reconsider the vote by which the bill is agreed to or disagreed to.
Appeals from decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a bill under this section shall be decided without debate.
Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of a bill under this section shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives.
(A) A bill transmitted to the Senate pursuant to paragraph (4) shall be referred to its Committee on Appropriations.
The committee shall report the bill with or without recommendation.
The bill shall be reported not later than the seventh legislative day of the Senate after it receives the bill.
A committee failing to report the bill within such period shall be automatically discharged from consideration of the bill, and the bill shall be placed upon the appropriate calendar.
During consideration under this subsection, any Member of the Senate may move to strike any provision of the bill or offer an amendment to reduce any amount proposed to be released.
A vote on final passage of a bill transmitted to the Senate shall be taken on or before the close of the 10th legislative day of the Senate after the date on which the bill is transmitted.
If the bill is passed in the Senate without amendment, the Secretary of the Senate shall cause the engrossed bill to be returned to the House of Representatives.
(A) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of a bill under this subsection shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the Senate on a bill under this subsection, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall not exceed 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a bill under this section shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a bill, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
A motion in the Senate to further limit debate on a bill under this subsection is not debatable.
A motion to recommit a bill under this section is not in order.
Amendments and Divisions.--No amendment to a bill considered under this section shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate except an amendment to strike a provision of the bill or to reduce an amount proposed to be restored by the bill.
It shall not be in order to demand a division of the question in the House of Representatives (or in a Committee of the Whole) or in the Senate.
No motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House to suspend the application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
Requirement to Make Available for Obligation.--Any amount of budget authority proposed to be restored in a special message transmitted to Congress under section 1520(e) shall be made available for obligation on the day after the date on which the bill proposing to restore such amount of budget authority is enacted into law unless it has been automatically rescinded under that section.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `legislative day' means, with respect to either House of Congress, any day during which that House is in session.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall only apply to fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998 and shall have no force or effect after September 30, 1998.