This Act may be cited as the ``Glaucoma Screening Act of 2007''.
Congress finds the following: (1) It is estimated that only half of the more than 3,000,000 individuals in the United States that have glaucoma are aware that they have glaucoma.
Glaucoma is the leading cause of blindness among African-Americans and Hispanics.
Glaucoma is 6 to 8 times more common in African- Americans than in Caucasians.
Glaucoma accounts for over 7,000,000 visits to physicians each year.
In terms of Social Security benefits paid, lost income tax revenues, and health care expenditures, the cost of glaucoma to the United States government is estimated to be over $1.5 billion annually.
Poor vision costs Medicare more than $2 billion per year in non-eye-related illnesses and healthcare needs.
Medicare currently provides coverage for glaucoma screenings for beneficiaries in the following high risk groups: (A) Individuals with diabetes.
Individuals with a family history of glaucoma.
African-Americans 50 years of age and older.
Hispanics 65 years of age and older.
Although Medicare has covered glaucoma screenings since 1998 for beneficiaries with diabetes, less than 45 percent of those beneficiaries have had an eye exam.
DIRECTING SECRETARY TO INCLUDE COVERAGE OF GLAUCOMA SCREENINGS UNDER MEDICARE FOR CERTAIN HISPANICS.
Expanding Medicare Coverage of Glaucoma Screenings to Hispanics 50 Years of Age and Older.--Section 1861(s)(2)(U) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)(U)) is amended by striking ``determined to be'' and all that follows through ``diabetes'' and inserting the following: ``with a family history of glaucoma, individuals with diabetes, and individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma including, among other individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma, individuals who are both older than 49 years of age and Hispanic''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies with respect to services furnished on or after January 1, 2008.
ESTABLISHING GRANT PROGRAM TO PROVIDE SCREENINGS FOR GLAUCOMA TO HIGH RISK INDIVIDUALS.
Grant Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to award a grant to an eligible entity (as described in subsection (b)) to provide screenings for glaucoma for individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma.
Eligibility.--In order to be eligible to receive a grant under this section, an entity shall-- (1) submit an application at such time, in such form, and with such information and assurances as the Secretary may require; (2) be located within the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory or possession of the United States; and (3) be dedicated solely to screening individuals for glaucoma and other eye diseases.
Use of Funds.--An entity receiving a grant under this section shall use the grant in accordance with the following requirements: (1) The entity shall utilize mobile screening units to test for glaucoma and other eye diseases.
The entity shall target screening activities to populations primarily consisting of individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma.
The entity shall form partnerships with Federally- qualified health centers to increase awareness of the need for screenings for glaucoma and to provide screenings for glaucoma for individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma, individuals with a family history of glaucoma, and individuals with diabetes.
The entity shall provide grants to approved medical residency training programs to permit students participating in the programs to conduct screenings for glaucoma for individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma.
The entity shall conduct all grant-funded activities within the United States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or a territory or possession of the United States.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: (1) Approved medical residency training program.--The term ``approved medical residency training program'' has the meaning given that term in section 1886(h)(5)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(h)(5)(A)).
Federally-qualified health center.--The term ``Federally-qualified health center'' has the meaning given that term in section 1861(aa)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.1395x(aa)(4)).
Individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma.--The term ``individuals determined to be at high risk for glaucoma'' means those individuals determined by the Secretary to be at high risk for glaucoma pursuant to the Secretary's administration of section 1861(s)(2)(U) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)(U)), as amended by section 3(a), but without regard to the age of the individual.
Screening for glaucoma.--The term ``screening for glaucoma'' has the meaning given that term in section 1861(uu) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(uu)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for grants under this section for each of the first 5 fiscal years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.