REGULATION OF GUN SHOWS.
In General.--Section 923 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(m)(1) A person shall not hold a gun show unless-- ``(A) the person is licensed to do so under this subsection; and ``(B) at least 30 days have elapsed since the person, using a form which shall be prescribed by the Secretary, has notified the Secretary and the chief law enforcement officer of the postal address and the dates and times at which the gun show is to be held.
A person desiring to be licensed to hold a gun show shall submit to the Secretary an application which-- ``(A) contains a certification by the applicant that-- ``(i) the applicant meets the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through (D) of subsection (d)(1); and ``(ii) any gun show to be conducted under the license is not prohibited by State or local law, and will be conducted in accordance with the requirements of State and local law; ``(B) contains a photograph and fingerprints of the applicant; and ``(C) is in such form as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
(A) The Secretary shall approve an application submitted pursant to paragraph (2) which meets the requirements of paragraph (2).
On approval of the application and payment by the applicant of such fee as the Secretary shall establish to ensure that the fees collected under this subsection are sufficient to cover the costs of issuing licenses under this subsection, the Secretary shall issue to the applicant a license which, subject to the provisions of this chapter and other applicable provisions of law, entitles the licensee to hold gun shows in interstate or foreign commerce during the 3-year period that begins with the date the license is issued.
The Secretary shall approve or deny an application submitted under paragraph (2) within 60 days after the Secretary receives the application.
If the Secretary fails to so act within such period, the applicant may bring an action under section 1361 of title 28 to compel the Secretary to so act.
(A) Before a person not licensed under this section transfers a firearm at a gun show-- ``(i) the person shall provide to the holder of the gun show written notice of-- ``(I) the name, age, and address of the person and of the prospective transferee (or, in the case of a party who is a corporation or other business entity, the identity and principal and local places of business of such party); ``(II) the serial number, make, and model of the firearm; and ``(III) the date and location of the transfer; and ``(ii) the holder of a gun show shall comply with the requirements imposed on licensed dealers by section 922(t) and subsections (g)(1)(A) and (g)(3)(A) of this section with respect to the transfer.
Within 30 days after the end of a gun show for which a license is issued under this subsection, the licensee shall deliver to the Secretary all records or documents which the licensee collected pursuant to subparagraph (A) during the gun show.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `gun show' means an event or function that is-- ``(A) sponsored by-- ``(i) a national, State, or local organization devoted to the collection, competitive use, or other sporting use of firearms; or ``(ii) an organization or association that sponsors functions devoted to the collection, competitive use, or other sporting use of firearms in the community; and ``(B) held at a location-- ``(i) which is not specified in any license issued under subsection (b) or (c); ``(ii) at which a firearm is offered for sale or transfer; and ``(iii) at which 50 or more firearms are present, 1 or more of which has been shipped or tranported in interstate or foreign commerce.''.
Penalties.--Section 924(a) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7)(A) Whoever knowingly violates section 923(m)(1) shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Whoever knowingly violates subparagraph (A)(i) or (B) of section 923(m)(4) shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both.
Whoever violates section 923(m)(4)(A)(ii) by knowingly failing to comply with a provision of law specified in such section shall be punished as otherwise provided under this section for knowingly violating the provision of law.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to conduct engaged in after the 1-year period that begins with the date of the enactment of this Act.