This Act may be cited as the ``Small Non-Coal Producing Company Relief Act''.
REDUCTION IN CONTRIBUTIONS OF CERTAIN PERSONS TO COAL MINERS COMBINED BENEFIT FUND.
In General.--Part II of subchapter B of chapter 99 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to financing of Combined Benefit Fund) is amended by inserting after section 9704 the following new section: ``SEC.
REDUCTIONS IN ANNUAL PREMIUMS OF CERTAIN ASSIGNED OPERATORS.
General Rule.--The annual premium of an assigned operator under section 9704(a) shall-- ``(1) in the case of an eligible small assigned operator, be reduced as provided in subsection (b), and ``(2) in any case in which there is a surplus in the Combined Fund to which subsection (c) applies, be reduced as provided in subsection (c).
Reductions for Eligible Small Assigned Operators.-- ``(1) In general.--If this subsection applies to an eligible small assigned operator for any plan year of the Combined Fund, the annual premium under section 9704(a) for such operator for such plan year shall not exceed 5 percent of the operator's average annual taxable income for purposes of chapter 1 for the 5-taxable year period ending with the operator's most recent taxable year ending before the beginning of the plan year.
Years to which subsection applies.-- ``(A) In general.--This subsection shall apply to any plan year of the Combined Fund-- ``(i) which begins before October 1, 1998, ``(ii) which begins after September 30, 1998, and before October 1, 2003, but only if the Combined Fund has a surplus as of the close of the plan year ending September 30, 1998, equal to or greater than $150,000,000, or ``(iii) which begins after September 30, 2003, but only if the Combined Fund has a surplus as of the close of the plan year ending September 30, 2003, equal to or greater than $100,000,000.
Coordination with surplus reductions.--This subsection shall not apply to any eligible small assigned operator for any plan year for which no annual premium is imposed on such operator by reason of subsection (c).
Eligible small assigned operators.--For purposes of this section-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible small assigned operator' means any assigned operator-- ``(i) the average annual gross income of which for purposes of chapter 1 for the 5- taxable year period ending with the operator's most recent taxable year ending before October 1, 1993, did not exceed $25,000,000, and ``(ii) which is not engaged in the production of coal for the plan year for which the determination is being made.
For purposes of this subparagraph, production by a related person shall be treated as production by the assigned operator.
Production of coal.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), an assigned operator or related person shall be treated as engaged in the production of coal if it has employed employees in-- ``(i) the extraction of coal, or ``(ii) the preparation, processing, or changing of coal for sale.
Aggregation rules.--In determining gross income or taxable income for purposes of this section, an assigned operator and any related persons shall be treated as 1 person.
Reductions Based Upon Fund Surplus.-- ``(1) Assigned operators.--If, as of the close of any plan year ending after September 30, 1997, the Combined Fund has a surplus equal to or greater than 50 percent of the net expenses of the Combined Fund for the plan year, no annual premium shall be imposed under section 9704(a) on any eligible small assigned operator for the succeeding plan year.
Other operators.--If, as of the close of any plan year ending after September 30, 1997, the Combined Fund has a surplus equal to or greater than 100 percent of the net expenses of the Combined Fund for the plan year, the annual premium under section 9704(a) for the succeeding plan year of any assigned operator other than an eligible small assigned operator shall be reduced by an amount which bears the same ratio to the surplus in excess of 100 percent of the net expenses of the Combined Fund for the plan year as-- ``(A) such assigned operator's applicable percentage (expressed as a whole number), bears to ``(B) the sum of the applicable percentages (expressed as whole numbers) of all assigned operators other than eligible small assigned operators.
Overall Limitation.-- ``(1) In general.--In no event shall the total reductions in annual premiums payable to the Combined Fund under this section for any plan year exceed $5,000,000.
Calculation of reductions.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the total reductions in annual premiums for any plan year shall not include any reductions under this section in premiums payable by an eligible small assigned operator who, prior to the date of the enactment of this section, has not paid at least 50 percent of the premiums assessed such assigned operator for the period October 1, 1994, through June 30, 1995.
Ordering rule.--Any decrease in premium reductions under this section for any plan year by reason of paragraph (1) shall be applied first against the reductions under subsection (b) and then against reductions under subsection (c).
Any such decreases shall be made ratably among operators.
Computation of Surplus.--For purposes of this section, any determination of a surplus in the Combined Fund-- ``(1) shall be calculated on an accrual basis, ``(2) shall be made and certified by an independent auditor retained by the trustees, and ``(3) once so certified, shall be reviewable by a court of law only to determine if such determination is reasonable.
A determination shall be considered reasonable for purposes of paragraph (3) if it is made in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles and is based on assumptions which, in the aggregate, are reasonable.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter B of chapter 99 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 9704 the following new item: ``Sec.
Reductions in annual premiums of certain assigned operators.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to plan years beginning after January 31, 1993.
In General.--In the case of an eligible small assigned operator (as defined in section 9704A(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by section 1), no penalty shall be imposed under section 9707 of such Code on any failure of such operator to pay any installment of a premium due under section 9704 of such Code before January 1, 1996, if the operator pays such installment before such date.
For purposes of this subsection, the amount of the installment shall be determined after application of the amendments made by section 1.
Compliance.--An operator shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of subsection (a) with respect to any installment if-- (1) the failure to pay the installment before January 1, 1996, was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and (2) the failure is corrected within 90 days of the later of-- (A) notice of the failure, or (B) a final administrative or judicial determination of the amount of the installment which is not reviewable or appealable.