ALTERNATIVE CONDITIONS AND FISHWAYS.
Alternative Mandatory Conditions.--Section 4 of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 797) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h)(1) Whenever any person applies for a license for any project works within any reservation of the United States, and the Secretary of the department under whose supervision such reservation falls (referred to in this subsection as `the Secretary`) deems a condition to such license to be necessary under the first proviso of subsection (e), the license applicant may propose an alternative condition.
The license applicant shall be entitled to a determination on the record after opportunity for an agency trial-type hearing of any disputed issues of material fact.
Notwithstanding the first proviso of subsection (e), the Secretary shall accept the proposed alternative condition referred to in paragraph (1), and the Commission shall include in the license such alternative condition, if the Secretary determines, based on substantial evidence provided by the license applicant that such alternative condition-- ``(A) provides for the adequate protection and utilization for the reservation; and ``(B) will either-- ``(i) cost less to implement, or ``(ii) result in improved operation of the project works for electricity production, as compared to the condition initially deemed necessary by the Secretary.
The Secretary shall submit into the public record of the Commission proceeding with any condition under subsection (e) or alternative condition it accepts under this subsection a written statement explaining the basis for such condition, and reason for not accepting any alternative condition under this subsection.
The written statement must demonstrate that the Secretary gave equal consideration to the effects of the condition adopted and alternatives not accepted on energy supply, distribution, cost, and use, flood control, navigation, drinking, irrigation, and recreational water supply, and air quality, in addition to the preservation of other aspects of environmental quality, based on such information as may be available to the Secretary, including information voluntarily provided in a timely manner by the applicant and others.
The Secretary shall also submit, together with the aforementioned written statement, all studies, data, and other factual information available to the Secretary and relevant to the Secretary's decision.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit other interested parties from proposing alternative conditions.
If the Secretary does not accept an applicant's alternative condition under this subsection, and the Commission finds that the Secretary's condition would be inconsistent with the purposes and requirements of this Part, or other applicable law, the Commission may refer the dispute to the Commission's Dispute Resolution Service.
The Dispute Resolution Service shall consult with the Secretary and the Commission and issue a non-binding advisory within 90 days.
The Secretary may accept the Dispute Resolution Service advisory unless the Secretary finds that the recommendation will not adequately protect the reservation.
The Secretary shall submit the advisory and the Secretary's final written determination into the record of the Commission proceeding.''.
Alternative Fishways.--Section 18 of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 811) is amended as follows: (1) By inserting ``(a)'' before the first sentence.
By adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1) Whenever the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce prescribes a fishway under this section, the license applicant or the licensee may propose an alternative to such prescription to construct, maintain, oroperate a fishway.
The license applicant shall be entitled to a determination on the record after opportunity for an agency trial-type hearing of any disputed issues of material fact.
Notwithstanding subsection (a), the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce, as appropriate, shall accept and prescribe, and the Commission shall require, the proposed alternative referred to in paragraph (1) if the Secretary of the appropriate department determines, based on substantial evidence provided by the licensee, that the alternative-- ``(A) will be no less protective of the fish resources than the fishway initially prescribed by the Secretary; and ``(B) will either-- ``(i) cost less to implement, or ``(ii) result in improved operation of the project works for electricity production, as compared to the fishway initially prescribed by the Secretary.
The Secretary concerned shall submit into the public record of the Commission proceeding with any prescription under subsection (a) or alternative prescription it accepts under this subsection a written statement explaining the basis for such prescription, and reason for not accepting any alternative prescription under this subsection.
The written statement must demonstrate that the Secretary gave equal consideration to the effects of the prescription adopted or alternative not accepted on energy supply, distribution, cost, and use, flood control, navigation, drinking, irrigation, and recreational water supply, and air quality, in addition to the preservation of other aspects of environmental quality, based on such information as may be available to the Secretary, including information voluntarily provided in a timely manner by the applicant and others.
The Secretary shall also submit, together with the aforementioned written statement, all studies, data, and other factual information available to the Secretary and relevant to the Secretary's decision.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit other interested parties from proposing alternative prescriptions.
If the Secretary does not accept an applicant's alternative prescription under this subsection, and the Commission finds that the Secretary's prescription would be inconsistent with the purposes and requirements of this Part, or other applicable law, the Commission may refer the dispute to the Commission's Dispute Resolution Service.
The Dispute Resolution Service shall consult with the Secretary and the Commission and issue a non-binding advisory within 90 days.
The Secretary may accept the Dispute Resolution Service advisory unless the Secretary finds that the recommendation will not adequately protect the fish resources.
The Secretary shall submit the advisory and the Secretary's final written determination into the record of the Commission proceeding.