This Act may be cited as the ``International Development Act of 1994''.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286-286mm) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTION TO GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Bank may contribute $400,000,000 on behalf of the United States to the Global Environment Facility.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury not more than $400,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
In General.--The African Development Fund Act (22 United States Code 290g- 290g-15) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Fund may contribute $315,000,000 to the seventh replenishment of the resources of the Fund.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury not more than $315,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the later of-- (1) October 1, 1994; or (2) the date the Secretary of the Treasury notifies the Congress that the negotiations of the seventh replenishment of the resources of the African Development Fund have been concluded successfully.
INTER-AMERICAN DEVELOPMENT BANK AND FUND FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS.
The Inter-American Development Bank Act (22 United States Code 283-283z-9) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CAPITAL INCREASE; INCREASE IN RESOURCES OF FUND FOR SPECIAL OPERATIONS.
Authority To Vote for Increase in Authorized Capital Stock of Bank and Increase in Resources of Fund for Special Operations.--The United States Governor of the Bank may vote for resolutions which-- ``(1) were transmitted by the Board of Executive Directors to the Governors of the Bank by resolution of __________; ``(2) are pending before the Board of Governors of the Bank; and ``(3) provide for-- ``(A) an increase in the authorized capital stock of the Bank and subscriptions to the Bank; and ``(B) an increase in the resources of the Fund for Special Operations and contributions to the Fund.
Subscription and Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--On adoption of the resolutions described in subsection (a), the United States Governor of the Bank may, on behalf of the United States-- ``(A) subscribe to 760,644 shares of the increase in the authorized capital stock of the Bank, 12,738 of which shall be shares of paid-in capital stock and 747,906 of which shall be shares of callable capital stock; and ``(B) contribute $82,304,000 to the Fund for Special Operations.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) Subscription.--For the subscription authorized by subsection (b)(1)(A), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury, without fiscal year limitation-- ``(A) not more than $76,832,001 for shares of paid- in capital stock of the Bank; and ``(B) not more than $4,511,156,729 for shares of callable capital stock of the Bank.
Contribution.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (b)(1)(B), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury not more than $82,304,000, without fiscal year limitation.
Authority To Vote for Certain Resolutions.--The United States Governor of the Bank may vote for a proposed resolution of the Board of Governors entitled `Amendments to the Agreement Establishing the Inter- American Development Bank, the Regulations of the Board of Governors, the General Rules Governing Admission of Nonregional Countries to Membership in the Bank, and the Regulations for the Election of Executive Directors', which was submitted to the Board of Governors pursuant to a resolution of the Board of Executive Directors approved on __________.''.
ENHANCED STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT FACILITY OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286-286mm), as amended by section 2 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE INTEREST SUBSIDY ACCOUNT OF THE ENHANCED STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT FACILITY OF THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the United States Governor of the Fund may make contributions on behalf of the United States in fulfillment of the United States commitment to contribute to the Interest Subsidy Account of the Enhanced Structural Adjustment Facility of the Fund.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitation on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury not more than $25,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
MILITARY SPENDING BY RECIPIENT COUNTRIES; MILITARY INVOLVEMENT IN THE ECONOMIES OF RECIPIENT COUNTRIES.
Title XV of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262o) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
MILITARY SPENDING BY RECIPIENT COUNTRIES; MILITARY INVOLVEMENT IN THE ECONOMIES OF RECIPIENT COUNTRIES.
Consideration of Commitment to Achieving Certain Goals.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors of the international financial institutions (as defined in section 1701(c)(2)) to promote growth in the international economy by taking into account, when considering whether to support or oppose loan proposals at these institutions, the extent to which the recipient government has demonstrated a commitment to achieving the following goals: ``(1) To provide accurate and complete data on the annual expenditures and receipts of the armed forces.
To end excessive military involvement in the economy.
To make substantial reductions in excessive military spending and forces.
To end corruption involoving members of the armed forces.
The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs and on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Foreign Relations and on Appropriations of the Senate a report on the steps taken to determine appropriate definitions of the goals set forth in subsection (a).
Steps to Achieve Goals Required.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors of the international financial institutions (as so defined) to promote a policy at each institution under which-- ``(1) the staff will include in its supporting documents for each proposed loan a report on military expenditures and an assessment of the steps taken by the recipient government to achieve the goals set forth in subsection (a); ``(2) the governing body will not approve proposed loans where insufficient effort has been made to achieve such goals, except in cases where the proposed loans are specifically designed to meet the basic human needs of the poor; and ``(3) a report on military expenditures and an assessment of the steps taken by the recipient government to achieve the goals set forth in subsection (a) will be included in regular policy consultations with developing countries.
Conditional Opposition to Loans to Indonesia.--In furtherance of the policy established by subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State, shall, not later than May 1, 1995, submit to the Committees on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs and on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Foreign Relations and on Appropriations of the Senate a report on the performance of the Government of Indonesia in achieving or implementing a credible plan to achieve the goals set forth in subsection (a).''.
RESPECT FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES.
Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262p-262p-5) is amended by redesignating section 1620 as section 1621 and by inserting after section 1619 the following: ``SEC.
RESPECT FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall direct the United States Executive Directors of the international financial institutions (as defined in section 1701(c)(2)) and the United States representative to the council of the Global Environment Facility administered by the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development to use the voice and vote of the United States to bring about the creation and full implementation of policies designed to promote respect for and full protection of the territorial rights, traditional economies, cultural integrity, traditional knowledge, and human rights of indigenous peoples.''.
FOCUS ON LOW-INCOME AREAS OF LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARRIBEAN.
The Inter-American Development Bank Act (22 United States Code 283-283z-9) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
FOCUS ON LOW-INCOME AREAS OF LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARRIBEAN.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall direct the United States Executive Director of the Bank to use the voice and vote of the United States to support an increased focus on the poorest countries in Latin America and the Carribean, and on poorer areas of better off countries, and to support porgrams conducted by the Multilateral Investment Fund, particularly in targeting low-income countries and populations, working with nongovernmental organizations and training and assisting former combatants from civil conflicts in Latin America.''.
GUARANTEE OF WORKER RIGHTS.
Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262p-262p-5), as amended by section 7 of this Act, is amended by redesignating section 1621 as section 1622 and by inserting after section 1620 the following: ``SEC.
GUARANTEE OF WORKER RIGHTS.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall direct the United States Executive Director at each international financial institution (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of this Act) to use the voice and vote of the United States to urge the respective institution to adopt policies to encourage borrowing countries to guarantee internationally recognized worker rights (within the meaning of section 502(a)(4) of the Trade Act of 1974).