GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE TECHNOLOGY ASSESSMENTS.
Findings and Purposes.-- (1) Findings.--Congress finds that-- (A) it is important for Congress to be better informed regarding the impact of technology on matters of public concern, including implications for economic, national security, social, scientific, and other national policies and programs; (B) on a pilot basis, the General Accounting Office has demonstrated a capacity to perform independent and objective technology assessments for Congress; and (C) the development of a cost-effective and efficient capacity for timely and deliberate technology assessments by the General Accounting Office requires the commitment of additional resources and administrative flexibility given the current resource constraints of the General Accounting Office.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (A) direct the establishment of a technology assessment capability in the General Accounting Office; (B) ensure the quality of such technology assessments in order to enhance the ability of Congress to address complex technical issues in a more timely and effective manner; and (C) condition the development of a technology assessment capability in the General Accounting Office on the provision of adequate additional resources and administrative flexibility.
Technology Assessments.--Chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 720 the following: ``Sec.
Technology assessments ``(a) The General Accounting Office shall establish a technology assessment capability to coordinate and prepare information for Congress relating to the policy implications of applications of technology.
The Comptroller General may establish standards and procedures to govern technology assessments performed under this section as the Comptroller General determines necessary.
Technology assessments performed under this section shall-- ``(1) provide Congress with timely and objective information to contribute to legislative consideration of technology applications and their policy implications, including thorough reports, in-depth studies, and short-term consultations; ``(2) be undertaken by the Comptroller General with special attention to the technical expertise and policy analysis skills needed to perform a prospective assessment of technology applications and policy implications; ``(3) be designed, to the extent practicable, to review an application of technology to an issue of public interest, including consideration of benefits, cost, and risks from such technology; and ``(4) include peer review by persons and organizations of appropriate expertise.
In performing technology assessments, the Comptroller General shall be properly apprised of Federal and non-Federal entities providing information to Congress to-- ``(1) enable effective coverage of critical issues; and ``(2) avoid duplication of effort.
Technology assessments performed under this section may be initiated as provided under section 717(b).
(1) In consultation with the National Academy of Sciences, the Comptroller General shall establish a technology assessment advisory panel to provide advice on technology assessments performed under this section, methodologies, possible subjects of study, and the means of improving the quality and timeliness of technology assessment services provided to Congress.
The advisory panel shall consist of 5 members, who by reason of professional background and experience, are specially qualified to advise on technology assessments.
Terms on the advisory panel shall-- ``(A) be for a period of 2 years; and ``(B) begin on January 1, on each year in which a new Congress is convened.
Notwithstanding section 1342, for the purposes of establishing a technology assessment advisory panel, the Comptroller General may accept and use voluntary and uncompensated services (except for reimbursement of travel expenses).
Individuals providing such voluntary and uncompensated services shall not be considered Federal employees, except for purposes of chapter 81 of title 5 and chapter 171 of title 28.
(1) In order to gain access to technical knowledge, skills, and expertise necessary for a technology assessment performed under this section, the Comptroller General may utilize individuals and enter into contracts or other arrangements to acquire needed expertise with any agency or instrumentality of the United States, with any State, territory, or possession or any political subdivision thereof, or with any person, firm, association, corporation, or educational institution.
Contracts and other arrangements under this subsection may be entered into-- ``(A) with or without reimbursement; and ``(B) without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5) or section 3324 of this title.
The Comptroller General shall submit to Congress an annual report on technology assessment activities of the General Accounting Office.
(1) There are authorized to be appropriated to the General Accounting Office to carry out the activities described in this section, $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006.
Technology assessments under this section may not be performed during fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006, unless a sufficient annual appropriation is provided for such fiscal years.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 720 the following: ``721.