This Act may be cited as the ``National Death Penalty Moratorium Act of 2000''.
TITLE I--MORATORIUM ON THE DEATH PENALTY SEC.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Death sentences are disproportionately visited on the poor: (A) About 90 percent of people facing capital charges cannot afford their own attorney.
No State has met standards developed by the American Bar Association (ABA) for appointment, performance, and compensation of counsel for indigent prisoners.
There is ample evidence that the death penalty is applied disproportionately to members of certain racial and ethnic groups: (A) Although African-Americans constitute only 13 percent of the American population, since 1976 African- Americans account for 35 percent of those executed, 43 percent of those who wait on death row nationwide, and 67 percent of those who wait on death row in the Federal system.
Although only 50 percent of murder victims are white, fully 84 percent of the victims in death penalty cases were white.
A study conducted by the House Judiciary Subcommittee on Civil and Constitutional Rights in 1994 concluded that 89 percent of defendants selected for capital prosecution under the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 have been either African-American or Hispanic American.
In 1990, the General Accounting Office reported ``a pattern of evidence indicating racial disparities in charging, sentencing, and imposition of the death penalty''.
Prisoner appeals have been severely curtailed, increasing the risk of imprisonment and execution of innocent people: (A) In a series of rulings since 1976, the Supreme Court has restricted the rights of death row prisoners to appeal their convictions and death sentences in Federal courts, even in cases where prisoners present compelling evidence of innocence.
In 1996, new legislation limited Federal court review of death penalty appeals and severely curtailed public funding of legal aid services for death row prisoners.
FEDERAL AND STATE DEATH PENALTY MORATORIUM.
Neither the Federal Government nor any State shall carry out the death penalty until Congress considers the final findings and recommendations of the National Commission on the Death Penalty in the report submitted under section 202(c)(2) and enacts legislation repealing this section and implementing or rejecting the guidelines and procedures recommended by the Commission.
TITLE II--NATIONAL COMMISSION ON THE DEATH PENALTY SEC.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on the Death Penalty (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed by the President in consultation with the Attorney General and the Chairmen and Ranking Members of the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members, of whom-- (A) 3 members shall be Federal or State prosecutors; (B) 3 members shall be attorneys experienced in capital defense; (C) 2 members shall be current or former Federal or State judges; and (D) 2 members shall be current or former Federal or State law enforcement officials; and (E) 5 members shall be individuals from the public or private sector who have knowledge or expertise, whether by experience or training, in matters to be studied by the Commission, which may include-- (i) officers or employees of the Federal Government or State or local governments; (ii) members of academia, nonprofit organizations, the religious community, or industry; and (iii) other interested individuals.
Balanced viewpoints.--In appointing the members of the Commission, the President shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure that the membership of the Commission is fairly balanced with respect to the opinions of the members of the Commission regarding support for or opposition to the use of the death penalty.
Date.--The appointments of the initial members of the Commission shall be made not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after all initial members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for conducting business, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chair.--The President shall designate 1 member appointed under subsection (a) to serve as the Chair of the Commission.
Rules and Procedures.--The Commission shall adopt rules and procedures to govern its proceedings.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the administration of the death penalty to determine whether it comports with constitutional principles and requirements of fairness, justice, equality, and due process.
Matters studied.--The matters studied by the Commission shall include the following: (A) Racial disparities in capital charging, prosecuting, and sentencing decisions.
Disproportionality in capital charging, prosecuting, and sentencing decisions based on geographic location and income status of defendant or any other factor resulting in such disproportionality.
Adequacy of representation of capital defendants, including consideration of the ABA ``Guidelines for the Appointment and Performance of Counsel in Death Penalty Cases'' (adopted February 1989) and Association policies intended to encourage competency of counsel in capital cases (adopted February 1979, February 1988, February 1990, and August 1996).
Whether innocent persons have been sentenced to death and the reasons these wrongful convictions have occurred.
Whether the Federal government should seek the death penalty in a State with no death penalty.
Whether courts are adequately exercising independent judgment on the merits of constitutional claims in State post-conviction and Federal habeas corpus proceedings.
Whether mentally retarded persons and persons who were under the age of 18 at the time of their offenses should be sentenced to death after conviction of death-eligible offenses.
Procedures to ensure that persons sentenced to death have access to forensic evidence and modern testing of such evidence, including DNA testing, when such testing could result in new evidence of innocence.
Any other law or procedure to ensure that death penalty cases are administered fairly and impartially, in accordance with the Constitution.
Guidelines and Procedures.-- (1) In general.--Based on the study conducted pursuant to subsection (a), the Commission shall establish guidelines and procedures for the administration of the death penalty consistent with paragraph (2).
Intent of guidelines and procedures.--The guidelines and procedures required by this subsection shall-- (A) ensure that the death penalty cases are administered fairly and impartially, in accordance with due process; (B) minimize the risk that innocent persons may be executed; and (C) ensure that the death penalty is not administered in a racially discriminatory manner.
Report.-- (1) Preliminary report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Attorney General, and the Congress a preliminary report, which shall contain a preliminary statement of findings and conclusions.
Final report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to the President, the Attorney General, and the Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions implementing the guidelines and procedures as it considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Information From Federal and State Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal or State department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this title.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Hearings.--The Commission or, at its direction, any subcommittee or member of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this title-- (1) hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, receive such evidence, administer such oaths; and (2) require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, correspondence, memoranda, papers, documents, tapes, and materials as the Commission or such subcommittee or member considers advisable.
Issuance and Enforcement of Subpoenas.-- (1) Issuance.--Subpoenas issued pursuant to subsection (d) shall bear the signature of the Chairperson of the Commission and shall be served by any person or class of persons designated by the Chairperson for that purpose.
Enforcement.--In the case of contumacy or failure to obey a subpoena issued under subsection (d), the district court of the United States for the judicial district in which the subpoenaed person resides, is served, or may be found may issue an order requiring such person to appear at any designated place to testify or to produce documentary or other evidence.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as a contempt.
Testimony of persons in custody.--A court of the United States within the jurisdiction in which testimony of a person held in custody is sought by the Commission or within the jurisdiction of which such person is held in custody, may, upon application by the Attorney General, issue a writ of habeas corpus ad testificandum requiring the custodian to produce such person before the Commission, or before a member of the Commission or a member of the staff of the Commission designated by the Commission for such purpose.
Witness Allowances and Fees.--The provisions of section 1821 of title 28, United States Code, shall apply to witnesses requested or subpoenaed to appear at any hearing of the Commission.
The per diem and mileage allowances for witnesses shall be paid from funds available to pay the expenses of the Commission.
Compensation of Members.--Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation for their services to the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 202.
In General.--The Commission may expend not to exceed $850,000 as provided by subsection (b) to carry out this title.
Availability.--Sums appropriated to the Department of Justice shall be made available to carry out this title.