This Act may be cited as the ``Gulf Coast Restoration Act''.
GULF COAST RESTORATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the Gulf Coast Restoration Fund.
Transfers to Fund.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Fund amounts equal to not less than 80 percent of any amounts collected by the United States before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act as penalties, settlements, or fines under sections 309 and 311 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319, 1321) in relation to the Gulf oil spill.
Authorized Uses.-- (1) In general.--The Fund shall be available to the Task Force, as provided in appropriations Acts, only for activities related to Gulf coast economic development, tourism promotion, and ecosystem restoration.
Grants to states.-- (A) In general.--The Task Force shall distribute the amounts made available for expenditure from the Fund to the Gulf States to be used in accordance with this subsection.
Allocation among states.--The Task Force shall allocate the amounts to be distributed to each Gulf State under this paragraph such that no single Gulf State receives less than 5 percent, nor more than 30 percent, of the available amounts.
Allocation within states.--The Governor of each Gulf State shall allocate amounts distributed to the State as follows: (i) Not more than 20 percent of such amounts may be used by the Governor for statewide economic development, tourism promotion, and ecosystem restoration activities.
Not less than 80 percent of such amounts shall be distributed to local governments in counties directly affected by the Gulf oil spill for local economic development, tourism promotion, and ecosystem restoration activities.
GULF COAST RESTORATION TASK FORCE.
Establishment.--There is established the Gulf Coast Restoration Task Force.
Membership.--The Task Force shall consist of the following members, or in the case of a Federal agency, a designee at the level of Assistant Secretary or the equivalent: (1) The Secretary of the Interior.
The Secretary of Commerce.
The Secretary of the Army.
The Secretary of Homeland Security.
The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The Commandant of the Coast Guard.
The Secretary of Transportation.
The Secretary of Agriculture.
The Secretary of the Navy.
Two representatives of each of the Gulf States, appointed by the Governor of each such State.
Two representatives, from within each of the Gulf States, of local governments having jurisdiction over areas directly affected by the Gulf oil spill, appointed by the Governor of each State, respectively.
Duties.--The Task Force shall administer the Fund in accordance with section 2.
Not later than 180 days after receiving funds under section 2, the Governor of each Gulf State shall submit to Congress a report describing the use of such funds.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Ecosystem restoration.--The term ``ecosystem restoration'' means any projects and activities for the conservation, protection, or restoration of coastal areas, including wetlands; the mitigation of damage to fish, wildlife, or natural resources; the planning assistance and the administrative costs of complying with this section; or the implementation of a federally approved marine, coastal, or comprehensive conservation management plan.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Gulf Coast Restoration Fund established by section 2(a).
Gulf oil spill.--The term ``Gulf oil spill'' means the oil spill in the Gulf of Mexico caused by the mobile offshore drilling unit Deepwater Horizon that began on April 20, 2010.
Gulf states.--The term ``Gulf States'' means the States of Alabama, Florida, Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas.
Task force.--The term ``Task Force'' means the Gulf Coast Restoration Task Force established by section 3(a).