This Act may be referred to as the ``Olympic Commemorative Coins Act''.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Corporation'' shall mean the corporation by the name of ``United States Olympic Committee'' created by the Act entitled ``An Act to incorporate the United States Olympic Association'', approved September 21, 1950 (36 United States Code 371 et seq.
), as amended; and (2) the term ``Secretary'' shall mean the Secretary of the Treasury.
Biannual Olympic Coins.--Beginning in 1997, in each 6-month period prior to the date upon which the Summer or Winter Olympic Games are held in a nation other than the United States, the Secretary shall issue not more than 500,000 commemorative one dollar coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.5 inches; (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent alloy; and (4) bear the design selected by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (f).
Olympic Coins When Games Are Held in the United States.--In each year prior to a year in which the Summer or Winter Olympic Games are held in the United States, the Secretary shall develop an expanded multi-coin commemorative coins program in consultation with the Corporation and the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
The Secretary shall issue such coins in the 6-month period prior to the date upon which such games are held.
Exclusivity.--During the first 2 months of each period in which coins are issued under this Act, the Secretary shall not issue other commemorative coins.
Surcharges.--(1) All sales of the coins issued under subsection (a) shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
All sales of the coins issued under subsection (b) shall include a surcharge of between $1 and $50 per coin as determined by the Secretary in consultation with the Corporation.
Distribution and Use of Surcharges.--(1) All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Corporation.
Funds received by the Corporation under this Act shall be used to carry out the Amateur Sports Act of 1978 (36 United States Code 371 et sequentes), and not less than 25 percent of such funds shall be used for the objects and purposes of paragraphs (6), (7), and (9) of section 104 of such Act (36 United States Code 374).
Design.--(1) The design for each coin issued under this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Corporation.
(A) On each coin issued under this Act there shall be-- (i) a designation of the value of the coin; (ii) an inscription of the year; and (iii) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
On coins issued under this Act there may be, with the consent of the Corporation under section 9 of the Act entitled ``An Act to incorporate the United States Olympic Association'', approved September 21, 1950 (36 United States Code 380), the symbol of the International Olympic Committee, the emblem of the Corporation, the words ``Olympic'', ``Olympiad'' or other symbols, emblems, trademarks and names which the Corporation has the exclusive right to use under that section.
The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from sources the Secretary determines to be appropriate, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain any gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under other provisions of law.
Each coin issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coin; (2) the surcharge provided in section 3 with respect to such coin; (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coin (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping); and (4) the estimated profit determined under section 7(b) with respect to such coin.
DETERMINATION OF COSTS AND PROFIT.
Determination of Costs.--The Secretary shall determine the costs incurred with respect to coins issued under this Act, including overhead costs.
Determination of Profit.--Prior to the sale of each edition of coin issued under this Act, the Secretary shall calculate the estimated profit to be included in the sale price of each such coin under section 6(4).
Prohibition on Judicial Review.--Determinations made under this section shall be made at the sole discretion of the Secretary and shall not be subject to judicial review.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
Section 5112(j) of title 31, United States Code, shall apply to the procurement of goods and services necessary to carry out the programs and operations of the United States Mint under this Act.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine books, records, documents, and other data of the Corporation related to the expenditure of amounts it has received under section 3(e)(1).
The Corporation shall biannually transmit a report to Congress and to the Secretary which shall account for the expenditure of funds received under section 3(e)(1).
It is the sense of Congress that each coin edition issued under this Act should be self-sustaining and should be administered so as not to result in any net cost to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.