That this Act may be cited as the ``Line-Item Rescission Act of 1993''.
EXPEDITED CONSIDERATION OF CERTAIN PROPOSED RESCISSIONS.
In General.--Part B of title X of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by redesignating sections 1013 through 1017 as sections 1014 through 1018, respectively, and inserting after section 1012 the following new section: ``expedited consideration of certain proposed rescissions ``Sec.
Transmittal of Special Message.--The President may, on the same calendar day the President approves any appropriation bill, transmit to both Houses of the Congress, for consideration in accordance with this section, one or more special messages proposing to rescind all or part of any item of budget authority provided in the appropriation bill.
Contents of Special Message.-- ``(1) No special message may be considered in accordance with this section if the special message proposes to rescind more than one item of budget authority.
Each special message transmitted under subsection (a) shall specify, with respect to the item of budget authority (or part thereof) proposed by the message to be rescinded, the matters referred to in paragraphs (1) through (5) of section 1012(a).
Each special message transmitted under subsection (a) shall be accompanied by a draft bill or joint resolution that would, if enacted, rescind the budget authority proposed to be rescinded.
Procedures.-- ``(1)(A) On the day on which a special message proposing to rescind an item of budget authority is transmitted to the House of Representatives and the Senate under subsection (a), the draft bill or joint resolution accompanying such special message shall be introduced (by request) by the majority leader of the House of the Congress in which the appropriation Act providing the budget authority originated.
If such House is not in session on the day on which a special message is transmitted, the draft bill or joint resolution shall be introduced in such House, as provided in the preceding sentence, on the first day thereafter on which such House is in session.
A draft bill or joint resolution introduced in the House of Representatives or the Senate pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be referred to the Committee on Appropriations of such House.
The committee shall report the bill or joint resolution without substantive revision (and with or without recommendation) not later than 20 calendar days of continuous session of the Congress after the date on which the bill or joint resolution is introduced.
A committee failing to report a bill or joint resolution within the 20-day period referred to in the preceding sentence shall be automatically discharged from consideration of the bill or joint resolution, and the bill or joint resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
A vote on final passage of a bill or joint resolution introduced in a House of the Congress pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be taken on or before the close of the 30th calendar day of continuous session of the Congress after the date of the introduction of the bill or joint resolution in such House.
If the bill or joint resolution is agreed to, the Clerk of the House of Representatives (in the case of a bill or joint resolution agreed to in the House of Representatives) or the Secretary of the Senate (in the case of a bill or joint resolution agreed to in the Senate) shall cause the bill or joint resolution to be engrossed, certified, and transmitted to the other House of the Congress on the same calendar day on which the bill or joint resolution is agreed to.
(A) A bill or joint resolution transmitted to the House of Representatives or the Senate pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) shall be referred to the Committee on Appropriations of such House.
The committee shall report the bill or joint resolution without substantive revision (and with or without recommendation) not later than 20 calendar days of continuous session of the Congress after the bill or joint resolution is transmitted to such House.
A committee failing to report the bill or joint resolution within the 20-day period referred to in the preceding sentence shall be automatically discharged from consideration of the bill or joint resolution, and the bill or joint resolution shall be placed upon the appropriate calendar.
A vote on final passage of a bill or joint resolution transmitted to a House of the Congress pursuant to subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) shall be taken on or before the close of the 30th calendar day of continuous session of the Congress after the date on which the bill or joint resolution is transmitted to such House.
If the bill or joint resolution is agreed to in such House, the Clerk of the House of Representatives (in the case of a bill or joint resolution agreed to in the House of Representatives) or the Secretary of the Senate (in the case of a bill or joint resolution agreed to in the Senate) shall cause the engrossed bill or joint resolution to be returned to the House in which the bill or joint resolution originated, together with a statement of the action taken by the House acting under this paragraph.
(A) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a bill or joint resolution under this section shall be highly privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the House of Representatives on a bill or joint resolution under this section shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill or joint resolution.
A motion further to limit debate shall not be debatable.
It shall not be in order to move to recommit a bill or joint resolution under this section or to move to reconsider the vote by which the bill or joint resolution is agreed to or disagreed to.
Motions to postpone, made in the House of Representatives with respect to the consideration of a bill or joint resolution under this section, and motions to proceed to the consideration of other business, shall be decided without debate.
All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a bill or joint resolution under this section shall be decided without debate.
Except to the extent specifically provided in the preceding provisions of this subsection, consideration of a bill or joint resolution under this section shall be governed by the Rules of the House of Representatives applicable to other bills and joint resolutions in similar circumstances.
(A) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of a bill or joint resolution under this section shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the Senate on a bill or joint resolution under this section, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a bill or joint resolution under this section shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill or joint resolution, except that in the event the manager of the bill or joint resolution is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a bill or joint resolution, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
A motion in the Senate to further limit debate on a bill or joint resolution under this section is not debatable.
A motion to recommit a bill or joint resolution under this section is not in order.
Amendments Prohibited.--No amendment to a bill or joint resolution considered under this section shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate.
No motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House, nor shall it be in order in either House for the Presiding Officer to entertain a request to suspend the application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
Requirement to Make Available for Obligation.--Any item of budget authority proposed to be rescinded in a special message transmitted to the Congress in accordance with subsection (a) shall be made available for obligation unless, not more than 60 days after the transmittal of the special message, both Houses of the Congress have agreed to the bill or joint resolution accompanying such special message.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term-- ``(1) `item' means any numerically expressed amount of budget authority set forth in an appropriation bill; ``(2) `appropriation bill' means any general or special appropriation bill, and any bill or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations; and ``(3) `appropriation Act' means any appropriation bill that has been approved by the President and become law.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1011(5) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended-- (A) by striking out ``1012, and'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1012, the 20-day periods referred to in paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(A) of section 1013(c), the 60-day period referred to in section 1013(e) and''; (B) by striking out ``1012 during'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1012 or 1013 during''; (C) by striking out ``of 45'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``of the applicable number of''; and (D) by striking out ``45-day period referred to in paragraph (3) of this section and in section 1012'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``period or periods of time applicable under such section''.
(A) Section 1011 of such Act is further amended-- (i) in paragraph (4) by striking out ``1013'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1014''; and (ii) in paragraph (5)-- (I) by striking out ``1016'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1017''; and (II) by striking out ``1017(b)(1)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1018(b)(1)''.
Section 1012 of such Act is amended-- (i) by striking out ``1012 or 1013'' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``1012, 1013, or 1014''; (ii) in subsection (b)(1) by striking out ``1012'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1012 or 1013''; (iii) in subsection (b)(2) by striking out ``1013'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1014''; and (iv) in subsection (e)(2)-- (I) by striking out ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), (II) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C), (III) by striking out ``1013'' in subparagraph (C) (as so redesignated), and (IV) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) he has transmitted a special message under section 1013 with respect to a proposed rescission; and''.
Section 1015 of such Act is amended by striking out ``1012 or 1013'' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``1012, 1013, or 1014''.
Section 1016 of such Act is amended by striking out ``or 1013(b)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``, 1013(e), or 1014(b)''.
Section 1012(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply to any item of budget authority proposed by the President to be rescinded under this section that the President has also proposed to rescind under section 1013 and with respect to which the 60-day period referred to in subsection (e) of such section has not expired.''.
The table of sections for subpart B of title X of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended-- (A) by redesignating the items relating to sections 1013 through 1017 as items relating to sections 1014 through 1018; and (B) by inserting after the item relating to section 1012 the following new item: ``Sec.
Expedited consideration of certain proposed rescissions.''.
The amendments made by this section shall apply to items of budget authority (as defined in subsection (f)(1) of section 1013 of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974, as added by section 2 of this Act) provided by appropriation Acts (as defined in subsection (f)(3) of such section) that become law after the date of the enactment of this Act.