EXPANSION OF AUTHORITY OF UNITED STATES NAVAL POSTGRADUATE SCHOOL TO ADMIT CIVILIAN STUDENTS.
Admission on Space-Available Basis.--Section 7047 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Admission of civilians ``(a) Admission Pursuant to Reciprocal Agreement.--With the approval of the Secretary of the Navy, the Superintendent of the Naval Postgraduate School may enter into an agreement with an accredited institution of higher education (or a consortium of such institutions) to permit a student described in subsection (c) who is enrolled at an institution of higher education that is a party to the agreement to receive instruction at the Naval Postgraduate School on a tuition-free basis.
In exchange for the admission of the student under this subsection, the institution of higher education shall be required to permit an officer of the armed forces to attend, on a tuition-free basis, courses offered by that institution corresponding in length to the instruction provided to the student at the Naval Postgraduate School.
Admission on Space-Available Basis.--With the approval of the Secretary of the Navy, the Superintendent may permit a student described in subsection (c) who is enrolled at an institution of higher education that is a party to an agreement under subsection (a) to receive instruction at the Naval Postgraduate School on a cost- reimbursable, space-available basis.
The Superintendent may also permit other persons to receive instruction at the Naval Postgraduate School on a cost-reimbursable, space-available basis if the Superintendent determines that the person would benefit from the instruction provided at the school.
Eligible Students.--A student enrolled at an institution of higher education may be admitted to the Naval Postgraduate School under subsection (a) or (b) if-- ``(1) the student is a citizen of the United States, is lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States, or is lawfully admitted to the United States for the purpose of pursuing a course of study at an institution of higher education; and ``(2) the Superintendent determines that the student has an interest in a field of study designated by the Superintendent as related to naval warfare and national security or other activities of the Naval Postgraduate School.
Retention of Funds Collected.--Amounts collected under subsection (b) to reimburse the Naval Postgraduate School for the costs of providing instruction to students or other persons permitted to attend the Naval Postgraduate School under such subsection shall be credited as an addition to the appropriation supporting the maintenance and operation of the Naval Postgraduate School.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents at the beginning of chapter 605 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out the item relating to section 7047 and inserting in lieu thereof the following new item: ``7047.
AUTHORITY OF UNITED STATES AIR FORCE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY TO ADMIT CIVILIAN STUDENTS.
Admission of Civilians.--Chapter 901 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 9314 the following new section: ``Sec.
United States Air Force Institute of Technology: admission of civilians ``(a) Admission Pursuant to Reciprocal Agreement.--With the approval of the Secretary of the Air Force through the Commandant of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology (AFIT), the Commandant may enter into agreements with accredited institutions of higher education (or consortia of such institutions) to permit a student described in subsection (c) who is enrolled at an institution of higher education that is a party to such an agreement to receive instruction at the United States Air Force Institute of Technology on the basis of the agreement.
Admission on a Fee-for-Service, Space-Available Basis.--With the approval of the Secretary of the Air Force through the AFIT Commandant, the Commandant may permit a student described in subsection (c) who is enrolled at an institution of higher education that is a party to an agreement under subsection (a) to receive instruction at the United States Air Force Institute of Technology on a fee-for- service, space-available basis.
The Commandant may also permit other persons to receive instruction at the institute on a fee-for-service, space-available basis if the Commandant determines that the person or the Federal Government would benefit from the instruction provided at the institute and that comparable instruction is not reasonably and expeditiously available through civilian schools.
Eligible Students.--A student enrolled at an institution of higher education may be admitted to the United States Air Force Institute of Technology under subsection (a) or (b) if-- ``(1) the student is a citizen of the United States, is lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States, or is lawfully admitted to the United States for the purpose of pursuing a course of study at an institution of higher education; and ``(2) the Commandant determines that the student has an interest in a field of study designated by the Commandant as related to the activities of the institute.
Retention of Funds Collected.--Amounts collected under subsection (b) to reimburse the United States Air Force Institute of Technology for the costs of providing instruction to students or other persons permitted to attend the institute under such subsection shall be credited as an addition to the appropriation supporting the maintenance and operation of the institute.''.
Clerical Amendments.--(1) The heading of section 9314 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
United States Air Force Institute of Technology: degrees and civilian faculty''.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 901 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking out the item relating to section 9314(a) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new items: ``9314.
United States Air Force Institute of Technology: degrees and civilian faculty.
United States Air Force Institute of Technology: admission of civilians.