SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
In General.--This Act may be cited as the ``Access to Emergency Medical Services Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--BIPARTISAN COMMISSION ON ACCESS TO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES Sec.
Report on ways to promote the effective delivery of emergency medical services.
TITLE II--ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN PHYSICIANS' SERVICES Sec.
Additional payments for certain physicians' services.
TITLE III--HOSPITAL AND CRITICAL ACCESS REPORTING ON CERTAIN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT INFORMATION Sec.
Requirement to report information on certain emergency department information as condition of Medicare participation.
TITLE I--BIPARTISAN COMMISSION ON ACCESS TO EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SEC.
There is established the United States Bipartisan Commission on Access to Emergency Medical Services (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall perform the following duties: (1) Identify and examine factors (including factors described in subsection (b)) in the health care delivery, financing, and legal systems that affect the effective delivery of screening and stabilization services furnished in hospitals that have emergency departments pursuant to EMTALA.
Make specific recommendations to Congress, taking into account the considerations specified in subsection (c), with respect to Federal programs, policies, and financing needed to assure the availability of such screening and stabilization services and the coordination of State, local, and Federal programs for responding to disasters and emergencies.
Factors Considered.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1), the Commission shall examine at least the following factors, with respect to emergency departments of hospitals: (1) Crowded conditions in such emergency departments and the practice of boarding patients who require admission, or have already been admitted, to a hospital for extended periods in such departments and in the areas adjacent to such departments.
With respect to individuals who present at such emergency departments for the treatment of emergency medical conditions, any barriers that impede access within a reasonable period of time to screening, stabilization services, and other appropriate consultations of physicians listed by the hospital on its list of on-call physicians.
The potential legal and financial liability of health care professionals and providers with respect to services required to be furnished to patients under EMTALA, relating to the requirement of emergency departments to screen and appropriately treat or transfer individuals presenting themselves at the departments with emergency medical conditions and women in labor.
Considerations in Recommendations.--In making recommendations under subsection (a)(2), the Commission shall consider the following: (1) Any changes in Federal law that would be necessary to promote the effective delivery of emergency medical services.
The amount and sources of Federal funds to finance such changes.
The advantages and disadvantages of alternative approaches to protecting health care professionals and providers from legal and financial liability with respect to services required to be furnished to individuals under EMTALA, such as establishing Federal limits on such liability-- (A) that would supersede any conflicting State law related to such liability; and (B) which may be the same as appropriate limits on liability that are established for public health professionals.
The most efficient and effective manner of coordinating State, local, and Federal programs for responding to disasters and emergencies, with respect to the delivery of emergency medical services.
Definitions.--For purposes of this title: (1) Hospital.--The term ``hospital'' has the meaning given such term in section 1867(e)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395dd)).
EMTALA.--The term ``EMTALA'' means section 1867 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395dd).
Appointment.-- (1) The Commission shall be composed of 18 members, who shall be appointed not later than the date that is 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and in accordance with paragraph (2), as follows: (A) The President shall appoint six members of the Commission.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives, after consultation with the minority leader of the House of Representatives, shall appoint six members of the Commission.
The majority leader of the Senate, after consultation with the minority leader of the Senate, shall appoint six members of the Commission.
Of the members appointed under paragraph (1), the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the majority leader of the Senate shall each appoint as members of the commission-- (A) two individuals who represent physicians and other health care professionals who provide emergency medical services; (B) two individuals who are elected or appointed Federal, State, or local officials and who are involved in issues and programs related to the provision of emergency medical services; and (C) two health care consumer advocates.
Chairman and Vice Chairmen.--The Commission shall elect a chairman and four vice chairmen from among its members.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made and shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
Compensation.-- (1) In general.--Members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--All members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for travel and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses during the performance of duties of the Commission while away from their homes or regular places of business, in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A quorum shall consist of nine members of the Commission, except that six or more members may conduct a hearing under section 105(a).
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of its chairman or a majority of its members.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and determine the compensation of such staff as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Such appointments and compensation may be made without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, that govern appointments in the competitive services, and the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title that relate to classifications and the General Schedule pay rates.
Consultants.--The Commission may procure such temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission, in accordance with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
Detail of Federal Employees.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, without reimbursement to the agency, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of such personnel.
Hearings and Other Activities.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission determines necessary to carry out its duties.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Studies by Government Accountability Office.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Comptroller General shall conduct such studies or investigations as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Cost Estimates by Congressional Budget Office.-- (1) Duty to provide requested estimates.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall provide to the Commission such cost estimates as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Reimbursement for development of cost estimates.--The Commission shall reimburse the Director of the Congressional Budget Office for expenses relating to the employment in the office of the Director of such additional staff as may be necessary for the Director to comply with requests by the Commission under paragraph (1).
Technical Assistance.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Use of Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies, and shall, for purposes of the frank, be considered a commission of Congress as described in section 3215 of title 39, United States Code.
Obtaining Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out its duties, if the information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States Code.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Acceptance of Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts and donations of services or property.
Printing.--For purposes of costs relating to printing and binding, including the costs of personnel detailed from the Government Printing Office, the Commission shall be deemed to be a committee of the Congress.
REPORT ON WAYS TO PROMOTE THE EFFECTIVE DELIVERY OF EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
Not later than the date that is 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to Congress a report containing its findings and recommendations described in section 102(a), including recommendations to remove any identified barriers to the effective delivery of emergency medical services in the United States and detailed recommendations for appropriate legislative initiatives to remove such barriers.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of the report required in section 106.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this title.
TITLE II--ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN PHYSICIANS' SERVICES SEC.
ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS FOR CERTAIN PHYSICIANS' SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1833 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(v) Additional Payment for Physicians' Services Furnished Pursuant to EMTALA.--In the case of physicians' services furnished on or after January 1, 2008, in the emergency department of a hospital (as defined in subsection (e)(5) of section 1867) pursuant to such section to an individual covered under the insurance program established under this part, in addition to the amount of payment that will otherwise be made for such services under this part, there shall also be paid to the physician or other person involved (or in the cases described in subparagraph (A) of section 1842(b)(6), to an employer or other entity involved) from the Federal Supplementary Trust Fund an amount equal to 10 percent of the payment amount for the services under this part (determined without regard to any additional amounts paid under subsection (m) or (u)).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2008.
TITLE III--HOSPITAL AND CRITICAL ACCESS REPORTING ON CERTAIN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT INFORMATION SEC.
REQUIREMENT TO REPORT INFORMATION ON CERTAIN EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT INFORMATION AS CONDITION OF MEDICARE PARTICIPATION.
Requirement.--Section 1866(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395cc(a)(1)) is amended- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (U); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (V) and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (V) the following new subparagraph: ``(W) in the case of a hospital (as defined in section 1867(e)(5)) that has an emergency department, to report to the Secretary information in accordance with subsection (k)(1).''.
Reporting by Hospitals and Critical Access Hospitals of Emergency Department Information and Public Disclosure of Such Information.--Section 1866 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395cc) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Reporting by Hospitals of Emergency Department Information and Public Disclosure of Such Information.-- ``(1) Annual reporting requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(1)(W), a hospital (as defined in section 1867(e)(5)) that has an emergency department shall annually submit to the Secretary a report (beginning for 2008) on the average admission period described in subparagraph (B) at such hospital for such year.
Admission period described.--The admission period described in this subparagraph, with respect to a hospital (as so defined) that has an emergency department, is the period beginning at the time of admission to the hospital of a patient who presents to such department and ending at the time at which such patient arrives at the patient's definitive inpatient destination in the hospital, which may not be an area immediately outside of the emergency department used to temporarily hold such patient until such patient arrives at the definitive inpatient destination.
Administration.--Each report submitted under subparagraph (A) shall be in such form and manner and at such time as the Secretary specifies.
Public disclosure of information.--The Secretary shall promptly post, on the official public Internet site of the Department of Health and Human Services, the information reported under paragraph (1)(A).
Such information shall be set forth in a manner that promotes comparison of such information among hospitals.''.
Designation of Emergency Department Quality Measure.-- (1) In general.--Not later than January 1, 2010, based on information reported under section 1866(k)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act for 2008 and after consultation with experts in emergency care, inpatient critical care, hospital operations management, nursing, and other relevant disciplines, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall-- (A) determine whether or not a quality measure described in paragraph (2) should be developed for purposes of inclusion as a performance measure required to be reported by hospitals under section 1886(b)(3)(B)(viii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(b)(3)(B)(viii)) or section 1833(t)(17) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l(t)(17)), as added by section 109(a)(1)(B) of the Medicare Improvements and Extension Act of 2006 (division B of Public Law 109-432), as appropriate, to improve the quality of health care delivery; and (B) in the case that the Secretary determines under subparagraph (A) that such a quality measure should be developed for such inclusion, develop such a quality measure and specify the date on which such quality measure will be so included for purposes of such sections.
Quality measure described.--The quality measure described in this paragraph, with respect to a hospital for a year, is a measure with respect to the average admission period described in section 1866(k)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act, as added by subsection (b) at such hospital for such year.