This Act may be cited as the ``Money Follows the Person Act of 2003''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) In his budget for fiscal year 2004, President George W. Bush proposes a ``Money Follows the Person'' rebalancing initiative under the medicaid program to help States rebalance their long-term services support systems more evenly between institutional and community-based services.
The President, by proposing this initiative, and Congress, recognize that States have not fully developed the systems needed to create a more equitable balance between institutional and community-based services spending under the medicaid program.
While a few States have been successful at achieving this balance, nationally, approximately 70 percent of the medicaid funding spent for long-term services is devoted to nursing facilities and intermediate care facilities for the mentally retarded.
Only 30 percent of such funding is spent for community-based services.
As a result, there are often long waiting lists for community-based services and supports.
In the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Congress found that individuals with disabilities continue to encounter various forms of discrimination, including segregation, and that discrimination persists in such critical areas as institutionalization.
In 1999, the Supreme Court held in Olmstead v. LC (527 United States Reports 581 (1999)) that needless institutionalization is discrimination under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, noting that institutional placement of people who can be served in the community ``perpetuates unwarranted assumptions that persons so isolated are unworthy of participating in community life.''
The Court further found that ``confinement in an institution severely diminishes the everyday life activities of individuals, including family relations, social contacts, work options, economic independence, educational advancement, and cultural enrichment.''
Additional resources would be helpful for assisting States in rebalancing their long-term services support system and complying with the Olmstead decision.
AUTHORITY TO CONDUCT MEDICAID DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Community-based services and supports.--The term ``community-based services and supports'' means, with respect to a State, any items or services that are an allowable expenditure for medical assistance under the State medicaid program, or under a waiver of such program and that the State determines would allow an individual to live in the community.
Individual's representative; representative.--The terms ``individual's representative'' and ``representative'' mean a parent, family member, guardian, advocate, or authorized representative of an individual.
Medicaid long-term care facility.--The term ``medicaid long-term care facility'' means a hospital, nursing facility, or intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded, as such terms are defined for purposes of the medicaid program.
Medicaid program.--The term ``medicaid program'' means the State medical assistance program established under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' has the meaning given such term for purposes of the medicaid program.
State Application.--A State may apply to the Secretary for approval to conduct a demonstration project under which the State shall provide community-based services and supports to individuals-- (1) who are eligible for medical assistance under the medicaid program; (2) who are residing in a medicaid long-term care facility and who have resided in such facility for at least 90 days; and (3) with respect to whom there has been a determination that but for the provision of community-based services and supports, the individuals would continue to require the level of care provided in a medicaid long-term care facility.
Requirements.--A State is not eligible to conduct a demonstration project under this section unless the State certifies the following: (1) With respect to any individual provided community-based services and supports under the demonstration project, the State shall continue to provide community-based services and supports to the individual under the medicaid program (and at the State's Federal medical assistance percentage (as defined in section 1905(b) of the Social Security Act) reimbursement rate), for as long as the individual remains eligible for medical assistance under the State medicaid program and continues to require such services and supports, beginning with the month that begins after the 12-month period in which the individual is provided such services and supports under the demonstration project.
The State shall allow an individual participating in the demonstration project (or, as appropriate, the individual's representative) to choose the setting in which the individual desires to receives the community-based services and supports provided under the project.
The State shall identify and educate individuals residing in a medicaid long-term care facility who are eligible to participate in the demonstration project (and, as appropriate the individual's representative) about the opportunity for the individual to receive community-based services and supports under the demonstration project.
The State shall ensure that each individual identified in accordance with paragraph (3) (and, as appropriate, the individual's representative), has the opportunity, information, and tools to make an informed choice regarding whether to transition to the community through participation in the demonstration project or to remain in the medicaid long-term care facility.
The State shall maintain an adequate quality improvement system so that individuals participating in the demonstration project receive adequate services and supports.
The State shall conduct a process for public participation in the design and development of the demonstration project and such process shall include the participation of individuals with disabilities, elderly individuals, or individuals with chronic conditions who are part of the target populations to be served by the demonstration project, and the representatives of such individuals.
The Federal funds paid to a State pursuant to this section shall only supplement, and shall not supplant, the level of State funds expended for providing community-based services and supports for individuals under the State medicaid program as of the date the State application to conduct a demonstration project under this section is approved.
Approval of Demonstration Projects.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall conduct a competitive application process with respect to applications submitted under subsection (b) (taking into consideration the preferences provided under paragraph (2)) that meet the requirements of subsection (c).
In determining whether to approve such an application, the Secretary may waive the requirement of-- (A) section 1902(a)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(1)) to allow for sub-State demonstrations; (B) section 1902(a)(10)(B) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(B)) with respect to comparability; and (C) section 1902(a)(10)(C)(i)(III) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(C)(i)(III)) with respect to income and resource limitations.
Preference for certain applications.--In approving applications to conduct demonstration projects under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to approving applications that indicate that the State shall do the following: (A) Design and implement enduring improvements in community-based long-term services support systems within the State to enable individuals with disabilities to live and participate in community life, particularly with respect to those practices that will ensure the successful transition of such individuals from medicaid long-term care facilities into the community.
Design and implement a long-term services support system in the State that prevents individuals from entering medicaid long-term care facilities in order to gain access to community-based services and supports.
Engage in systemic reform activities within the State to rebalance expenditures for long-term services under the State medicaid program through administrative actions that reduce reliance on institutional forms of service and build up more community capacity.
Address the needs of populations that have been underserved with respect to the availability of community services or involve individuals or entities that have not previously participated in the efforts of the State to increase access to community-based services.
Actively engage in collaboration between public housing agencies, the State medicaid agency, independent living centers, and other agencies and entities in order to coordinate strategies for obtaining community integrated housing and supportive services for an individual who participates in the demonstration project, both with respect to the period during which such individual participates in the project and after the individual's participation in the project concludes, in order to enable the individual to continue to reside in the community.
Develop and implement policies and procedures that allow the State medicaid agency to administratively transfer or integrate funds from the State budget accounts that are obligated for expenditures for medicaid long-term care facilities to other accounts for obligation for the provision of community-based services and supports (including accounts related to the provision of such services under a waiver approved under section 1915 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396n)) when an individual transitions from residing in such a facility to residing in the community.
Payments to States.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall pay to each State with a demonstration project approved under this section an amount for each quarter occurring during the period described in paragraph (2) equal to 100 percent of the State's expenditures in the quarter for providing community-based services and supports to individuals participating in the demonstration project.
Period described.--The period described in this paragraph is the 12-month period that begins on the date on which an individual first receives community-based services and supports under the demonstration project in a setting that is not a medicaid long-term care facility and is selected by the individual.
Reports.-- (1) In general.--Each State conducting a demonstration project under this section shall submit a report to the Secretary that, in addition to such other requirements as the Secretary may require, includes information regarding-- (A) the types of community-based services and supports provided under the demonstration project; (B) the number of individuals served under the project; (C) the expenditures for, and savings resulting from, conducting the project; and (D) to the extent applicable, the changes in State's long-term services system developed in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d)(2).
Uniform data format.--In requiring information under this subsection, the Secretary shall develop a uniform data format to be used by States in the collection and submission of data in the State report required under paragraph (1).
Evaluations.--The Secretary shall use an amount, not to exceed one-half of 1 percent of the amount appropriated under subsection (h) for each fiscal year, to provide, directly or through contract-- (1) for the evaluation of the demonstration projects conducted under this section; (2) technical assistance to States concerning the development or implementation of such projects; and (3) for the collection of the data described in subsection (f)(1).
Funding.-- (1) In general.--There is appropriated to carry out this section $350,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Availability.--Funds appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year shall remain available until expended, but not later than September 30, 2008.