This Act may be cited as the ``Iraq Claims Act of 1994''.
Certain Claims Within the Jurisdiction of UN Commission.--The United States Commission is authorized to receive and determine the validity and amounts of any claims referred to it by the Secretary of State with respect to which the United States has received lump-sum payments from the United Nations Commission.
Other Claims Against Iraq.--The United States Commission is authorized to receive and determine the validity and amounts of any claims by nationals of the United States against the Government of Iraq that are determined by the Secretary of State to be outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations Commission.
Decision Rules.--In deciding claims under subsection (a) or (b), the United States Commission shall apply, in the following order-- (1) in the case of claims under subsection (a), relevant decisions of the United Nations Security Council and the United Nations Commission; (2) applicable substantive law, including international law; and (3) applicable principles of justice and equity.
Priority Claims.--Before deciding any other claim against the Government of Iraq, the United States Commission shall, to the extent practical, decide all pending non-commercial claims of members of the United States Armed Forces and other individuals arising out of Iraq's invasion and occupation of Kuwait or out of the 1987 attack on the USS Stark.
Applicability of International Claims Settlement Act.--To the extent they are not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, the provisions of title I (other than section 2(c)) and title VII of the International Claims Settlement Act of 1949 (22 United States Code 1621-1627 and 1645-1645o) shall apply with respect to claims under this Act and the funds established pursuant to sections 3(a) and 3(c).
UN Commission Claims Funds.--The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to establish in the Treasury of the United States one or more funds (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``UN Commission Claims Funds'') for payment of claims under section 2(a).
The Secretary of the Treasury shall cover into the UN Commission Claims Funds such amounts as are allocated to such funds pursuant to subsection (b)(1).
Allocation of Funds Received From UN Commission.--The Secretary of State shall allocate funds received by the United States from the United Nations Commission, in the manner the Secretary determines appropriate, between-- (1) the UN Commission Claims Funds; and (2) funds established under the authority of the paragraphs under the heading ``TRUST FUNDS'' in the Act entitled ``An Act making appropriations for the diplomatic and consular service for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and ninety-seven'', approved February 26, 1896 (22 United States Code 2668a).
Iraq Claims Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to establish in the Treasury of the United States a fund (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Iraq Claims Fund'') for payment of claims under section 2(b).
The Secretary of the Treasury shall cover into the Iraq Claims Fund such amounts as are allocated to such fund pursuant to subsection (d).
Allocation of Proceeds From Iraqi Asset Liquidatation.-- (1) In general.--The President shall allocate funds resulting from the liquidation of assets pursuant to section 4 in the manner the President determines appropriate between the Iraq Claims Fund and such other accounts as are appropriate for the payment of claims of the United States Government, subject to the limitation in paragraph (2).
Limitation.--The amount allocated pursuant to this subsection for payment of claims of the United States Government may not exceed the amount which bears the same relation to the amount allocated to the Iraq Claims Fund pursuant to this subsection as the sum of all certified claims of the United States Government bears to the sum of all claims certified under section 2(b).
As used in this paragraph, the term ``certified claims of the United States Government'' means those claims of the United States Government which are determined by the Secretary of State to be outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations Commission and which are determined to be valid, and whose amount has been certified, under such procedures as the President may establish.
AUTHORITY TO VEST IRAQI ASSETS.
The President is authorized to vest and liquidate as much of the assets of the Government of Iraq in the United States that have been blocked pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) as may be necessary to satisfy claims under section 2(b), as well as claims of the United States Government against Iraq which are determined by the Secretary of State to be outside the jurisdiction of the United Nations Commission.
REIMBURSEMENT FOR EXPENSES OF PROGRAM ADMINISTRATION.
Deduction.--In order to reimburse the United States Government for its expenses in administering the Iraq claims program and this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall deduct-- (1) 1.5 percent of any amount covered into the UN Commission Claims Funds or the Iraq Claims Fund; and (2) 1.5 percent of any amount the Secretary of State receives from the United Nations Commission that is not covered into the UN Commission Claims Funds and that is not in payment of a claim of the United States Government.
Deductions Treated as Miscellaneous Receipts.--Amounts deducted pursuant to subsection (a) shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
In General.--The United States Commission shall certify to the Secretary of the Treasury each award made pursuant to section 2.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall make payment, out of the appropriate fund established pursuant to section 3(a) or 3(c), in the following order of priority to the extent funds are available in such fund: (1) Payment of $10,000 or the principal amount of the award, whichever is less.
For each claim that has priority under section 2(d), payment of a further $90,000 toward the unpaid balance of the principal amount of the award.
Payments from time to time in ratable proportions on account of the unpaid balance of the principal amounts of all awards according to the proportions which the unpaid balance of such awards bear to the total amount in the appropriate claims fund that is available for distribution at the time such payments are made.
After payment has been made of the principal amounts of all such awards, pro rata payments on account of accrued interest on such awards as bear interest.
After payment has been made in full of all the awards payable out of a fund established pursuant to section 3(a) or 3(c), any funds remaining in that fund shall be transferred to the other claims fund established pursuant to section 3(a) or 3(c), except that any funds received by the United States from the United Nations Commission shall be so transferred only to the extent not inconsistent with requirements of the United Nations Commission.
Unsatisfied Claims.--Payment of any award made pursuant to this Act shall not extinguish any unsatisfied claim, or be construed to have divested any claimant, or the United States on his or her behalf, of any rights against the Government of Iraq with respect to any unsatisfied claim.
Transfer to Commission.--The head of any Executive agency may transfer or otherwise make available to the United States Commission such records and documents relating to claims authorized to be adjudicated by this Act as may be required by the United States Commission in carrying out its functions under this Act.
Public Disclosure.--Section 552 of title 5 of the United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Freedom of Information Act'') shall not apply with respect to records that, as determined by the Secretary of State, are required under the rules and decisions of the United Nations Commission to be withheld from public disclosure.
STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS; DISPOSITION OF UNUSED FUNDS.
Statute of Limitations.--Any demand or claim for payment on account of an award that is certified under the Iraq claims program shall be barred one year after the publication date of the notice required by subsection (b).
Publication of Notice.-- (1) In general.--At the end of the 9-year period specified in paragraph (2), the Secretary of the Treasury shall publish a notice in the Federal Register detailing the statute of limitations provided for in subsection (a) and identifying the claim numbers and awardee names of unpaid certified claims.
Publication date.--The notice required by paragraph (1) shall be published 9 years after the latter of-- (A) the last date on which the Secretary of the Treasury covers into any of the UN Commission Claims Funds, or into any fund described in section 3(b)(2), amounts allocated to that fund pursuant to section 3(b); or (B) the last date on which the Secretary of the Treasury covers into the Iraq Claims Fund amounts allocated to that fund pursuant to section 3(d).
Disposition of Unused Funds.-- (1) Disposition.--At the end of the 2-year period beginning on the publication date of the notice required by subsection (b), the Secretary of the Treasury shall dispose of all unused funds described in paragraph (2) as follows: (A) By making additional payments pursuant to the Iraq claims program.
By depositing in the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts any such funds that are not used for such additional payments.
Unused funds.--The unused funds referred to in paragraph (1) are-- (A) any remaining balance in the UN Commission Claims Funds or in the Iraq Claims Fund, including the amount of any unpaid certified claim under the Iraq claims program; and (B) any remaining balance in any fund referred to in section 3(b)(2) to the extent such balance reflects amounts deposited pursuant to that section.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``Government of Iraq'' includes agencies, instrumentalities, and controlled entities (including public sector enterprises) of that government; (2) the term ``Executive agency'' has the meaning given that term by section 105 of title 5, United States Code; (3) the term ``Iraq claims program'' means the claims whose adjudication is provided for in this Act and any other claims that are within the jurisdiction of the United Nations Commission; (4) the term ``United Nations Commission'' means the United Nations Compensation Commission established pursuant to United Nations Security Council Resolution 687 (1991); and (5) the term ``United States Commission'' means the Foreign Claims Settlement Commission of the United States.
ADMISSION TO THE UNITED STATES AS REFUGEES OF INDIVIDUALS WHO SERVED IN THE ARMED FORCES OF IRAQ DURING THE PERSIAN GULF CONFLICT.
Statement of Policy.--It is the sense of the Congress that individuals who have served in the armed forces of Iraq during the Persian Gulf conflict should not be admitted to the United States as refugees under the Immigration and Nationality Act except in exceptional circumstances.
Persian Gulf Conflict Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Persian Gulf conflict'' means the period beginning on August 2, 1990, and ending on February 27, 1991.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) Saddam Hussein has been condemned by the international community for his unwillingness to take the steps necessary to provide for the basic humanitarian needs of the Iraqi people; (2) dire shortages of food, medicine, and basic medical supplies (including insulin, anesthetics, and antibiotics) have resulted in a continuing humanitarian disaster in Iraq, including massive human suffering and the death of hundreds of thousands of innocent Iraqi civilians during the past 4 years; (3) this humanitarian tragedy is occurring throughout Iraq; (4) the United States has a long history of providing humanitarian assistance to alleviate human suffering in many parts of the world; and (5) the United States Agency for International Development has the authority under chapter 9 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (relating to international disaster assistance) and other provisions of law to provide assistance to address humanitarian needs throughout Iraq.
Statement of Congressional Policy.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the United States should immediately provide additional humanitarian assistance, particularly medicine and medical supplies, to alleviate the humanitarian disaster throughout Iraq; (2) such assistance should be provided through independent nongovernmental organizations and through international organizations so that this desperately need assistance can reach all areas of need, in particular those outside the United Nations protected areas; and (3) the costs of such assistance should be reimbursed from any available Iraqi resources, including the Iraqi assets that have been blocked pursuant the International Emergency Economic Powers Act so long as such reimbursement does not reduce the amount paid on those priority claims of members of the United States Armed Forces and others described in section 2(d) of this Act and does not delay payment on those claims.
PROSECUTION OF SADDAM HUSSEIN AND OTHER MEMBERS OF THE IRAQI GOVERNMENT FOR WAR CRIMES.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) as ordered by Saddam Hussein, Iraq engaged in unprovoked aggression in its conquest and occupation of Kuwait; (2) the Iraqi occupation force treated Kuwaiti citizens barbarously; (3) Saddam Hussein used American and European civilians as ``human shields'' in an attempt to protect strategic facilities throughout Iraq and directed that captured American and allied prisoners of war be used for the same purposes; (4) Saddam Hussein ordered his military to launch missile attacks against innocent civilians in Israel and Saudi Arabia; and (5) former President Bush and President Clinton rightly warned Saddam Hussein and Iraqi Government officials that they would be held responsible for any abuses they have caused.
Establishment of Tribunal.--The Congress urges the President to request the United Nations to establish a tribunal to charge Saddam Hussein and other responsible Iraqi Government officials for war crimes, acts of aggression, and crimes against humanity they have committed.
Passed the House of Representatives April 28, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.