SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``O&C Lands Protection Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Modifications to sales authority.
Modifications to exchange authority.
Administration of lands acquired in geographic area; redesignation of public domain lands.
O&C Lands Protection Fund.
Timber and surface resource revenue distribution.
Relationship to Umpqua Land Exchange authority.
For purposes of this Act: (1) O&C lands.--The term ``O&C lands'' means the lands that revested in the United States under the Act of June 9, 1916 (Chapter 137; 39 United States Statutes at Large 218), and that are managed by the Secretary of the Interior through the Bureau of Land Management under the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes).
Public domain lands.--The term ``public domain lands'' has the meaning given the term ``public lands'' in the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et seq.
), other than O&C lands.
Geographic area.--The term ``geographic area'' means all lands in the State of Oregon located within the boundaries of the Bureau of Land Management's Medford District, Roseburg District, Eugene District, Salem District, Coos Bay District, and Klamath Resource Area of the Lakeview District, as those districts and that resource area were constituted on January 1, 1998.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
MODIFICATIONS TO SALES AUTHORITY.
Limitations on Acreage Sold.--Subject to subsection (b)(2) and notwithstanding any other sales authority of the Secretary, the Secretary may not sell more than a maximum combined total of 640 acres of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area during each fiscal year, and may not sell more than a maximum combined total of 6,400 acres of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area during any continuous 15-year period beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
Limitation on Lands To Be Sold.--Notwithstanding any other sales authority of the Secretary, the Secretary may not sell any O&C lands or public domain lands within the geographic area that are located within-- (1) a congressionally designated wilderness area; (2) the national wild and scenic river system; or (3) an area designated by the Secretary under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) to be an area of critical environmental concern.
Price; Procedures.--Notwithstanding any other sales authority of the Secretary, the Secretary shall make all sales of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area-- (1) at a price that is not less than the fair market value of the lands sold, as determined by the Secretary; and (2) by competitive public bidding, under procedures established by the Secretary that ensure adequate notice to owners of land adjoining the land proposed for sale, to local governments in the vicinity of the land proposed for sale, and to the State of Oregon.
Acquisition of Lands.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may use amounts in the O&C Lands Protection Fund established by section 6 to purchase from willing sellers non-Federal lands located within the geographic area that are contiguous to other O&C lands or public domain lands.
Priority of lands for acquisition.--In acquiring lands under this subsection, the Secretary may give first priority to satisfying the need, if any, for acquisition of lands adjacent to streams, riparian areas, or wildlife corridors within the geographic area that are used by species that are listed as threatened species or endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
MODIFICATIONS TO EXCHANGE AUTHORITY.
Limitations on Acreage Exchanged.--Subject to the provisions of this section and notwithstanding any other exchange authority of the Secretary, the Secretary may not exchange out of Federal ownership more than a maximum combined total of 480 acres of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area during each fiscal year for non-Federal lands referred to in subsection (c), and may not exchange out of Federal ownership more than a maximum combined total of 4,800 acres of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area during any continuous 15-year period beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
Limitation on Federal Lands To Be Exchanged.--Notwithstanding any other exchange authority of the Secretary, the Secretary may not exchange out of Federal ownership any O&C lands or public domain lands within the geographic area that are located within-- (1) a congressionally designated wilderness area; (2) the national wild and scenic river system; or (3) an area designated by the Secretary under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) to be an area of critical environmental concern.
Limitation on Non-Federal Lands Acquired.--Notwithstanding any other exchange authority of the Secretary, all non-Federal lands acquired by the Secretary in an exchange for O&C lands or public domain lands within the geographic area must be located within the geographic area and contiguous with other O&C lands or public domain lands.
Procedures.--The Secretary shall establish procedures for exchanges out of Federal ownership of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area, including-- (1) procedures for valuing the lands exchanged; and (2) procedures that ensure adequate notice of proposed exchanges to local governments in the vicinity of all lands to be exchanged and to the State of Oregon.
Requirements for Value of Exchanged Lands.--Notwithstanding any other exchange authority of the Secretary, the Secretary may not exchange out of Federal ownership O&C lands or public domain lands within the geographic area if the fair market value of the lands received by the United States in the exchange-- (1) is less than 75 percent of the fair market value of the lands conveyed by the United States in the exchange; or (2) is greater than 125 percent of the fair market value of the lands conveyed by the United States in the exchange.
Equalization Payments.--The Secretary, as necessary to ensure that the total value received by the United States in an exchange out of Federal ownership of O&C lands or public domain lands within the geographic area is equal to the total value conveyed by the United States in the exchange, shall-- (1) use amounts in the O&C Lands Protection Fund established by section 3(c) to pay, to the person from whom lands are acquired by the United States in the exchange, the difference between the value of the lands received by the United States and the value of the lands conveyed by the United States; or (2) require that person to pay that difference to the United States.
ADMINISTRATION OF LANDS ACQUIRED IN GEOGRAPHIC AREA; REDESIGNATION OF PUBLIC DOMAIN LANDS.
Acquired Lands.--All lands in the geographic area acquired by the United States after the date of the enactment of this Act shall for all purposes have the same status, be administered, and be otherwise treated as lands that were revested in the United States pursuant to the Act of June 9, 1916 (Chapter 137; 39 United States Statutes at Large 218) and managed by the Secretary under the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181 et sequentes).
Redesignation of Public Domain Lands for Treatment as Revested Lands.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary-- (A) before the 180th day of each fiscal year, shall determine whether there has been a net reduction in the number of acres of O&C lands during the preceding fiscal year as a result of disposal of lands by the United States under any provision of law; and (B) if the Secretary determines that there was such a reduction, shall within 90 days after that determination designate a number of acres of public domain lands within the geographic area, equal to the number of acres of that reduction, for treatment as O&C lands under paragraph (3).
Lands designated.--The Secretary shall designate under paragraph (1)(B) public domain lands that are stocked with timber in volumes per acre that are not less than the average volumes per acre found on the O&C lands and public domain lands in the geographic area that were disposed of during the preceding fiscal year.
Treatment of redesignated lands.--Lands designated by the Secretary under paragraph (1)(B) shall for all purposes have the same status, be administered, and be otherwise treated as lands that were revested in the United States pursuant to the Act of June 9, 1916 (Chapter 136; 39 United States Statutes at Large 218) and managed by the Secretary under the Act of August 28, 1937 (43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes).
Notification of congress.--The Secretary shall, before the end of each fiscal year, notify the Congress of each redesignation of lands under this subsection in that fiscal year.
O&C LANDS PROTECTION FUND.
In General.--There is established in the Treasury a separate account to be known as the O&C Lands Protection Fund.
Contents.--The O&C Lands Protection Fund shall consist of all amounts received by the United States as-- (1) proceeds from sales of O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area; or (2) equalization payments under section 4(f).
Use.--Amounts in the O&C Lands Protection Fund shall be available to the Secretary, without fiscal year limitation or further appropriation, solely for-- (1) purchasing lands under section 3(d); (2) making equalization payments under section 4(f); and (3) making distributions under subsection (d) of this section.
Distributions From Fund.--All amounts in the O&C Lands Protection Fund on January 1, 2013, and on January 1 of each 15th year thereafter, shall be distributed as follows: (1) 5 percent shall be paid to the State of Oregon as provided in the fifth proposition of section 4 of the Act of February 14, 1859 (Chapter XXXIII; 11 United States Statutes at Large 383), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
50 percent shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury of the United States.
45 percent shall be distributed to the 18 Oregon counties within which the geographic area is located, by payment to each of the counties in the same proportion as payments are made from the Oregon and California land-grant fund under section 201(a) of the Act of August 28, 1937 (Chapter 876; 43 United States Code 1181f(a)).
TIMBER AND SURFACE RESOURCE REVENUE DISTRIBUTION.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all revenue received by the United States as proceeds from the sale of timber and other surface resources from public domain lands within the geographic area shall be distributed as follows: (1) 5 percent shall be paid to the State of Oregon as provided in section 3 of the Act of July 31, 1947 (Chapter 406; 30 United States Code 603), popularly known as the Materials Act of 1947, and the fifth proposition of section 4 of the Act of February 14, 1859 (Chapter XXXIII; 11 United States Statutes at Large 383), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
50 percent shall be deposited in the Salmon Habitat Restoration Fund established by subsection (b).
45 percent shall be distributed to the 18 Oregon counties within which the geographic area is located, by payment to each of the counties in the same proportion as payments are made from the Oregon and California land-grant fund under section 201(a) of the Act of August 28, 1937 (Chapter 876; 43 United States Code 1181f(a)).
Salmon Habitat Restoration.-- (1) In general.--There is established in the Treasury as a separate account the Salmon Habitat Restoration Fund, which shall consist of amounts deposited under subsection (a)(2).
Use.--Amounts in the account shall be available to the Secretary without fiscal year limitation or further appropriation-- (A) solely for the purpose of stream habitat restoration and fisheries enhancement projects on O&C lands and public domain lands within the geographic area, for so long as any species of salmonoid fish within the geographic area is listed as a threatened species or endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes); and (B) thereafter for use within the geographic area for maintenance and development of campgrounds and other recreation areas on O&C lands or public domain lands.
RELATIONSHIP TO UMPQUA LAND EXCHANGE AUTHORITY.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit the authority of the Secretary to continue to study and implement the Umpqua Land Exchange Project in accordance with the provisions set forth in the Memorandum of Understanding between the Umpqua Land Exchange Project and the Association of O&C Counties dated February 19, 1998.