This Act may be cited as the ``Buddy System Computer Education Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to award demonstration grants to develop and expand public-private partnership programs which extend the learning experience, via computers, beyond the classroom environment in order to-- (1) enhance learning by providing students with the technological tools and guidance necessary to develop skills critical to educational growth and success in the workplace, including-- (A) mastery of fundamental computer technology and applications; (B) improved written and visual communication skills; (C) improved critical thinking and problem solving abilities; and (D) improved ability to work in a collaborative, teamwork-driven environment; (2) encourage parental involvement in education and total family use and understanding of computers and telecommunications through at-home applications; and (3) established foundations for life-long learning through improvement in education skills and student motivation and attitudes.
Grant Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct a program of awarding a grant to each of 3 States to enable such States to create a computer-based education project in accordance with the requirements of section 4 for children--(A) grades 4-6; and or (B) middle or junior high school.
Award basis.--The Secretary shall award grants under this Act on a competitive basis.
Preference.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Secretary shall give preference to applications-- (A) from States that have a demonstrated ability or commitment to computer-based technology education; and (B) describing projects that serve school districts which serve a large number or percentage of economically disadvantaged students.
Site Selection and Project Implementation.--Site selection and implementation of the computer-based education projects assisted under this Act shall take place not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Each State receiving a grant to conduct a computer-based education project under this Act shall-- (1) provide a continuous 4-year computer-based education project to--(A) consecutive groups of 4th, 5th, and 6th (if applicable) grade school students during the period commencing with each such group's entry into 4th grade and ending the summer following each such group's completion of elementary school; and or (B) consecutive groups of middle or junior high school students during the period commencing with each such group's entry into the 1st grade taught at such middle or junior high school and ending the summer following each such groups completion of the last grade taugtht at such middle or junior high school.
ensure that each student in each of the classes participating in the project shall participate in the project; (3) conduct such project in not more than 7 public schools within the State; and (4) ensure that each student participating in the project shall have access to a computer-- (A) at school during the school year; and (B) at home during the school year and summer.
Application Required.--In order to receive a grant under this Act, the chief State school officer of a State shall submit an application to the Secretary in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Such application shall include an assurance from the State educational agency that the State educational agency has made every effort to match on a dollar- for-dollar basis from private or public sources the funds received under this Act, except that no such application shall be penalized or denied assistance under this Act on the basis of the failure to provide such matching funds.
Application Period.--States shall be eligible to submit applications for assistance under this Act during a 3-month period determined by the Secretary.
Grant funds under this Act shall be used to provide hardware and software components to all sites, and training for classroom teachers as well as parents, administrators and technical personnel.
The Secretary shall evaluate the demonstration program assisted under this Act and shall report to the Congress regarding the overall effectiveness of such program.
For the purpose of this Act, the term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.
There are authorized to be appropriated $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, $7,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $5,500,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $3,500,000 for fiscal year 1997 to carry out this Act.