This Act may be cited as the ``Landmine Moratorium Extension Act of 1993''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Antipersonnel landmines, which are designed to maim and kill people, have been used indiscriminately in dramatically increasing numbers around the world.
Hundreds of thousands of noncombatant civilians, including children, have been the primary victims.
Unlike other military weapons, landmines often remain implanted and undiscovered after conflict has ended, causing massive suffering to civilian populations.
Tens of millions of landmines have been strewn in at least sixty-two countries, often making whole areas uninhabitable.
The State Department estimates there are more than ten million landmines in Afghanistan, nine million in Angola, four million in Cambodia, three million in Iraqi Kurdistan, and two million each in Somalia, Mozambique, and the former Yugoslavia.
Hundreds of thousands of landmines were used in conflicts in Central America in the 1980's.
Advanced technologies are being used to manufacture sophisticated mines which can be scattered remotely at a rate of one thousand per hour.
These mines, which are being produced by many industrialized countries, were discovered in Iraqi arsenals after the Persian Gulf War.
At least three hundred types of antipersonnel landmines have been manufactured by at least forty four countries, including the United States.
However, the United States is not a major exporter of landmines.
During the past ten years the Administration has approved ten licenses for the commercial export of antipersonnel landmines with a total value of $980,000, and the sale under the Foreign Military Sales program of one hundred nine thousand one hundred and twenty-nine antipersonnel landmines.
The United States signed, but has not ratified, the 1980 Convention on Prohibitions or Restrictions on the Use of Certain Conventional Weapons Which May Be Deemed To Be Excessively Injurious or To Have Indiscriminate Effects.
Protocol II of the Convention, otherwise known as the Landmine Protocol, prohibits the indiscriminate use of landmines.
When it signed the 1980 Convention, the United States stated: ``We believe that the Convention represents a positive step forward in efforts to minimize injury or damage to the civilian population in time of armed conflict.
Our signature of the Convention reflects the general willingness of the United States to adopt practical and reasonable provisions concerning the conduct of military operations, for the purpose of protecting noncombatants.''.
The United States also indicated that it had supported procedures to enforce compliance, which were omitted from the Convention's final draft.
The United States stated: ``The United States strongly supported proposals by other countries during the Conference to include special procedures for dealing with compliance matters, and reserves the right to propose at a later date additional procedures and remedies, should this prove necessary, to deal with such problems.''.
The lack of compliance procedures and other weaknesses have significantly undermined the effectiveness of the Landmine Protocol.
Since it entered into force on December 2, 1983, the number of civilians maimed and killed by antipersonnel landmines has multiplied.
Since the moratorium on United States sales, transfers and exports of antipersonnel landmines was signed into law on October 23, 1992, the European Parliament has issued a resolution calling for a five year moratorium on sales, transfers and exports of antipersonnel landmines, and the Government of France has announced that it has ceased all sales, transfers and exports of antipersonnel landmines.
On December 2, 1993, ten years will have elapsed since the 1980 Convention entered into force, triggering the right of any party to request a United Nations conference to review the Convention.
Amendments to the Landmine Protocol may be considered at that time.
The Government of France has made a formal request to the United Nations Secretary General for a review conference.
With necessary preparations and consultations among governments, a review conference is not expected to be convened before late 1994 or early 1995.
The United States should continue to set an example for other countries in such negotiations by extending the moratorium on sales, transfers and exports of antipersonnel landmines for an additional three years.
A moratorium of this duration would extend the current prohibition on the sale, transfer and export of antipersonnel landmines a sufficient time to take into account the results of a United Nations review conference.
It shall be the policy of the United States to seek verifiable international agreements prohibiting the sale, transfer or export, further limiting the manufacture, possession and use, and eventually, terminating manufacture, possession and use of antipersonnel landmines.
It is the sense of the Congress that the President should submit the 1980 Convention on Certain Conventional Weapons to the Senate for ratification.
Furthermore, the Administration should participate in a United Nations conference to review the Landmine Protocol, and actively seek to negotiate under United Nations auspices a modification of the Landmine Protocol, or another international agreement, to prohibit the sale, transfer or export of antipersonnel landmines, and to further limit their manufacture, possession and use.
MORATORIUM ON TRANSFERS OF ANTI-PERSONNEL LANDMINES ABROAD.
For a period of three years beginning on the date of enactment of this Act-- (1) no sale may be made or financed, no transfer may be made, and no license for export may be issued, under the Arms Export Control Act, with respect to any antipersonnel landmine; and (2) no assistance may be provided under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, with respect to the provision of any antipersonnel landmine.
For purposes of this section, the term ``antipersonnel landmine'' means-- (1) any munition placed under, on, or near the ground or other surface area, or delivered by artillery, rocket, mortar, or similar means or dropped from an aircraft and which is designed to be detonated or exploded by the presence, proximity, or contact of a person; (2) any device or material which is designed, constructed, or adapted to kill or injure and which functions unexpectedly when a person disturbs or approaches an apparently harmless object or performs an apparently safe act; and (3) any manually-emplaced munition or device designed to kill, injure, or damage and which is actuated by remote control or automatically after a lapse of time.