This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Health Care Reform Act of 1995''.
HEALTH CARE REFORM PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1704 the following new section: ``Sec.
Delivery of health care through reformed management of care ``(a) The Secretary shall conduct a program to reform the way in which the Secretary manages delivery of health care to veterans.
The program shall be carried out in accordance with this section.
(1) In carrying out the program of reformed health care under this section, the Secretary shall take appropriate action to (A) expand the capacity of the Department of Veterans Affairs to provide outpatient care to eligible veterans, and (B) allocate resources to Department facilities in such a manner as to enable such facilities in carrying out the provisions of this section to provide to veterans described in subsection (c) access to care which is reasonably similar, without regard to the State in which those veterans reside.
In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall take appropriate steps, within service-delivery areas established by the Secretary, to reduce duplication of services and to realign services and programs.
(1) During the period through September 30, 1999, the Secretary shall, for purposes of the program of reformed health care under this section, manage Department health care facilities so as to provide needed hospital care and outpatient medical treatment-- ``(A) to any veteran described in subsection (e) without regard to otherwise applicable limitations in this chapter (other than the limitations specified in section 1712(b) of this title); and ``(B) to all other veterans, subject to the limitations in this chapter.
The care and treatment described in paragraph (1) includes the provision of preventive health services and prosthetic appliances and may include home care services.
The Secretary shall, in carrying out the program, ensure that any veteran with a service-connected disability is provided all benefits to which that veteran is entitled under this chapter.
(1) The Secretary, in order to manage the provision of care and services under this section, shall coordinate care of veterans through facilities under the jurisdiction of, or under contract to, the Secretary and through referral to other appropriate providers in a veteran's community.
The Secretary, to further the provision of care and services under this section, may make such rules and regulations regarding acquisition procedures or policies as the Secretary considers appropriate to obtain needed care and services under this section.
The Secretary, in managing the provision of care and services under this section, may-- ``(A) use systems of patient prioritization, consistent with the relative priorities described in section 1712(i) of this title; and ``(B) establish a program of enrollment of eligible veterans.
The Secretary, in managing the provision of care and services under this section, shall ensure that the Department maintains its capacity to provide for the specialized treatment and rehabilitative needs of disabled veterans described in section 1710(a) of this title (including veterans with spinal cord dysfunction, blindness, and mental illness) within distinct programs or facilities of the Department that are dedicated to the specialized needs of those veterans in a manner that (A) affords those veterans reasonable access to care and services for those specialized needs, and (B) ensures that overall capacity of the Department to provide such services is not reduced below the capacity of the Department, nationwide, to provide those services as of the date of the enactment of this section.
A veteran referred to in subsection (c)(1)(A) is any veteran-- ``(1) with a compensable service-connected disability; ``(2) whose discharge or release from active military, naval, or air service was for a compensable disability that was incurred or aggravated in the line of duty; ``(3) who is in receipt of, or who, but for a suspension pursuant to section 1151 of this title (or both a suspension and the receipt of retired pay), would be entitled to disability compensation, but only to the extent that such veteran's continuing eligibility for such care is provided for in the judgment or settlement provided for in such section; ``(4) who is a former prisoner of war; ``(5) of the Mexican border period or of World War I; or ``(6) who is unable to defray the expenses of necessary care, as determined in accordance with section 1722(a) of this title.
Not later than February 1, 1999, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report on the experience of the Department in establishing and administering the program required by this section.
The report shall include any recommendations of the Secretary for legislation to expand access of eligible veterans to health care services furnished by the Department.
This section shall expire at the close of September 30, 1999.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1704 the following new item: ``1705.
Delivery of health care through reformed managment of care.''.
Deadline for Implementation.--The Secretary shall implement the program under section 1705 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), not later than October 1, 1996.
FUNDS RECOVERED FROM THIRD PARTIES.
Authorized Uses.--Section 1729 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end of paragraph (3) of subsection (g) the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Expenses of (i) establishing new outpatient clinics, (ii) altering or remodeling medical facilities to provide additional space for provision of outpatient care, and (iii) other measures as determined necessary by the Secretary to increase the number of outpatient visits provided eligible veterans through facilities of the Department or under contract arrangements.''.
Availability of Funds.--Subsection (g) of such section is further amended by striking out paragraph (4) and inserting the following: ``(4)(A) There shall be within the Fund a reserve to be available for the purposes specified in paragraph (3)(C).
Not later than December 1 of each year, there shall be set aside for the reserve amounts as provided in this paragraph.
If the amount to be set aside for the reserve for any year is less than zero, the amount added to the reserve for that year shall be zero.
Funds may be obligated under paragraph (3)(C) only to the extent of the availability of unobligated amounts in the reserve.
Amounts in the reserve shall remain available for obligation until expended.
On December 1, 1995, the amount set aside for the reserve under subparagraph (A) shall be the amount by which-- ``(i) the unobligated balance remaining in the Fund at the close of business on September 30, 1995, minus any part of such balance that the Secretary determines is necessary to defray the expenses, payments, and costs described in paragraph (3), exceeds ``(ii) $579,282,000.
On December 1, 1996, the amount set aside for the reserve under subparagraph (A) shall be the amount by which-- ``(i) the unobligated balance remaining in the Fund at the close of business on September 30, 1996, minus any part of such balance that the Secretary determines is necessary to defray the expenses, payments, and costs described in paragraph (3), exceeds ``(ii) $640,918,000.
On December 1, 1997, the amount set aside for the reserve under subparagraph (A) shall be the amount by which-- ``(i) the unobligated balance remaining in the Fund at the close of business on September 30, 1997, minus any part of such balance that the Secretary determines is necessary to defray the expenses, payments, and costs described in paragraph (3), exceeds ``(ii) $731,334,000.
On December 1, 1998, the amount set aside for the reserve under subparagraph (A) shall be the amount by which-- ``(i) the unobligated balance remaining in the Fund at the close of business on September 30, 1998, minus any part of such balance that the Secretary determines is necessary to defray the expenses, payments, and costs described in paragraph (3), exceeds ``(ii) $758,321,000.
On December 1, 1999, the amount set aside for the reserve under subparagraph (A) shall be the amount by which-- ``(i) the unobligated balance remaining in the Fund at the close of business on September 30, 1999, minus any part of such balance that the Secretary determines is necessary to defray the expenses, payments, and costs described in paragraph (3), exceeds ``(ii) $372,435,000.
Not later than January 1 of each year, there shall be deposited into the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts an amount equal to the amount of the unobligated balance remaining in the Fund at the close of business on September 30 of the preceding year minus (A) any part of such balance that the Secretary determines is necessary in order to enable the Secretary to defray, during the fiscal year in which the deposit is made, the expenses, payments, and costs described in paragraph (3), and (B) the amount in the reserve described in paragraph (4).
The Secretary shall prescribe regulations for the allocation of amounts in the reserve under paragraph (4) for the purposes stated in paragraph (3)(C).
Those regulations shall be designed to provide incentives to increase the recoveries and collections under this section.
Such regulations may provide that up to 25 percent of those amounts be made available each year directly to the medical centers, or networks of medical centers, at which such recoveries have been at above average levels.
The remainder of those funds shall be allocated by the Secretary, based on the plan developed pursuant to paragraph (7), in a manner such that funds are targeted to areas determined to have the greatest unmet need for outpatient care.
In order to promote effective planning for orderly development of needed capacity for providing outpatient care to eligible veterans, the Under Secretary for Health shall conduct an annual study to evaluate the relative need within service-delivery areas of the Department for expanding that capacity (directly or through contract arrangements).''.
Annual Report on Medical Care Cost Recovery.--Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Not later than February 1 each year, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on medical care cost recovery under this section.
The report shall include (1) the plan described in subsection (g)(7), (2) the regulations promulgated under subsection (g)(6), (3) the specific allocations made pursuant to such regulations, and (4) the actions taken by the Secretary to carry out section 2(d)(4) of the Veterans Health Care Reform Act of 1995 during the preceding fiscal year.