This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Sexual Trauma Treatment Act''.
COUNSELING AND TREATMENT FOR VETERANS WHO HAVE EXPERIENCED SEXUAL TRAUMA.
Duration of Program.--Section 1720D of title 38, United States Code, is amended in subsection (a)-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``During the period through December 31, 2001, the'' and inserting ``The''; (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``During the period referred to in paragraph (1), the'' and inserting ``The''; and (3) in paragraph (3), by striking ``, during the period through December 31, 2001,''.
Mandatory Nature of Program.--Subsection (a) of such section is further amended in paragraphs (1) and (2) by striking ``may'' and inserting ``shall''.
Provision of Treatment for Sexual Trauma.--Such subsection is further amended in paragraphs (1) and (3) by inserting ``and treatment'' after ``counseling'' each place it appears.
Determinations To Be Made by Mental Health Professionals.--Such subsection is further amended in paragraph (1) by striking ``the Secretary determines'' and inserting ``a mental health professional employed by the Department determines''.
Outreach Efforts.--Subsection (c) of such section is amended-- (1) by inserting ``and treatment'' in the first sentence and in paragraph (2) after ``counseling''; (2) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1); (3) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and (4) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph (2): ``(2) shall ensure that information about the counseling and treatment available to veterans under this section (which information shall be revised and updated not less often than every two years)-- ``(A) is made available and visibly posted at each facility of the Department; and ``(B) is advertised through public service announcements, pamphlets, billboards, and other appropriate means of communication; and''.
Persons Eligible for Counseling and Treatment.--Such section is further amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection (d): ``(d)(1) A veteran shall be eligible for counseling and treatment under this section without regard to the provisions of section 5303A of this title.
An individual who is a member of a reserve component shall be eligible for counseling and treatment under this section in the same manner as a veteran and without regard to the provisions of section 5303A of this title.
An individual who is a former member of a reserve component (but who is not a veteran within the meaning of section 101 of this title) and who was discharged or released from service as a member of a reserve component under conditions other than dishonorable shall be eligible for counseling and treatment under this section in the same manner as a veteran and without regard to the provisions of section 5303A of this title.''.
Oversight of Outreach Activities.--Not later than four months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall complete the design and updating of public service announcements, pamphlets, billboards, and other appropriate means of communication as required for implementation of paragraph (2) of section 1720D(c) of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (e)(3).
Not later than six months after that date, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives examples of the documents and other means of communication developed for compliance with that paragraph.
Report on Implementation of Sexual Trauma Treatment Program.-- Not later than 14 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the use made of the authority provided under section 1720D of title 38, United States Code, as amended by this section.
The report shall include the following with respect to activities under such section 1720D since the enactment of such section 1720D: (1) The number of persons who have sought counseling under such section 1720D.
The number of veterans who have received counseling under such section.
The number of veterans who have been referred to non- Department mental health facilities and providers in connection with sexual trauma counseling and treatment.
The number of veterans who have been determined by the Secretary to have a service-connected disease or disability resulting from sexual trauma.
REPORT ON EFFORTS TO PROVIDE VETERANS WITH INFORMATION CONCERNING SEXUAL TRAUMA COUNSELING AND TREATMENT SERVICES.
Report Required.--Not later than 14 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the congressional committees specified in subsection (b) a joint report describing in detail the collaborative efforts of the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Defense to ensure that members of the Armed Forces, upon separation from active military, naval, or air service, are provided appropriate and current information about programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs to provide counseling and treatment for sexual trauma that may have been experienced by those members while in the active military, naval, or air service, including information about eligibility requirements for, and procedures for applying for, such counseling and treatment.
The report shall include proposed recommendations from both the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense for the improvement of their collaborative efforts to provide such information.
Specified Committees.--The committees referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) The Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
The Committee on Veterans' Affairs and the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate.