This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Veterans Affairs Emergency Medical Care Act of 2002''.
AUTHORITY TO FURNISH HEALTH CARE DURING MAJOR DISASTERS AND MEDICAL EMERGENCIES.
In General.--(1) Subchapter II of chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1711 the following new section: ``Sec.
Care and services during major disasters and medical emergencies ``(a) During and immediately following a disaster or emergency referred to in subsection (b), the Secretary may furnish hospital care and medical services to individuals responding to, involved in, or otherwise affected by such disaster or emergency, as the case may be.
A disaster or emergency referred to in this subsection is any disaster or emergency as follows: ``(1) A major disaster or emergency declared by the President under the Robert B. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5121 et sequentes).
A disaster or emergency in which the National Disaster Medical System is activated.
The Secretary may furnish care and services under this section to veterans without regard to their enrollment in the system of annual patient enrollment under section 1705 of this title.
The Secretary may give a higher priority to the furnishing of care and services under this section than to the furnishing of care and services to any other group of persons eligible for care and services in medical facilities of the Department with the exception of-- ``(1) veterans with service-connected disabilities; and ``(2) members of the Armed Forces on active duty who are furnished health-care services under section 8111A of this title.
(1) The cost of any care or services furnished under this section to an officer or employee of a department or agency of the Federal Government other than the Department shall be reimbursed at such rates as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the head of such department or agency based on the cost of the care or service furnished.
Amounts received by the Department under this subsection shall be credited to the funds allotted to the Department facility that furnished the care or services concerned.
Within 60 days of the commencement of a disaster or emergency referred to in subsection (b) in which the Secretary furnishes care and services under this section (or as soon thereafter as is practicable), the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report on the Secretary's allocation of facilities and personnel in order to furnish such care and services.
The Secretary shall prescribe regulations governing the exercise of the authority of the Secretary under this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of that chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1711 the following new item: ``1711A.
Care and services during major disasters and medical emergencies.''.
Exception From Requirement for Charges for Emergency Care.-- Section 1711(b) of that title is amended by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``Except as provided in section 1711A of this title with respect to a disaster or emergency covered by that section, the Secretary''.
Members of the Armed Forces.--Subsection (a) of section 8111A of that title is amended to read as follows: ``(a)(1) During and immediately following a period of war, or a period of national emergency declared by the President or Congress that involves the use of the Armed Forces in armed conflict, the Secretary may furnish hospital care, nursing home care, and medical services to members of the Armed Forces on active duty.
(A) During and immediately following a disaster or emergency referred to in subparagraph (B), the Secretary may furnish hospital care and medical services to members of the Armed Forces on active duty responding to or involved in such disaster or emergency, as the case may be.
A disaster or emergency referred to in this subparagraph is any disaster or emergency follows: ``(i) A major disaster or emergency declared by the President under the Robert B. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5121 et sequentes).
A disaster or emergency in which the National Disaster Medical System is activated.
The Secretary may give a higher priority to the furnishing of care and services under this section than to the furnishing of care and services to any other group of persons eligible for care and services in medical facilities of the Department with the exception of veterans with service-connected disabilities.
In this section, the terms `hospital care', `nursing home care', and `medical services' have the meanings given such terms by sections 1701(5), 101(28), and 1701(6) of this title, respectively.