This Act may be cited as the ``Ultrasound Informed Consent Act''.
AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
The Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE XXX--INFORMED CONSENT ``SEC.
``In this title: ``(1) Abortion.--The term `abortion' means the intentional use or prescription of any instrument, medicine, drug, or any other substance or device or method to terminate the life of an unborn child, or to terminate the pregnancy of a woman known to be pregnant with an intention other than-- ``(A) to produce a live birth and preserve the life and health of the child after live birth; or ``(B) to remove an ectopic pregnancy, or to remove a dead unborn child who died as the result of a spontaneous abortion, accidental trauma, or a criminal assault on the pregnant female or her unborn child.
Abortion provider.--The term `abortion provider' means any person legally qualified to perform an abortion under applicable Federal and State laws.
Unborn child.--The term `unborn child' means a member of the species homo sapiens, at any stage of development prior to birth.
Woman.--The term `woman' means a female human being whether or not she has reached the age of majority.
REQUIREMENT OF INFORMED CONSENT.
Requirement of Compliance by Providers.--Any abortion provider in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, who knowingly performs any abortion, shall comply with the requirements of this title.
Performance and Review of Ultrasound.--Prior to a woman giving informed consent to having any part of an abortion performed, the physician who is to perform the abortion, or certified technician working in conjunction with the physician, shall-- ``(1) perform an obstetric ultrasound on the pregnant woman; ``(2) provide an explanation of the results of the ultrasound; ``(3) display the ultrasound images so that the pregnant woman may view them; and ``(4) provide a medical description of the ultrasound images, which shall include the dimensions of the embryo or fetus and the presence of external members and internal organs, if present and viewable.
No Requirement To View Ultrasound Images.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a woman to view the ultrasound images.
Neither the physician nor the woman shall be subject to any penalty if she refuses to look at the presented ultrasound images.
EXCEPTION FOR MEDICAL EMERGENCIES.
In General.--The provisions of section 3002 shall not apply to an abortion provider or facility in the case of a medical emergency.
Medical Emergency Defined.-- ``(1) In general.--In subsection (a), the term `medical emergency' means a condition which, in the reasonable medical judgment of the abortion provider, so complicates the medical condition of the pregnant woman that a delay in commencing an abortion procedure would impose a serious risk of causing grave and irreversible physical health damage entailing substantial impairment of a major bodily function, not including any psychological or emotional condition or function.
Reasonable medical judgment.--In paragraph (1), the term `reasonable medical judgment' means a medical judgment that would be made by a reasonably prudent physician, knowledgeable about the case and the treatment possibilities with respect to the medical conditions involved.
Certification.-- ``(1) In general.--Upon a determination by an abortion provider under subsection (a) that a medical emergency exists with respect to a pregnant woman, such provider shall certify the specific medical conditions that constitute the emergency and include such certification in the medical file of the pregnant woman.
False statements.--An abortion provider who willfully falsifies a certification under paragraph (1) shall be subject to all the penalties provided for under section 3004 for failure to comply with this title.
PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO COMPLY.
In General.--An abortion provider who willfully fails to comply with the provisions of this title shall be subject to civil penalties in accordance with this section in an appropriate Federal court.
Commencement of Action.--The Attorney General may commence a civil action under this section.
First Offense.--Upon a finding by a court that a respondent in an action commenced under this section has knowingly violated a provision of this title, the court shall notify the appropriate State medical licensing authority and shall assess a civil penalty against the respondent in an amount not to exceed $100,000.
Second and Subsequent Offenses.--Upon a finding by a court that the respondent in an action commenced under this section has knowingly violated a provision of this title and the respondent has been found to have knowingly violated a provision of this title on a prior occasion, the court shall notify the appropriate State medical licensing authority and shall assess a civil penalty against the respondent in an amount not to exceed $250,000.
Private Right of Action.--A pregnant woman upon whom an abortion has been performed in violation of this title, or the parent or legal guardian of such a woman if she is an unemancipated minor, may commence a civil action against the abortion provider for any willful violation of this title for actual and punitive damages.''.
Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act shall be construed to preempt any provision of State law to the extent that such State law establishes, implements, or continues in effect greater disclosure requirements regarding abortion than those provided under this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
The provisions of this Act shall be severable.
If any provision of this Act, or any application thereof, is found unconstitutional, that finding shall not affect any provision or application of the Act not so adjudicated.