This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Economic Impact Notification Act''.
REQUIREMENT FOR DISTRICT ECONOMIC IMPACT STATEMENT FOR FEDERAL AGENCIES TRANSFERRING EMPLOYEES OUT OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
Requirement Described.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (b), if a Federal agency proposes to carry out any program or activity that would result in the transfer of employees whose official station or agency is located in the District of Columbia to another station or agency that is not located in the District of Columbia for permanent duty, the agency shall-- (A) prepare a District of Columbia economic impact statement; (B) submit the statement to the Committee on the District of Columbia of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate not less than 12 months before such program or activity is scheduled to begin; (C) submit the statement to the National Capital Planning Commission, Congress, the Administrator of General Services, the Mayor of the District of Columbia, and the Council of the District of Columbia; and (D) publish the statement in the Federal Register.
Treatment of contracts to construct or lease facilities.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the entering into of a contract to construct a new facility or to lease an existing facility as the official station or agency of employees of a Federal agency shall be considered a program or activity carried out by the agency.
Exception for Transfers of Small Number of Employees.-- Subsection (a) shall not apply in the case of a program or activity of an agency if the number of employees transferred as a result of the program or activity to a station or agency that is not located in the District of Columbia would be less than 50.
Federal Agency Defined.--The term ``Federal agency'' means an executive department (as defined in section 101 of title 5, United States Code).
CONGRESSIONAL APPROVAL OF PROJECTS.
Congressional Approval of Projects.--Except as provided in subsection (b), a Federal agency required to submit a District of Columbia economic impact statement under section 2 may not carry out the program or activity that is the subject of the statement unless Congress enacts legislation specifically approving the program or activity.
Exception for National Emergencies.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to any program or activity if the Federal agency submits a certification to the Committees described in subsection (c) that an emergency exists which requires that the program or activity be carried out in the national security interest of the United States.
The certification shall include a description of the emergency circumstances which necessitate the carrying out of the program or activity and a discussion of the national security interests involved.
Committees to Which Legislation Referred.--Legislation described in subsection (a) shall be referred to the Committee on the District of Columbia of the House of Representatives or the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate by the Speaker of the House of Representatives or the President of the Senate (as the case may be).
In General.--A District of Columbia economic impact statement prepared by an agency under section 2 shall describe the adverse effects of the program or activity that is the subject of the statement on the economy of and employment in the District of Columbia, and shall include the following: (1) A socioeconomic analysis of the effects of the program or activity on the District of Columbia.
A projection of the effect of the program or activity on unemployment in the District of Columbia, including unemployment among employees of other Federal and non-Federal entities who may be affected by the program or activity.
An analysis of the impact of the program or activity on the number of people residing in the District of Columbia and the resulting impact on the District's tax base, the housing market in the District, businesses in the District, and the demand for services provided by the District government.
Consultation With Local Officials.--In preparing a District of Columbia economic impact statement under section 2, a Federal agency shall consult with the Mayor of the District of Columbia, the Council of the District of Columbia, and the National Capital Planning Commission.
The Mayor of the District of Columbia and the Chairman of the Council of the District of Columbia shall provide the Federal agency with comments on the statement, and the Federal agency shall include such comments in the circulation of the statement.
REQUIRING HEADQUARTERS FUNCTIONS OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT AGENCIES TO BE LOCATED IN DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
In General.--The headquarters functions of each executive department shall be carried out in the District of Columbia.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) the term ``executive department'' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of title 5, United States Code; and (2) the term ``headquarters functions'' means any function or activity of the Federal Government relating to the administration of national laws, the formulation of policy directives and regulations, the needs of the President for consultation with officers of executive departments, or any other activities necessary for the efficient functioning of the Federal Government, and includes related administrative and support services.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall apply to functions carried out on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, except that nothing in such subsection shall be construed to require an executive department carrying out such functions at a location other than the District of Columbia before such date to carry out such functions in the District of Columbia after such date.
Except as provided in section 5(c), the requirements of this Act shall apply to functions, programs, or activities of Federal agencies that are carried out during any fiscal year beginning after September 30, 1994.