This Act may be cited as the ``Domestic Workforce Protection Act''.
COMMERCE DEPARTMENT RENAMED AS DEPARTMENT OF TRADE AND COMMERCE.
In General.--The Department of Commerce is hereby redesignated the Department of Trade and Commerce, and the Secretary of Commerce or any other official of the Department of Commerce is hereby redesignated the Secretary or official, as appropriate, of Trade and Commerce.
Reference to Department, Secretary, etc.
of Commerce Deemed Reference to Department, Secretary, etc.
of Trade and Commerce.--Any reference to the Department of Commerce, the Secretary of Commerce, or any other official of the Department of Commerce in any law, rule, regulation, certificate, directive, instruction, or other official paper in force on the effective date of this Act shall be deemed to refer and apply to the Department of Trade and Commerce or the Secretary of Trade and Commerce, respectively.
TRANSFER OF THE OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE TO WITHIN THE DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE AND TRADE.
Section 141(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2171(a)) is amended by striking ``Executive Office of the President'' and inserting ``Department of Trade and Commerce''.
TERMINATION OF DEFERRAL TO ELIMINATE TAX BENEFITS FOR OFFSHORE PRODUCTION.
General Rule.--Paragraph (1) of section 951(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amounts included in gross income of United States shareholders) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon in subparagraph (A)(iii); (2) by striking ``959(a)(2).''
in subparagraph (B) and inserting ``959(a)(2); and''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(C) the amount determined under section 956A with respect to such shareholder for such year (but only to the extent not excluded from gross income under section 959(a)(3)).''.
Amount of Inclusion.--Subpart F of part III of subchapter N of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 956 the following new section: ``SEC.
EARNINGS OF CONTROLLED FOREIGN CORPORATIONS.
General Rule.--In the case of any controlled foreign corporation, the amount determined under this section with respect to any United States shareholder for any taxable year is the lesser of-- ``(1) the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) such shareholder's pro rata share of the amount of the controlled foreign corporation's assets for such taxable year, over ``(B) the amount of earnings and profits described in section 959(c)(1)(B) with respect to such shareholder, or ``(2) such shareholder's pro rata share of the applicable earnings of such controlled foreign corporation determined after the application of section 951(a)(1)(B).
Applicable Earnings.--For purposes of this section, the term `applicable earnings' means, with respect to any controlled foreign corporation, the sum of-- ``(1) the amount referred to in section 316(a)(1) to the extent such amount was accumulated in taxable years beginning after February 29, 2004, and ``(2) the amount referred to in section 316(a)(2), reduced by distributions made during the taxable year and reduced by the earnings and profits described in section 959(c)(1) to the extent that the earnings and profits so described were accumulated in taxable years beginning after February 29, 2004.
Special Rule Where Corporation Ceases To Be Controlled Foreign Corporation During Taxable Year-.--If any foreign corporation ceases to be a controlled foreign corporation during any taxable year-- ``(1) the determination of any United States shareholder's pro rata share shall be made on the basis of stock owned (within the meaning of section 958(a)) by such shareholder on the last day during the taxable year on which the foreign corporation is a controlled foreign corporation, ``(2) the amount of such corporation's assets for such taxable year shall be determined by only taking into account quarters ending on or before such last day, and ``(3) in determining applicable earnings, the amount taken into account by reason of being described in paragraph (2) of section 316(a) shall be the portion of the amount so described which is allocable (on a pro rata basis) to the part of such year during which the corporation is a controlled foreign corporation.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations to prevent the avoidance of the provisions of this section through reorganizations or otherwise.''.
Previously Taxed Income Rules.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 959 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exclusion from gross income of previously taxed earnings and profits) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1), by adding ``or'' at the end of paragraph (2), and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) such amounts would, but for this subsection, be included under section 951(a)(1)(C) in the gross income of,''.
Allocation rules.-- (A) Subsection (a) of section 959 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``paragraph (2)'' in the last sentence and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''.
Section 959(f) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (i) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section-- ``(A) amounts that would be included under subparagraph (B) of section 951(a)(1) (determined without regard to this section) shall be treated as attributable first to earnings described in subsection (c)(2), and then to earnings described in subsection (c)(3), and ``(B) amounts that would be included under subparagraph (C) of section 951(a)(1) (determined without regard to this section) shall be treated as attributable first to earnings described in subsection (c)(2) to the extent the earnings so described were accumulated in taxable years beginning after February 29, 2004, and then to earnings described in subsection (c)(3).
''; and (ii) by striking ``section 951(a)(1)(B)'' in paragraph (2) and inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C) of section 951(a)(1)''.
Conforming amendment.--Subsection (b) of section 989 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``section 951(a)(1)(B)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (B) or (C) of section 951(a)(1)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after February 29, 2004, and to taxable years of United States shareholders in which or with which such taxable years of foreign corporations end.
Technical and Conforming Changes.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and to the Committee on Finance of the Senate, a draft of any technical and conforming changes in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that are necessary to reflect throughout such Code the changes in the substantive provisions of law made by this section.
DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTIONS FOR CERTAIN OFFSHORE ROYALTY PAYMENTS.
In General.--Part IX of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CERTAIN OFFSHORE ROYALTY PAYMENTS.
In General.--In the case of a corporation, no deduction shall be allowed for the payment of a royalty to an affiliated entity organized and operated outside the United States in exchange for the use of rights to a copyrighted or trademarked product if those rights were transferred by the corporation or a related party to that entity.
Exception.--Subsection (a) does not apply to the payment of a royalty if the taxpayer establishes, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that-- ``(1) the transfer of the rights to the entity was for a sound business reason (other than the reduction of liability for tax under this chapter); and ``(2) the amounts paid or incurred for such royalty payments are reasonable under the circumstances.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The part analysis for such part is amended by adding at the end the following: ``280I.
Certain offshore royalty payments.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
INCREASE IN AUTHORITY OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE TO THWART USE OF TAX HAVENS BY CORPORATIONS.
In General.--Subchapter B of chapter 78 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
AUTHORITY TO FRUSTRATE USE OF CORPORATE TAX HAVENS.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized-- ``(1) to deny any otherwise allowable deduction or credit under chapter 1, ``(2) to recharacterize, reallocate, and resource income, ``(3) to recharacterize transactions, and ``(4) to disregard any transaction, trust, or other legal entity, determined by the Secretary to be necessary to prevent the use by a corporation of a tax haven to avoid liability for tax under this chapter.
Tax Haven Defined.--In this section, the term `tax haven' means any country that meets the tax haven criteria established by the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The subchapter analysis for subchapter B of chapter 78 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``6725.
Authority to frustrate use of corporate tax havens.''.
ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL FOR TRADE.
Position Established.--The Attorney General shall appoint an Assistant Attorney General for Trade.
Duties.--The Assistant Attorney General for Trade shall-- (1) investigate anticompetitive conduct by foreign companies that has an adverse impact on the economy of the United States (including manufacturing, agriculture, and employment) or the global competitiveness of United States companies; (2) investigate violations of international trade agreements to which the United States is a party that have an adverse impact on the economy of the United States (including manufacturing, agriculture, and employment) or the global competitiveness of United States companies and take appropriate action to seek redress or punishment for those violations; and (3) investigate and initiate appropriate action against other activities throughout the world that have an adverse impact on the economy of the United States (including manufacturing, agriculture, and employment) or the global competitiveness of United States companies.
Authority Is in Addition to Other Authorities.--The authority granted to the Assistant Attorney General for Trade by this section is in addition to, and not in derogation or in lieu of, any authority provided by law to any other officer or agency of the United States charged with enforcement of the trade laws of the United States or of international agreements to which the United States is a party.
Compensation.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``(10)'' in the item relating to Assistant Attorney General and inserting ``(11)''.
EMPLOYMENT OF ADDITIONAL CUSTOMS INSPECTORS FOR ILLEGAL TRANSSHIPMENTS OF TEXTILES.
The Secretary of Homeland Security shall hire, train, and deploy 1,000 customs agents in addition to the number of customs agents otherwise authorized by law or otherwise employed by the Department of Homeland Security for the purpose of detecting and preventing illegal transshipments of textiles to avoid textile import quotas and in violation of trade agreements to which the United States is a party.
INCREASED DOMESTIC PRODUCTION OF NATIONAL DEFENSE CRITICAL GOODS.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Homeland Security, and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall develop a program to encourage and support increased domestic production of goods and products that are essential or critical to national security in order to decrease the United States' dependence upon imports of such goods and products.
Support Program.--The Secretary of Commerce shall implement the program developed under subsection (a) to the maximum extent feasible through existing programs, including programs administered by the Small Business Administration.
The Secretary shall transmit to the Congress a report, within 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, describing the program and making such recommendations, including legislative recommendations, as the Secretary deems necessary for expanding the scope or improving the efficacy of the program.
The Secretary may submit the report in both classified and redacted form.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce such sums as may be necessary to carry out the program.
SENSE OF THE SENATE CONCERNING APPROPRIATIONS FOR CERTAIN PROGRAMS.
It is the sense of the Senate that the Congress should appropriate the full amount authorized by law to carry out the Regional Centers for the Transfer of Manufacturing Technology program under section 25 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k) and the Advanced Technology Program authorized by section 28 of that Act (15 United States Code 278n).
TRANSFER OF INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION FUNCTIONS.
Abolishment of ITC.--Effective on the first day of the seventh month beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the United States International Trade Commission established by section 330 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1330) as in effect on the last day of the sixth month beginning after the date of enactment of this Act is abolished.
Transfer of Functions.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all functions that on the last day of the sixth month beginning after the date of enactment of this Act are authorized to be performed by the United States International Trade Commission are transferred to the Department of Commerce effective on the first day of the seventh month beginning after the date of enactment of this Act and shall be performed by the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Import Administration.
Determination of Certain Functions.--If necessary, the Office of Management and Budget shall make any determination of the functions that are transferred under this section.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce, shall make such determinations as may be necessary with regard to the functions, offices, or portions thereof transferred by this Act, and make such additional incidental dispositions of personnel, assets, liabilities, grants, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds held, used, arising from, available to, or to be made available in connection with such functions, offices, or portions thereof, as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
The Director shall provide for the termination of the affairs of all entities terminated by this Act and, in consultation with the Administrator, for such further measures and dispositions as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this Act.