RETURN TO OPERATIONAL STATUS.
The Secretary of Energy (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall immediately discontinue the shutdown of the Fast Flux Test Facility (in this Act referred to as the ``Facility''), and take action necessary to begin returning the Facility to operational status.
To the extent possible, the technical staff shall be retained, and all documents, materials, spare parts, components and capabilities shall be preserved.
The Facility shall be maintained in operation by the Secretary for at least 20 years, and for so much longer as it remains capable of performing missions established for it under section 2.
Task Force.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a task force, to be composed of one individual each selected by-- (A) the National Academy of Sciences; (B) the American Physical Society; (C) the American Nuclear Society; (D) the College of Nuclear Physicians; and (E) the Nuclear Engineering Department Heads Organization.
Duties.--The task force established under paragraph (1) shall, within 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, transmit a report to the Congress that establishes a ranked list of missions for the Facility.
Such list shall be established in consultation with the operating contractor of the Facility, taking into consideration the widest possible range of potential uses, both governmental and nongovernmental, for the Facility.
Such uses shall include the following: (A) Reestablishing world leadership in beneficial nuclear technology and nuclear medicine.
The production of medical and other isotopes for use or sale by Federal or non-Federal entities.
The production of tritium needed to maintain the safety and reliability of our defense stockpile.
Irradiation services to support research and commercial objectives.
Demonstration programs to verify fast reactor capability to convert radioactive waste or weapons materials into a safer form.
Materials testing and physics research.
Service as a training center.
The production of steam to be used or sold by Federal or non-Federal entities, and for the testing of steam generators.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the task force shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Implementation.--The Secretary shall implement the recommendations of the task force as missions of the Facility.
The Secretary may enter into agreements with domestic and foreign entities for participation of such entities in the missions of the Facility.
Any contract entered into by the Secretary after the date of the enactment of this Act for the operation of the Facility shall include provisions to-- (1) ensure that all operations and experiments meet applicable safety requirements and acceptance criteria; (2) provide necessary support services to the non-Federal entities that have entered into agreements pursuant to section 3; (3) provide indemnification pursuant to section 170d.
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2210(d)); (4) indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the contractor from and against all liability, including liability for legal costs, relating to any preexisting conditions at any part of the Facility.
indemnify, protect, and hold harmless the contractor from and against all liability to third parties (including liability for legal costs and for claims for personal injury, illness, property damage, and consequential damages) for negligence arising out of the contractor's performance under the contract, unless such liability was caused by conduct of the contractor which was grossly negligent or which constituted intentional misconduct; and (6) provide for indemnification of subcontractors as described in paragraphs (3), (4), and (5).
EXEMPTION FROM NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION REGULATION.
No activities of the Facility or the operating contractor thereof shall be subject to licensing or other regulation by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
FAST FLUX TEST FACILITY FUND.
There shall be established in the Treasury a separate fund to be known as the ``Fast Flux Test Facility Fund'', which shall include all appropriations made for the Facility and all funds received for the sale of products or services of the Facility or under agreements entered into under section 3.
Amounts in such Fund shall be available, to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, for the activities of the Facility.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for the activities of the Facility and of the task force established under section 2(a)(1) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.