CLASS SIZE DEMONSTRATION GRANTS.
Subpart 3 of part D of title V of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1109 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``Subpart 3--Class Size Demonstration Grants ``SEC.
``It is the purpose of this subpart to provide grants to State educational agencies to enable such agencies to determine the benefits, in various school settings, of reducing class size on the educational performance of students and on classroom management and organization.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to State educational agencies to pay the Federal share of the costs of conducting demonstration projects that demonstrate methods of reducing class size that may provide information meaningful to other State educational agencies and local educational agencies.
Federal share.--The Federal share shall be 50 percent.
Reservation.--The Secretary may reserve not more than 5 percent of the amount appropriated under section 565A for each fiscal year to carry out the activities described in section 565.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary shall make grants to State educational agencies on the basis of-- ``(1) the need and the ability of a State educational agency to reduce the class size of an elementary school or secondary school served by such agency; ``(2) the ability of a State educational agency to furnish the non-Federal share of the costs of the demonstration project for which assistance is sought; ``(3) the ability of a State educational agency to continue the project for which assistance is sought after the termination of Federal financial assistance under this subpart; and ``(4) the degree to which a State educational agency demonstrates in the application submitted pursuant to section 564 consultation in program implementation and design with parents, teachers, school administrators, and local teacher organizations, where applicable.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this subpart, the Secretary shall give priority to demonstration projects that involve at-risk students in the earliest grades, including educationally or economically disadvantaged students, students with disabilities, and limited English proficient students.
Grants Must Supplement Other Funds.--A State educational agency shall use the Federal funds received under this subpart to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local funds available to the State educational agency to carry out the purpose of this subpart.
Annual Competition.--In each fiscal year, the Secretary shall announce the factors to be examined in a demonstration project assisted under this subpart.
Such factors may include-- ``(1) the magnitude of the reduction in class size to be achieved; ``(2) the level of education in which the demonstration projects shall occur; ``(3) the form of the instructional strategy to be demonstrated; and ``(4) the duration of the project.
Random Techniques and Appropriate Comparison Groups.-- Demonstration projects assisted under this subpart shall be designed to utilize randomized techniques or appropriate comparison groups.
In General.--In order to receive a grant under this subpart, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary that is responsive to the announcement described in section 563(a), at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Duration.--The Secretary shall encourage State educational agencies to submit applications under this subpart for a period of 5 years.
Contents.--Each application submitted under subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) a description of the objectives to be attained with the grant funds and the manner in which the grant funds will be used to reduce class size; ``(2) a description of the steps to be taken to achieve target class sizes, including, where applicable, the acquisition of additional teaching personnel and classroom space; ``(3) a statement of the methods for the collection of data necessary for the evaluation of the impact of class size reduction programs on student achievement; ``(4) an assurance that the State educational agency will pay, from non-Federal sources, the non-Federal share of the costs of the demonstration project for which assistance is sought; and ``(5) such additional assurances as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Sufficient Size and Scope Required.--The Secretary shall award grants under this subpart only to State educational agencies submitting applications which described projects of sufficient size and scope to contribute to carrying out the purpose of this subpart.
National Evaluation.--The Secretary shall conduct a national evaluation of the demonstration projects assisted under this subpart to determine the costs incurred in achieving the reduction in class size and the effects of the reductions on results, such as student performance in the affected subjects or grades, attendance, discipline, classroom organization, management, and teacher satisfaction and retention.
Cooperation.--Each State educational agency receiving a grant under this subpart shall cooperate in the national evaluation described in subsection (a) and shall provide such information to the Secretary as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Reports.--The Secretary shall report to Congress on the results of the evaluation conducted under subsection (a).
Dissemination.--The Secretary shall widely disseminate information about the results of the class size demonstration projects assisted under this subpart.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subpart $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 and each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.''.
PRIVATE SECTOR FUNDING FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT BY NASA RELATING TO AIRCRAFT PERFORMANCE.
The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration may not carry out research and development activities relating to the performance of aircraft (including supersonic aircraft and subsonic aircraft) unless the Administrator receives payment in full for such activities from the private sector.