This Act may be cited as the ``Travel and Tourism Promotion Act of 2001''.
TITLE I--TAX PROVISIONS SEC.
CONSUMER TRAVEL TAX CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable personal credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and inserting after section 34 the following: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified consumer travel expenses which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Maximum Credit.--The credit allowed to a taxpayer under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed $500 ($1000, in the case of a joint return), reduced by the amount of credit allowed under subsection (a) for all preceding taxable years.
Qualified Consumer Travel Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified consumer travel expenses' means reasonable expenses in connection with a qualifying personal trip for-- ``(A) travel by aircraft, rail, watercraft, or commercial motor vehicle, and ``(B) lodging while away from home at any commercial lodging facility.
Such term does not include expenses for meals, entertainment, amusement, or recreation.
Qualifying personal trip.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualifying personal trip' means leisure travel within the United States which is taken on or after October 1, 2001, and before January 1, 2003.
Only personal travel included.--Such term shall not include travel if, without regard to this section, any expenses in connection with such travel are deductible in connection with a trade or business or activity for the production of income.
United states.--The term `United States' includes the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and a possession of the United States (as defined in section 936).
Commercial lodging facility.--The term `commercial lodging facility' includes any hotel, motel, resort, rooming house, or campground ``(d) Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of credit to dependents.--No credit shall be allowed under this section to any individual with respect to whom a deduction under section 151 is allowable to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Expenses must be substantiated.--No credit shall be allowed by subsection (a) unless the taxpayer substantiates by adequate records or by sufficient evidence corroborating the taxpayer's own statement the amount of the expenses described in subsection (c)(1).
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any expense for which credit is allowed under this section.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``, or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid on or after the date of enactment of this Act, and before January 1, 2003.
TITLE II--TRAVEL AND TOURISM PROMOTION BUREAU SEC.
UNITED STATES TRAVEL AND TOURISM PROMOTION BUREAU.
Establishment.--There is established in the Department of Commerce a United States Travel and Tourism Promotion Bureau (in this title referred to as the ``Bureau'').
Purpose.--The Bureau shall-- (1) work to help restore consumer confidence in travel in the two years following the September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on the United States; and (2) work in conjunction with private industry and industry employee representatives to design and implement public service announcements and advertising to promote tourism, encouraging Americans and foreign visitors to rediscover the nation's treasures.
Powers.--To carry out the purposes of this title, the Bureau may-- (1) distribute funds to any travel and tourism related organization or association; (2) enter into contracts with private organizations or business; (3) utilize up to three existing employees of the Department of Commerce, as may be assigned by the Secretary; and (4) conduct any and all acts necessary and proper to carry out the purposes of this title.
UNITED STATES TRAVEL AND TOURISM PROMOTION BUREAU ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--There is established a United States Travel and Tourism Promotion Bureau Advisory Committee (in this title referred to as the ``Advisory Committee'') for the purpose of recommending activities to the Bureau.
Members.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce shall appoint the members of the Advisory Committee of whom-- (1) 1 member shall be a representative of the aviation industry; (2) 1 member shall be a representative of airline workers; (3) 1 member shall be a representative of the hotel industry; (4) 1 member shall be a representative of hotel workers; (5) 1 member shall be a representative of the restaurant industry; (6) 1 member shall be a representative of restaurant workers; (7) 1 member shall be a representative of amusement parks; and (8) 1 member shall be a member of the Rural Tourism Foundation.
Chair.--The Advisory Committee shall elect a Chair for an initial term of 6 months.
After such initial term, the Chair shall be elected for such term as the Committee may designate.
Vacancies.--If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the Committee, the Secretary of Commerce shall fill the vacancy, provided that the membership of the Committee remains consistent with subsection (b).
Not less than once every 90 days, the Bureau shall report to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives regarding-- (1) the activities of the Bureau to promote travel and tourism; and (2) the state of the travel and tourism industry.
The provisions of this title shall terminate on the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--Notwithstanding the provisions of the 2001 Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act for Recovery from and Response to Terrorist Attacks on the United States, of the amounts made available under such Act not less than $60,000,000 shall be available solely for the purpose of carrying out this title.
Availability of Funds.--The funds made available under subsection (a) shall remain available without fiscal year limitation until expended, but not later than September 31, 2003.