This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare and Medicaid Health Plan Beneficiary Orientation and Medical Profile Act of 1996''.
PROHIBITION ON PAYMENTS UNDER MEDICARE UNTIL COMPLETION OF ORIENTATION AND MEDICAL PROFILE.
In General.--Section 1876(c)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395mm(c)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(G)(i) The Secretary may not make a payment to an eligible organization under a risk-sharing contract under this section with respect to an enrollee until the eligible organization certifies to the Secretary that the organization-- ``(I) has provided the enrollee an orientation as described in clause (ii), and ``(II) has a medical profile described in clause (iii) with respect to the enrollee.
The orientation required under this subparagraph includes an explanation of the following features of the health plan offered by such organization: ``(I) Access to care, including choice of physician, physician location, and hospital coverage.
Utilization review procedures and referral practices.
Payment structures (including any deductible), additional health care services available with or without a fee (and the amount of any such fee), applicable coverage packages, and copayment rates.
Any physician incentive plan that such organization operates under the health plan.
Any other procedures required under the plan that affect access to care.
The medical profile described in this clause is such profile of the medical condition of the enrollee as the Secretary shall specify by regulation.''.
Promulgation of Requirements for Orientation and Medical Profile.--Not later that 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, by rule, first specify the elements of the orientation and of the medical profile described in clauses (ii) and (iii) of section 1876(c)(3)(G) of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a)).
Chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to such rule.
Such rule shall apply on a final basis, pending notice and opportunity for public comment.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies with respect to enrollees as of the first day of the first month that begins more than 60 days after the date on which the Secretary first publishes the rule under subsection (b) in the Federal Register.
PROHIBITION ON PAYMENTS UNDER MEDICAID UNTIL COMPLETION OF ORIENTATION, MEDICAL PROFILE, AND IMMUNIZATION.
Requirement for Orientation and Medical Profile.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no payment shall be made to a State under title XIX of the Social Security Act with respect to expenditures incurred by it for payment (determined under a prepaid capitation basis or under any other risk basis) for services provided by any entity (including a health insuring organization) for an individual enrolled with the entity until the entity certifies to the Secretary of Health and Human Services that-- (A) the entity has provided the enrollee with such orientation as the Secretary of Health and Human Services specifies, which orientation shall include the explanation of rights described in paragraph (2) and the explanation of access to care described in paragraph (3); (B) the entity has a medical profile described in section 1876(c)(3)(G)(iii) of the Social Security Act (as added by section 2(a)) with respect to the enrollee; and (C) if the entity is responsible for the provision (directly or through arrangements with providers of services) of immunizations for an enrollee who is a child-- (i) the entity has obtained the immunization status of such child, and (ii) the entity has begun to provide (or is providing) for immunizations of such child in accordance with the standards established for early and periodic screening, diagnostic, and treatment services under such title.
Explanation of rights.--The explanation of rights described in this paragraph shall include an explanation of an enrollee's rights under such title in relation to enrollment with the entity, including an explanation of-- (A) the enrollee's rights to benefits from the entity, (B) the restrictions on payments under such title for services furnished other than by or through the entity, (C) out-of-area coverage provided by the entity, (D) the entity's coverage of emergency services and urgently needed care, and (E) appeal rights of enrollees.
Explanation of access to care.--The explanation of access to care described in this paragraph includes an explanation of the following features of the benefits offered by the entity under such title: (A) Access to care, including choice of physician, physician location, and hospital coverage.
Utilization review procedures and referral practices.
Payment structures and benefits.
Any physician incentive plan that such entity operates in relation to the enrollee.
Any other procedures required by the entity that affect access of the enrollee to care.
Promulgation of Requirements for Orientation and Medical Profile.--Not later that 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, by rule, first specify the elements of the orientation and of the medical profile described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a).
Chapter 8 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to such rule.
Such rule shall apply on a final basis, pending notice and opportunity for public comment.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), subsection (a) applies with respect to enrollees as of the date that is 60 days after the date on which the Secretary first publishes the rule under subsection (b) in the Federal Register.
Immunization requirements.--Subsection (a)(1)(C) applies with respect to enrollees as of the first day of the first month that begins more than 60 days after the date on which the Secretary first publishes the rule under subsection (b) in the Federal Register.