SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Child Support Reform Act of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--NATIONAL CHILD SUPPORT GUIDELINES COMMISSION Sec.
National Child Support Guidelines Commission.
TITLE II--CENTRALIZED CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT Sec.
Establishment of the Office of the Assistant Commissioner for Centralized Child Support Enforcement.
Use of Federal Case Registry of Child Support Orders and National Directory of New Hires.
TITLE III--EFFECTIVE DATES Sec.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) an increasing number of children are raised in families with only one parent present, usually the mother, and these families are 5 times as likely to be poor as 2-parent families; (2) the failure of noncustodial parents to pay their fair share of child support is a major contributor to poverty among single-parent families; (3) in 1990, there was a $33,700,000,000 gap between the amount of child support that was received and the amount that could have been collected; (4) in 1991, the aggregate child support income deficit was $5,800,000,000; (5) as of spring 1992, only 54 percent, or 6,200,000, of custodial parents received awards of child support, and of the 6,200,000 custodial parents awarded child support, 5,300,000 were supposed to receive child support payments in 1991; (6) of the custodial parents described in paragraph (5), approximately \1/2\ of the parents due child support received full payment and the remaining \1/2\ were divided equally between those receiving partial payment (24 percent) and those receiving nothing (25 percent); (7) as a result of the situation described in paragraphs (5) and (6), increasing numbers of families are turning to the child support program established under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 651 et sequentes) for assistance, accounting for an over 40 percent increase in the caseload under that program during the 1991 to 1995 period; (8) during the 1991 to 1995 period, the percentage of cases under the title IV-D child support program in which a collection was made declined from 19.3 percent to 18.9 percent; (9) the Internal Revenue Service has improved its performance in making collections in cases referred to it by the title IV-D child support program, moving from successfully intercepting Federal income tax refunds in 992,000 cases in 1992 to successfully intercepting Federal income tax refunds in 1,200,000 cases in 1996; (10) in cases under the title IV-D child support program in which a collection is made, approximately \1/3\ of such cases are cases where some or all of the collection is a result of a Federal tax refund intercept; (11) in 1995, the average amount collected for families in which the Internal Revenue Service made a collection through the Federal tax refund intercept method was $827 for families receiving Aid to Families with Dependent Children and $847 for other families; and (12) State-by-State child support guidelines have resulted in orders that vary significantly from State to State, resulting in low awards and inequities for children.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) provide for the review of various State child support guidelines to determine how custodial parents and children are served by such guidelines; (2) increase the economic security of children, improve the enforcement of child support awards through a more centralized, efficient system; and (3) improve the enforcement of child support orders by placing responsibility for enforcement in the Internal Revenue Service.
TITLE I--NATIONAL CHILD SUPPORT GUIDELINES COMMISSION SEC.
NATIONAL CHILD SUPPORT GUIDELINES COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the ``National Child Support Guidelines Commission'' (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
General Duties.--The Commission shall study and evaluate the various child support guidelines currently in use by the States, identify the benefits and deficiencies of such guidelines in providing adequate support for children, and recommend any needed improvements.
Matters for Consideration by the Commission.--In making the recommendations concerning guidelines required under subsection (b), the Commission shall consider-- (1) matters generally applicable to all support orders, including-- (A) the relationship between the guideline amounts and the actual costs of raising children; and (B) how to define income and under what circumstances income should be imputed; (2) the appropriate treatment of cases in which either or both parents have financial obligations to more than 1 family, including the effect (if any) to be given to-- (A) the income of either parent's spouse; and (B) the financial responsibilities of either parent for other children or stepchildren; (3) the appropriate treatment of expenses for child care (including care of the children of either parent, and work- related or job-training-related child care); (4) the appropriate treatment of expenses for health care (including uninsured health care) and other extraordinary expenses for children with special needs; (5) the appropriate duration of support by 1 or both parents, including-- (A) support (including shared support) for post- secondary or vocational education; and (B) support for disabled adult children; (6) procedures to automatically adjust child support orders periodically to address changed economic circumstances, including changes in the consumer price index or either parent's income and expenses in particular cases; and (7) whether, or to what extent, support levels should be adjusted in cases in which custody is shared or in which the noncustodial parent has extended visitation rights.
Membership.-- (1) Number; appointment.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 individuals appointed jointly by the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Congress, not later than January 15, 1998, of which-- (i) 2 shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee on Finance of the Senate, and 1 shall be appointed by the ranking minority member of the Committee; (ii) 2 shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and 1 shall be appointed by the ranking minority member of the Committee; and (iii) 6 shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Qualifications of members.--Members of the Commission shall have expertise and experience in the evaluation and development of child support guidelines.
At least 1 member shall represent advocacy groups for custodial parents, at least 1 member shall represent advocacy groups for noncustodial parents, and at least 1 member shall be the director of a State program under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act.
Terms of office.--Each member shall be appointed for a term of 2 years.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Commission Powers, Compensation, Access to Information, and Supervision.--The first sentence of subparagraph (C), the first and third sentences of subparagraph (D), subparagraph (F) (except with respect to the conduct of medical studies), clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (G), and subparagraph (H) of section 1886(e)(6) of the Social Security Act shall apply to the Commission in the same manner in which such provisions apply to the Prospective Payment Assessment Commission.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the appointment of members, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Finance of the Senate, a final assessment of how States, through various child support guideline models, are serving custodial parents and children.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 6 months after the submission of the report described in subsection (e).
TITLE II--CENTRALIZED CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE OFFICE OF THE ASSISTANT COMMISSIONER FOR CENTRALIZED CHILD SUPPORT ENFORCEMENT.
In General.--For purposes of locating absent parents and facilitating the enforcement of child support obligations, the Secretary of the Treasury shall establish within the Internal Revenue Service an Office of the Assistant Commissioner for Centralized Child Support Enforcement which shall establish not later than October 1, 1997, a Division of Enforcement for the purpose of carrying out the duties described in section 203.
Coordination.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall issue regulations for the coordination of activities among the Office of the Assistant Commissioner for Centralized Child Support Enforcement, the Assistant Secretary for Children and Families, and the States, to facilitate the purposes of this title.
USE OF FEDERAL CASE REGISTRY OF CHILD SUPPORT ORDERS AND NATIONAL DIRECTORY OF NEW HIRES.
Section 453(j)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 653(j)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Information comparisons.-- ``(A) In general.--For the purpose of locating individuals in a paternity establishment case or a case involving the establishment, modification, or enforcement of a support order, the Secretary shall-- ``(i) compare information in the National Directory of New Hires against information in the support case abstracts in the Federal Case Registry of Child Support Orders not less often than every 2 business days; and ``(ii) within 2 business days after such a comparison reveals a match with respect to an individual, report the information to the Division of Enforcement for centralized enforcement.
Cases referred to division of enforcement.-- If a case is referred to the Division of Enforcement by the Secretary under subparagraph (A)(ii), the Division of Enforcement shall-- ``(i) notify the custodial and noncustodial parents of such referral, ``(ii) direct the employer to remit all child support payments to the Internal Revenue Service; ``(iii) receive all child support payments made pursuant to the case; ``(iv) record such payments; and ``(v) promptly disburse the funds-- ``(I) if there is an assignment of rights under section 408(a)(3), in accordance with section 457, and ``(II) in all other cases, to the custodial parent.''.
In General.--With respect to the Division of Enforcement, the duties described in this section are as follows: (1) Enforce all child support orders referred to the Division of Enforcement-- (A) under section 453(j)(2)(A)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 653(j)(2)(A)(ii)); (B) by the State in accordance with section 454(35) of such Act (42 United States Code 654(35)); and (C) under section 452(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 652(b)).
Enforce a child support order in accordance with the terms of the abstract contained in the Federal Case Registry of Child Support Orders or the modified terms of such an order upon notification of such modifications by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Enforce medical support provisions of any child support order using any means available under State or Federal law.
Receive and process requests for a Federal income tax refund intercept made in accordance with section 464 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 664).
Failure To Pay Amount Owing.--With respect to any child support order being enforced by the Division of Enforcement, if an individual fails to pay the full amount required to be paid on or before the due date for such payment, the Office of the Assistant Commissioner for Centralized Child Support Enforcement, through the Division of Enforcement, may assess and collect the unpaid amount in the same manner, with the same powers, and subject to the same limitations applicable to a tax imposed by subtitle C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 the collection of which would be jeopardized by delay.
Use of Federal Courts.--The Office of the Assistant Commissioner for Centralized Child Support Enforcement, through the Division of Enforcement, may utilize the courts of the United States to enforce child support orders against absent parents upon a finding that-- (1) the order is being enforced by the Division of Enforcement; and (2) utilization of such courts is a reasonable method of enforcing the child support order.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 452(a)(8) (42 United States Code 652(a)(8)) is repealed.
Section 452(c) (42 United States Code 652(c)) is repealed.
In General.--Section 454 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 654) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (32), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (33) and inserting ``; and'', and by inserting after paragraph (33) the following new paragraph: ``(34) provide that the State will cooperate with the Office of the Assistant Commissioner for Centralized Child Support Enforcement to facilitate the exchange of information regarding child support cases and the enforcement of orders by the Commissioner.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 455(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 655(b)) is amended by striking ``454(34)'' and inserting ``454(33)''.
Any term used in this title which is also used in part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 651 et sequentes) shall have the meaning given such term by such part.
TITLE III--EFFECTIVE DATES SEC.
In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act or subsection (b), the amendments made by this Act take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
Special Rule.--In the case of a State that the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in order to meet the additional requirements imposed by the amendments made by this Act, the State shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements of such amendments before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of enactment of this Act.
For purposes of this subsection, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of the session shall be treated as a separate regular session of the State legislature.