This Act may be cited as the ``English Language Empowerment Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds and declares the following: (1) The United States is comprised of individuals and groups from diverse ethnic, cultural, and linguistic backgrounds.
The United States has benefited and continues to benefit from this rich diversity.
Throughout the history of the United States, the common thread binding individuals of differing backgrounds has been a common language.
In order to preserve unity in diversity, and to prevent division along linguistic lines, the Federal Government should maintain a language common to all people.
English has historically been the common language and the language of opportunity in the United States.
The purpose of this Act is to help immigrants better assimilate and take full advantage of economic and occupational opportunities in the United States.
By learning the English language, immigrants will be empowered with the language skills and literacy necessary to become responsible citizens and productive workers in the United States.
The use of a single common language in conducting official business of the Federal Government will promote efficiency and fairness to all people.
English should be recognized in law as the language of official business of the Federal Government.
Any monetary savings derived from the enactment of this Act should be used for the teaching of non-English speaking immigrants the English language.
ENGLISH AS THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGE OF FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
In General.--Title 4, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 6--LANGUAGE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ``Sec.
Declaration of official language of Federal Government.
Preserving and enhancing the role of the official language.
Official Federal Government activities in English.
Reform of naturalization requirements.
Declaration of official language of Federal Government ``The official language of the Federal Government is English.
Preserving and enhancing the role of the official language ``The Federal Government shall have an affirmative obligation to preserve and enhance the role of English as the official language of the Federal Government.
Such obligation shall include encouraging greater opportunities for individuals to learn the English language.
Official Federal Government activities in English ``(a) Conduct of Business.--The Federal Government shall conduct its official business in English.
Denial of Services.--No person shall be denied services, assistance, or facilities, directly or indirectly provided by the Federal Government solely because the person communicates in English.
Entitlement.--Every person in the United States is entitled-- ``(1) to communicate with the Federal Government in English; ``(2) to receive information from or contribute information to the Federal Government in English; and ``(3) to be informed of or be subject to official orders in English.
Standing ``A person injured by a violation of this chapter may in a civil action (including an action under chapter 151 of title 28) obtain appropriate relief.
Reform of naturalization requirements ``(a) Fluency.--It has been the longstanding national belief that full citizenship in the United States requires fluency in English.
English is the language of opportunity for all immigrants to take their rightful place in society in the United States.
Ceremonies.--All authorized officials shall conduct all naturalization ceremonies entirely in English.
Rule of construction ``Nothing in this chapter shall be construed-- ``(1) to prohibit a Member of Congress, an employee or official of the Federal Government, while performing official business, from communicating orally in a foreign language with another person.
to discriminate against or restrict the rights of any individual in the country; ``(3) to discourage or prevent the use of languages other than English in any nonofficial capacity; and ``(4) except where an existing Federal law directly contravenes the amendments made by such section (such as by requiring the use of a language other than English for official business of the Federal Government), to repeal existing Federal laws.
Definitions ``For purposes of this chapter: ``(1) Federal Government.--The term `Federal Government' means all branches of the Federal Government and all employees and officials of the Federal Government while performing official business.
Official business.--The term `official business' means governmental actions, documents, or policies which are enforceable with the full weight and authority of the Federal Government, and includes publications, income tax forms, informational materials, and the contents of franked mail (as described in section 3210 of title 39, United States Code), but does not include-- ``(A) teaching of foreign languages; ``(B) actions, documents, or policies necessary for international relations, trade, or commerce; ``(C) actions or documents that protect the public health and safety; ``(D) actions, documents, or policies that are not enforceable in the United States; ``(E) actions that protect the rights of victims of crimes or criminal defendants; or ``(F) documents that utilize terms of art or phrases from languages other than English.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of chapters for title 4, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``6.
Language of the Federal Government..................... 161''.
This Act (and the amendments made by this Act) shall not preempt any law of any State.
The amendments made by section 3 shall take effect upon the date of enactment of this Act, except that no suit may be commenced to enforce or determine rights under chapter 6 of title 4, United States Code, until the date that is 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.