This Act may be cited as the ``American Indian Tort Liability Insurance Act''.
AMERICAN INDIAN TORT LIABILITY INSURANCE.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma v. Manufacturing Technologies, Inc., 523 United States Reports ____ (1998), recognized the increasing interaction between tribal governments, tribal corporations, or individual members of Indian tribes with individuals who are not members of an Indian tribe, on and off Indian reservations (including property held in trust for Indian tribes) in the areas of economic development and commerce; (2) the interaction referred to in paragraph (1) may lead to disputes that could include claims by individuals against tribal governments or tribal organizations as a result of injury in tort; (3) as Justice Kennedy stated in his opinion in Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma v. Manufacturing Technologies, Inc., the doctrine of tribal immunity asserted by the governing bodies of Indian tribes to shield the Indian tribes from court actions that are necessary to recover for the liability of the governing bodies or tribal organizations of Indian tribes, can ``harm those who are unaware that they are dealing with a tribe, who do not know of tribal immunity, or who have no choice in the matter, as in the case of tort victims''; and (4) in order to provide protection for individuals interacting with tribal governments or organizations-- (A) Indian tribes should maintain tort liability insurance; and (B) tribal immunity should not be used as a basis for the denial of a claim under that tort liability insurance.
Definition.--In this section: (1) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tribal immunity.--The term ``tribal immunity'' means the immunity of an Indian tribe from-- (A) jurisdiction of the courts; and (B) judicial review of an action of that Indian tribe and other remedies.
Tribal organization.--The term ``tribal organization'' has the meaning given that term in section 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(l)).
Tribal priority allocation.--The term ``tribal priority allocation'' means an allocation to a tribal priority account of an Indian tribe by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to allow that Indian tribe to establish program priorities and funding levels.
Indian Tribes as Defendants in Tort Disputes.--Section 1362 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) inserting ``(a)'' before ``The district courts''; (2) inserting ``(referred to in this section as an `Indian tribe')'' after ``Interior''; and (3) adding at the end the following: ``(b) Subject to the provisions of chapter 171A, the district courts shall have jurisdiction of civil actions in claims against an Indian tribe for money damages, accruing on or after the date of enactment of this subsection for injury or loss of property, personal injury, or death caused by the negligent or wrongful act or omission of an Indian tribe (including a tribal organization) under circumstances in which the Indian tribe, if a private individual or corporation would be liable to the claimant in accordance with the law of the State where the act or omission occurred.
Subject to the provisions of chapter 171A, to the extent necessary to enforce this section, the tribal immunity of the Indian tribe involved is waived.''.
Tort Liability Insurance.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Insurance.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), not later than 180 days after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall obtain or provide tort liability insurance or equivalent coverage, on the most cost-effective basis, for each Indian tribe that receives a tribal priority allocation.
Coverage.--The insurance obtained under subparagraph (A) for an Indian tribe shall cover the governing body of the Indian tribe, each tribal organization, of that Indian tribe and each contractor or employer of that Indian tribe, within the scope of that contractor or employer.
The coverage shall become effective on the date on which that coverage is obtained.
Exception.--If the Secretary determines that an Indian tribe described in paragraph (1) has obtained liability insurance in an amount and of the type that the Secretary determines to be appropriate (including meeting the requirement of paragraph (4)) by the date specified in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall not be required to provide additional coverage for that Indian tribe.
Tribal immunity may not be asserted to deny claims.-- Under the liability insurance obtained under paragraph (1) or that the Secretary determines to be appropriate under paragraph (2), tribal immunity may not be asserted by the insurer as a reason for denying a claim for damages resulting from the tort liability of an Indian tribe.
Amount of coverage.--In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary shall ensure that each Indian tribe obtains, or is provided, in accordance with this subsection, a sufficient amount of insurance coverage to cover tort liability of the Indian tribe, under chapter 171A of title 28, United States Code.
Funding of Tort Liability Insurance.-- (1) Initial payment of insurance premiums.--For the initial payment of insurance premiums for insurance obtained or provided by the Secretary under subsection (d), the Secretary shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure the payment of premiums by the Indian tribe, including adjusting the amount of the tribal priority allocation made to the Indian tribe to cover the cost of the initial payments.
Subsequent payments.-- (A) In general.--After an initial payment under paragraph (1), and before the Secretary makes a tribal priority allocation for an Indian tribe, the Secretary shall verify that the Indian tribe-- (i) has insurance coverage that meets the requirements of subsection (d); and (ii) has made such payments for premiums of that insurance as are necessary to provide insurance coverage for the fiscal year for which the tribal priority allocation is to be made.
Payment required as a condition to receiving tribal priority allocation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if the Secretary determines under subparagraph (A) that an Indian tribe has not made the payments described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the Secretary shall withhold the tribal priority allocation of that Indian tribe until such time as those payments are made.
Jurisdiction of District Courts.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the district courts shall have jurisdiction over any action concerning the tort liability of an Indian tribe that is covered under insurance that meets the requirements of subsection (d), and a case to recover damages through an insurer that provides coverage under subsection (d) may be brought without regard to whether remedies under otherwise applicable tribal law have been exhausted.
Regulations.--To carry out this section, as soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall issue regulations that-- (1) provide for the amount of insurance coverage or equivalent coverage needed to protect an Indian tribe for the liabilities that may be subject to a claim under chapter 171A if title 28, United States Code; (2) establish a schedule of premiums to be assessed against an Indian tribe that is provided liability insurance under subsection (d); and (3) establish a means to verify the amount, maintenance, and funding of insurance of Indian tribes that obtain and maintain insurance under subsection (d)(3).
Indian Tort Claims Procedure.-- (1) In general.--Part 6 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 171 the following: ``CHAPTER 171A--INDIAN TORT CLAIMS PROCEDURE ``Sec.
Liability of Indian tribes.
Definitions ``In this chapter: ``(1) The term `employee of an Indian tribe' includes-- ``(A) an officer or employee of an Indian tribe (including an officer or employee of a tribal organization); and ``(B) any person acting on behalf of an Indian tribe in an official capacity, temporarily or permanently, whether with or without compensation (other than an employee of the Federal Government or the government of a State or political subdivision thereof who is acting within the scope of the employment of that individual).
The term `Indian tribe' has the meaning given that term in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e).
The term `tribal immunity' means the immunity of an Indian tribe from-- ``(A) jurisdiction of the courts; and ``(B) judicial review of an action of that Indian tribe and other remedies.
Liability of Indian tribes ``(a) Subject to the limitations under subsection (c), an Indian tribe (including a tribal organization) shall be liable for the actions of the employees of that Indian tribe (or tribal organization), relating to tort claims, in the same manner and to the same extent, as a private individual or corporation under like circumstances, but shall not be liable for interest before judgment or for punitive damages.
Subject to the limitations under subsection (c), in any case described in subsection (a) in which a death was caused and the law of the State where the act or omission complained of occurred provides for punitive damages, the Indian tribe shall, in lieu of being liable for punitive damages, be liable for actual or compensatory damages resulting from that death to each person on behalf of whom action was brought.
(1) The liability of an Indian tribe or tribal organization may not exceed-- ``(A) $500,000 for each claim made under this chapter; or ``(B) in any case in which more than 1 claim arises from the same occurrence for damages for a tortuous act or omission, an aggregate amount equal to $1,000,000 for those claims.
If the Secretary of the Interior determines that a limitation on the amount of liability of an Indian tribe under subparagraph (A) or (B) is appropriate, the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to Congress proposed legislation to provide for that increase.
Exceptions; waiver ``(a) The provisions of this chapter and section 1362(b) shall not apply to any case relating to a controversy relating to membership in an Indian tribe.
With respect to an Indian tribe, to the extent necessary to carry out this chapter, the tribal immunity of that Indian tribe is waived.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of chapters for title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 171 the following: ``171A.
Indian Tort Claims Procedure........................ 2691''.