This Act may be cited as the ``Indian Tribal Government Lease Agreement Act''.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``Indian tribal government'' means the governing body of any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Fund'' means the Fund established by section 4.
The term ``account'' means an account within the Fund established on behalf of an Indian tribal government in connection with a lease agreement entered into by that tribal government pursuant to section 3.
The term ``essential governmental function'' means any function carried out by, or on behalf of, an Indian tribal government involving the planning, design, construction, repair, improvement, and expansion of education facilities.
Purpose.--The Secretary is authorized, under section 102 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, to enter into lease agreements with Indian tribal governments pursuant to which the Secretary agrees to lease, for a period of years, facilities constructed by any such tribal government for use in carrying out an essential governmental function.
Terms.--Any lease agreement shall include such terms and conditions as the Secretary determines necessary or appropriate to assure that the proceeds from bonds, sold by an Indian tribal government for the purpose of constructing a facility to be covered by such lease agreement, will be used only in the manner, and for the purposes, approved by the Secretary.
Indian Priority List.--In determining which Indian tribal government may enter into a lease agreement under this Act, the Secretary shall follow the Education Facilities Construction Priority list as of fiscal year 1993 or as thereafter modified.
THE TRIBAL GOVERNMENT LEASE FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States the Tribal Government Lease Fund.
Each Indian tribal government having a lease agreement under this Act shall have an account in such Fund.
Contents of Fund.--There shall be deposited in the appropriate accounts within the Fund the following: (1) Moneys appropriated to the accounts for payments in connection with lease agreements under this Act.
Income and gains realized by the account from any investment of excess funds, and the obligations or securities comprising such investments within such account.
Any other receipts of such account.
Excess Funds Investment.--If the Secretary of the Interior determines that the amount of money in any such account exceeds the amount required for current needs, the Secretary of the Treasury, at the request of the Secretary of the Interior, may invest such amounts as the Secretary of the Treasury deems advisable in obligations of, or obligations guaranteed by, the Government of the United States, or in such other governmental or agency obligations or other securities of the United States as he deems appropriate.
Depository.--The Secretary of the Treasury may deposit moneys of the Fund with any Federal Reserve bank, any depository for public funds, or in such other places and in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury deems appropriate.
Uses.--Moneys in each account within the Fund shall be administered by the Secretary in order-- (1) to effect the payment, when due, of the principal of, and any interest on, bonds issued by the tribal government having such account in connection with a facility covered by a lease agreement under this Act; (2) to redeem such bonds; and (3) to make payment of all expenses incurred by the Indian tribal government in carrying out its duties with respect to its account within the Fund.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATION TO THE FUND; APPROPRIATIONS.
Moneys in such Fund, together with all moneys hereafter deposited in such Fund, are hereby appropriated for the purposes of this Act and shall remain available until expended.
For fiscal year 1994, and each fiscal year thereafter, there are authorized to be appropriated, to each of the appropriate accounts in the Fund, such sums as may be necessary to make payments under lease agreements under this Act, and to carry out the other provisions of this Act.
FULL FAITH AND CREDIT.
Any bond issued by an Indian tribal government after the date of the enactment of this Act the proceeds of which are used for the construction of a facility covered by a lease agreement under this Act shall constitute general obligations of the United States of America backed by the full faith and credit of the United States of America.
In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States is authorized to audit the operations of each of the accounts within the Fund in accordance with such rules and regulations as he may prescribe.
Any such audit shall be conducted at the place or places where accounts of the Fund are normally kept.
The representatives of the Comptroller General shall have access to all books, accounts, records, reports, files and other papers, things, or property belonging to, or in use by or in connection with the Fund, or the Indian tribal government which pertain to the financial transactions of the Fund and which are necessary to facilitate an audit.
Such representatives shall be afforded full facilities for verifying transactions with the balances or securities held by depositories, fiscal agents, and custodians.
All such books, accounts, records, reports, files, papers, things, and property shall remain in the possession and custody of the Fund, or the Indian tribal government, as the case may be.
Access to Information.--The representatives of the Comptroller General shall have access to all books, accounts, records, reports, files, and other papers, things, or property belonging to or in use by any person or entity which has entered into a financial transaction with or involving the Fund, or the Indian tribal government, under this Act, to the extent deemed necessary by the Comptroller General to facilitate any audit of financial transactions pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
Such representatives shall be afforded full facilities for verifying transactions with the balances or securities held by depositories, fiscal agents, and custodians.
All such property of such person or entity shall, to the extent practicable, remain in the possession and custody of such person or entity.
Report.--The Comptroller General shall make a report of each such audit to the Congress.
Such report shall contain all comments and information which the Comptroller General deems necessary to inform Congress of the financial operations and conditions of the Fund and any recommendations which he deems advisable.
Such report shall indicate specifically and describe in detail any program, expenditure, or other financial transaction or undertaking observed in the course of such audit which the Comptroller General deems to have been carried on or made without lawful authority or which is inconsistent with the purposes and provisions of this Act.
A copy of such report shall be furnished to the President, the Secretary and the appropriate Indian tribal governments under this Act at the time it is submitted to the Congress.