This Act may be cited as the ``Violent Crime Intervention Act of 1994''.
TITLE I--NATIONAL CRIMINAL RECORDS DATABASE SEC.
The Congress finds that-- (1) nationwide-- (A) many State criminal record systems are not up to date and contain incomplete or incorrect information; and (B) less than 20 percent of all criminal records are fully computerized, include court dispositions, and are accessible through the Interstate Identification Index of the Department of Justice; and (2) a complete and accurate nationwide criminal record database is an essential element in fighting crime and development of such a database and is a national urgent priority.
STATE CRIMINAL RECORD UPGRADES.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall issue guidelines establishing specific requirements for a State to qualify as a fully participating member of the Interstate Identification Index.
Minimum Requirements.--The guidelines referred to in subsection (a) shall require-- (1) that all arrest reports and final disposition orders are submitted to the State records repository within 21 days; (2) the State repository to enter these records and orders into the State database not more than 14 days after the repository receives the information; (3) the State to conduct audits, at least annually, of State criminal records to ensure that such records contain correct and complete information about every felony arrest and report the results of each audit to the Attorney General; (4) the State to certify to the Attorney General, on January 1 of each year, that the law enforcement agencies, courts, and records officials of the State are in compliance with this section; and (5) such other conditions as the Attorney General determines are necessary.
Fees.--A State that does not qualify as a fully participating State, pursuant to the guidelines referred to in subsection (a), within 2 years after the date on which the Attorney General issues such guidelines shall pay a user fee for each identification request made to the Interstate Identification Index in an amount equal to the average cost of a single Federal database inquiry, as determined by the Attorney General each year.
There are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal years 1995 and 1996 to the Attorney General for grants to States to establish or improve their criminal record databases to qualify as a fully participating member of the Interstate Identification Index.
TITLE II--LIABILITY FOR EARLY RELEASE OF VIOLENT FELONS SEC.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) violent criminals often serve only a small portion of their original sentences; (2) a significant proportion of the most serious violent crimes committed in the United States are committed by criminals who have been released early from a sentence for a previous violent crime; (3) violent criminals who are released early from prison often travel to other States to commit additional violent crimes; (4) the crime and threat of crime committed by violent criminals released early from prison affects tourism, economic development, use of the interstate highway system, federally owned or supported facilities, and other commercial activities of individuals; and (5) the policies of one State regarding the early release of criminals sentenced in that State for a violent crime often affects the citizens of other States, who can influence those policies only through Federal law.
Purpose.--The purpose of this title is to reduce violent crime by requiring States to bear the responsibility for the consequences of releasing violent criminals before they serve the full term for which they were sentenced.
In General.--The victim (or in the case of a homicide, the family of the victim) of a violent crime shall have a Federal cause of action in any district court against a State if the individual committing the crime-- (1) previously had been convicted by the State of a violent offense; (2) was released from incarceration prior to serving his or her full sentence for such offense; and (3) committed the violent crime before the original sentence would have expired.
Exception.--A State shall not be liable under subsection (a) if the State requires a violent criminal to be incarcerated for the entire term of imprisonment to which the criminal is sentenced.
Definition.--As used in this title, the term ``crime of violence'' has the same meaning as in section 16 of title 18, United States Code.
Damages.--A State shall be liable to the victim in an action brought under this title for the actual damages resulting from the violent crime, but not for punitive damages.