This Act may be cited as the ``National Museum of African American History and Culture Plan for Action Presidential Commission Act of 2001''.
In General.--There is established the National Museum of African American History and Culture Plan for Action Presidential Commission (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall consist of not more than 23 members appointed as follows: (1) The President shall appoint seven voting members.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Senate Majority Leader shall each appoint six voting members.
In addition to the members appointed under paragraph (2), the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Senate Majority Leader shall each appoint two additional nonvoting members.
Qualifications.--Members of the Commission shall be chosen from the following professional groups: (1) Professional museum associations, including the Association of African American Museums and African American Museum Cultural Complex, Inc. (2) Academic institutions and groups committed to the research and study of African American life, art, history, and culture, including Historically Black Colleges and Universities and the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies.
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
Plan of Action for Establishment and Maintenance of Museum.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall submit a report to the President and the Congress containing its recommendations with respect to a plan of action for the establishment and maintenance of the National Museum of African American History and Culture in Washington, D.C. (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Museum'').
National conference.--In developing the recommendations, the Commission shall convene a national conference on the Museum, comprised of individuals committed to the advancement of African American life, art, history, and culture, not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Fundraising Plan.--The Commission shall develop a fundraising plan for supporting the creation and maintenance of the Museum through contributions by the American people, and a separate plan on fundraising by the African American community.
Report on Issues.--The Commission shall examine and submit a report to the President and the Congress on the following issues: (1) The availability and cost of collections to be acquired and housed in the Museum.
The impact of the Museum on regional African American museums.
Possible locations for the Museum on or adjacent to the National Mall in Washington, D.C. (4) The cost of converting the Smithsonian Institution's Arts and Industries Building into a modern museum with requisite temperature and humidity controls.
Whether the Museum should be located within the Smithsonian Institution.
The governance and organizational structure from which the Museum should operate.
Legislation to Carry Out Plan of Action.--Based on the recommendations contained in the report submitted under subsection (a) and the report submitted under subsection (c), the Commission shall submit for consideration to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, the Committee on House Administration of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate, and the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and Senate a legislative plan of action to create and construct the Museum.
Facilities and Support of Secretary of the Interior.--The Secretary of the Interior shall provide the administrative services, facilities, and funds necessary for the performance of the Commission's functions.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government may receive compensation for each day on which the member is engaged in the work of the Commission, at a daily rate to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
DEADLINE FOR SUBMISSION OF REPORTS; TERMINATION.
Deadline.--The Commission shall submit final versions of the reports and plans required under section 3 not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate not later than 30 days after submitting the final versions of reports and plans pursuant to subsection (a).
There are authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 for activities of the Commission during fiscal year 2002.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.