This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Accountability Act of 1993''.
General Rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the laws specified in subsection (b) shall, to the extent that they relate to the terms and conditions of employment (including hiring, promotion or demotion, salary, benefits, work assignments or reassignments, overtime, and termination), the health and safety of employees, and the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees, apply to the Congress in the same manner and to the same extent as they apply-- (1) in the case of a private person, to such a person; and (2) in the case of an Executive agency (as defined by section 105 of title 5, United States Code), to such an agency.
Laws Made Applicable to Congress by This Act.--The laws referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes).
National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 151 et sequentes).
Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et seq.).
Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 621 et sequentes).
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes).
Title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 701 et sequentes).
Privacy Act of 1974 (5 United States Code 552a, 552a note).
Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 United States Code 6101 et seq.).
Ethics in Government Act of 1978.
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Application of the Freedom of Information Act.--The Congress, and the instrumentalities of Congress, shall be subject to section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the ``Freedom of Information Act''), to the same extent that Executive agencies (as defined by section 105 of title 5, United States Code) are subject to such section 552.
Application of Independent Counsel Provisions.--Chapter 40 of title 28, United States Code (relating to independent counsel), shall apply to the Congress, such that the individuals referred to in subsections (e) (1), (2), (3), (6), and (7) of this Act shall be deemed to be included in section 591(b) of title 28, United States Code.
Individuals Covered by Act.--This Act shall apply to the following individuals: (1) A Senator or Representative in, or Resident Commissioner or Delegate to, the Congress (hereafter in this Act referred to as ``Members'').
An employee of either House of Congress, of a committee of either House, or a joint committee of the two Houses.
An elected officer of either House who is not a Member.
The Legislative Counsel of either House and an employee of the Legislative Counsel.
A member of the Capitol Police.
An employee of a Member if the pay of the employee is paid by the Secretary of the Senate or the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
An employee of the instrumentalities of Congress, including the Congressional Research Service, the Office of Technology Assessment, the General Accounting Office, the Office of the Architect of the Capitol, the Botanic Gardens, the Government Printing Office, the Library of Congress, the Congressional Budget Office, and the Copyright Royalty Tribunal.
Employees in the District or State Office of a Member.--For the purposes of determining whether the individuals employed in the district or State office of a Member are subject to the laws set forth in section 2, the district or State office shall be treated as if it were an affiliated branch of a private employer under the laws in section 2.
Place of Residence and Political Affiliation.--Notwithstanding the laws set forth in section 2, a Member may consider the political affiliation and place of residence of an individual seeking employment on the personal staff of that Member.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 509 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 373) is repealed.
Application of Small Business Exemption to Members.--To the extent that a law referred to in section 2 contains an exemption for a small business, such an exemption shall apply to a Member if the aggregate number of employees of the Member and employees attributable to the Member does not exceed the number of employees necessary to qualify as a small business under the exemption.
For the purpose of this subsection, the number of employees attributable to a Member equals the result of the sum of the employees specified in subsections (e) (2), (3), (4), (6), and (7) who work in the District of Columbia and are employed by the House in which that Member sits, divided by the number of Members in that House.
PROMULGATION OF IMPLEMENTING REGULATIONS.
Not later than the 180-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the House of Representatives and the Senate shall each promulgate rules and regulations to carry out this Act, including specifically implementing each of the laws set forth in section 2.
Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with Federal law.
A House of Congress that fails to promulgate such rules and regulations within such time period shall be subject to the regulations of the relevant Executive agency.
If any individual referred to in section 2(e) is aggrieved by an action taken pursuant to this Act, such individual may seek review of that action in a Federal district court of competent jurisdiction and shall have the same rights and remedies provided to private persons under the laws referred to in section 2.