This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Protection Act of 2000''.
TITLE I--PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF PHYSICIAN INFORMATION IN NATIONAL PRACTITIONER DATA BANK SEC.
PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF PHYSICIAN INFORMATION.
In General.--Part B of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11131 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 427 the following section: ``SEC.
PUBLIC AVAILABILITY OF PHYSICIAN INFORMATION.
In General.--Not later than January 31, 2001, the Secretary, notwithstanding any other provision of this part, shall in accordance with this section promulgate regulations under which the public may, through the method described in subsection (c), obtain information reported under this part on physicians.
Limitations.--The following information on a physician may not under subsection (a) be made available to the public: ``(1) Information disclosing the identity of any patient involved in the incidents involved.
The home address of the physician.
The social security account number of the physician.
The date of birth of the physician.
The number assigned to the physician by the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The name, title, and telephone number of the official with responsibility for submitting the report on behalf of the entity.
Use of Internet.--For purposes of subsection (a), the method described in this subsection is to make the information involved available to the public, without charge, through the telecommunications medium known as the World Wide Web of the Internet.
The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall provide for the establishment of a site on such medium, and shall update the information maintained through such medium not less frequently than monthly.
Statement of Physician.--Regulations under subsection (a) shall require that each disclosure under such subsection include any statement that was submitted under section 426(b) by the physician involved.
Context of Disclosed Information on Medical Malpractice Payments.--With respect to information reported under section 421 on a physician, regulations under subsection (a) shall require that a disclosure of a report under such section be accompanied by supplemental information in accordance with the following: ``(1) For each State for which such a report is made on the physician: ``(A) The information under section 421 shall be presented in context by comparing the physician involved to the experiences of other physicians in the same specialty in the same State.
In disclosing the amount of the payment reported under section 421(b)(2): ``(i) The amount shall be presented in context by categorizing the amount in a manner that indicates the level of significance of the payment in relation to amounts reported under such section for other physicians in the same specialty in the same State.
For such purposes, there shall be a minimum of three graduated categories.
The disclosure shall state whether the amount was made in settlement (or partial settlement) of, or in satisfaction of a judgment in, a medical malpractice action or claim.)
A statement providing that a payment made pursuant to a medical malpractice action or claim may occur for a variety of reasons which do not necessarily reflect negatively on the professional competence or conduct of the physician.
A statement providing that a payment made pursuant to a medical malpractice action or claim should not be construed as creating a presumption that medical malpractice has occurred.
A statement providing that some physicians work primarily with high risk patients, and such physicians may have numbers of medical malpractice actions or claims that are higher than average for their specialties because they specialize in cases or patients who are at very high risk for medical problems.
A statement providing that-- ``(A) malpractice histories tend to vary by specialty, and some specialties are more likely than others to be the subject of litigation, and ``(B) the disclosure and accompanying information compare physicians only to the members of their specialty, not to all physicians, in order to make an individual physician's history more meaningful.
A statement providing that-- ``(A) malpractice histories tend to vary by State, and due to variations in State laws, physicians in some States are more likely than those in other States to be the subject of litigation, and ``(B) the disclosure and accompanying information compare physicians only to other physicians within a given State, not to all physicians, in order to make an individual physician's history more meaningful.
Context of Disclosed Information Regarding Criminal Acts.-- With respect to information that under section 422(c) or 424A is reported on a physician, regulations under subsection (a) shall require that a disclosure of a report under such a section be accompanied by a statement providing that the disclosure may fail to provide all crime- related information on the physician because the availability of such information depends in part on State laws and in part on self-reporting by physicians.''.
Disclosure.--Section 427(b)(1) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11137(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``Information reported'' and inserting ``Except for the disclosure of information authorized by this title, information reported''.
Fees.--Section 427(b) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11137(b)) is amended by striking paragraph (4).
TITLE II--REPORTING REQUIREMENTS REGARDING NATIONAL PRACTITIONER DATA BANK SEC.
REQUIRING REPORTS ON MEDICAL MALPRACTICE PAYMENTS.
Section 421(b) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11131(b)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6); (2) in paragraph (4), by striking ``and'' after the comma at the end; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following paragraph: ``(5) in the case of a physician-- ``(A) the medical field of the physician, including the medical specialty, ``(B) the date on which the physician was first licensed in the medical field and specialty, and the number of years the physician has been practicing in such field and specialty, and ``(C) the professional license number of the physician, and the name of the State in which the license is held, and''.
REPORTING OF SANCTIONS TAKEN BY BOARDS OF MEDICAL EXAMINERS.
In General.--Section 422(a) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11132(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(A), by striking ``which revokes or suspends'' and inserting ``which denies, revokes, or suspends''; and (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``(if known)'' and all that follows and inserting ``for the action described in paragraph (1)(A) that was taken with respect to the physician or, if known, for the surrender of the license,''; (B) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (F); (C) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following subparagraphs: ``(C) the medical field of the physician, including the medical specialty, ``(D) the date on which the physician was first licensed in the medical field and specialty, and the number of years the physician has been practicing in such field and specialty, and ``(E) the professional license number of the physician, and the name of the State in which the license is held, and''.
Criminal Acts of Physicians.--Section 422 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11132) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(c) Criminal Acts of Physicians.-- ``(1) In general.--Each Board of Medical Examiners shall report, in accordance with section 424, the information described in paragraph (2), to the extent that the information is collected by such Board.
Information to be reported.--With respect to the Board of Medical Examiners of a State, the information to be reported under paragraph (1) is as follows: ``(A) A description of felony convictions of physicians in courts of the State or other States.
A description of such misdemeanor convictions of physicians in such courts as in the Secretary's discretion may reflect on quality health matters.
A description of any criminal charges in such courts to which the physician pled nolo contendere.''.
Contextual Information Regarding Disclosures of Physician Information.--Section 422 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, as amended by subsection (b) of this section, is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(d) Contextual Information Regarding Disclosures of Physician Information.--Each Board of Medical Examiners shall, in accordance with section 424, report to the Secretary such information as the Secretary may request from the Board for purposes of assisting the Secretary in making disclosures in accordance with section 428(e), to the extent that such information is collected by such Board.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subsections (a) and (b) of section 424 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11134) are each amended by striking ``section 422(a)'' and inserting ``section 422''.
REPORTING OF CERTAIN PROFESSIONAL REVIEW ACTIONS TAKEN BY HEALTH CARE ENTITIES.
In General.--Section 423(a)(3) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11133(a)(3)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' after ``surrender,''; (2) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (D); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (B) the following subparagraph: ``(C) in the case of a physician-- ``(i) the medical field of the physician, including the medical specialty, ``(ii) the date on which the physician was first licensed in the medical field and specialty, and the number of years the physician has been practicing in such field and specialty, and ``(iii) the professional license number of the physician, and the name of the State in which the license is held, and''.
Applicability of Requirements to Federal Entities.-- (1) In general.--Section 423 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11133) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(e) Applicability to Federal Facilities and Physicians.-- ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) applies to Federal health facilities (including hospitals) and actions by such facilities regarding the competence or professional conduct of Federal physicians to the same extent and in the same manner as such subsection applies to health care entities and professional review actions.
Relevant board of medical examiners.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the Board of Medical Examiners to which a Federal health facility is to report is the Board of Medical Examiners of the State within which the facility is located.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 432 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11152) is amended-- (A) by striking subsection (b); and (B) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (b).
PHYSICIAN SELF-REPORTING REGARDING FELONY CONVICTIONS.
Part B of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11131 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 424 the following section: ``SEC.
PHYSICIAN SELF-REPORTING REGARDING FELONY CONVICTIONS.
In General.--Each physician shall report, in accordance with subsection (b), each felony conviction of the physician.
Form of Reporting.--The information required to be reported under subsection (a) shall-- ``(1) be reported regularly (but not less often than monthly) and in such form and manner as the Secretary prescribes, and ``(2) be reported to the Secretary, or, in the Secretary's discretion, to the agency described in section 424(b).
Sanctions for Failure To Report.--Any physician who fails to report information on a felony conviction required to be reported under this section shall be subject to a civil money penalty of not more than $10,000 for each such failure to report.
Such penalty shall be imposed and collected in the same manner as civil money penalties under subsection (a) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act are imposed and collected under that section.''.
NOTICE TO PRACTITIONERS; CORRECTION OF INFORMATION.
Section 426 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11136) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``With respect to''; (2) in subsection (a) (as so designated), in paragraph (1), by striking ``, upon request,''; and (3) by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(b) Statement of Practitioner.-- ``(1) In general.--With respect to information reported under this part, if the physician or other licensed health care practitioner involved submits to the Secretary a statement regarding the information so reported, the statement shall be made a part of the report involved, subject to paragraph (2).
Such a statement may be made at any time, and may be revised.
Length of statement.--Paragraph (1) applies to a statement by a physician or other licensed health care practitioner only if the statement does not exceed 4,000 characters, including spaces and punctuation.
Notice.--In carrying out subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall inform the practitioner involved that a statement under paragraph (1) may be submitted, and that the statement is subject to the limitation described in paragraph (2).''.
TITLE III--DUTY TO OBTAIN INFORMATION SEC.
DUTY OF HOSPITALS TO OBTAIN INFORMATION.
Section 425 of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11135) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(d) Applicability to Federal Hospitals.--This section applies to Federal hospitals to the same extent and in the same manner as such subsection applies to other hospitals.''.
DUTY OF BOARDS OF MEDICAL EXAMINERS TO OBTAIN INFORMATION.
Part B of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11131 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 425 the following section: ``SEC.
DUTY OF BOARDS OF MEDICAL EXAMINERS TO OBTAIN INFORMATION.
In General.--Effective six months after the date of the enactment of the Patient Protection Act of 2000, it is the duty of each Board of Medical Examiners to request from the Secretary (or the agency designated under section 424(b)) information reported under this part concerning a physician-- ``(1) at the time the physician submits the initial application for a physician's license in the State involved, and ``(2) at each time the physician submits an application to continue in effect the license.
A Board of Medical Examiners may request information reported under this part concerning a physician at other times.
Failure To Obtain Information.--With respect to an action for mandamus or other cause of action against a Board of Medical Examiners, a Board which does not request information respecting a physician as required under subsection (a) is presumed to have knowledge of any information reported under this part to the Secretary with respect to the physician.
Reliance on Information Provided.--With respect to a cause of action against a Board of Medical Examiners, each Board of Medical Examiners may rely upon information provided to the Board under this title, unless the Board has knowledge that the information provided was false.''.
TITLE IV--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
REQUEST OF BOARD OF MEDICAL EXAMINERS REGARDING PHYSICIAN INFORMATION IN NATIONAL PRACTITIONER DATA BANK.
Section 427(a) of the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 11137(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary (or the agency designated under section 424(b)) shall, upon request, provide the Board of Medical Examiners of a State a summary of information reported under this part on physicians who are licensed in that State.
For each physician included in such a summary, the summary shall at a minimum provide the name, address, total number of reports of such information, and the number of reports for each report type.''.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate a final rule to implement the amendments made by this Act not later than January 31, 2001.
Such amendments take effect 30 days after the date on which such final rule is promulgated.