This Act may be cited as the ``Border Hospital Survival and Illegal Immigrant Care Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Immigration is a Federal responsibility.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service does not take into custody all aliens who are unlawfully present in the United States.
Section 1867 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395dd) and State laws require that, if any individual (whether or not lawfully present in the United States) comes to a hospital and the hospital determines that the individual has an emergency medical condition, the hospital must provide either, within the staff and facilities available at the hospital, for such further medical examination and such treatment as may be required to stabilize the medical condition, or, if appropriate, for transfer of the individual to another medical facility.
The Southwest border region is ill-equipped to absorb the expense of providing health care to undocumented aliens because it ranks last in the country in terms of per capita income.
The Southwest border region has been designated as a health professional shortage area under section 332 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254e).
The unreimbursed costs associated with caring for undocumented aliens are severely threatening the financial stability of health care providers in Arizona.
REIMBURSEMENT TO HEALTH CARE PROVIDERS FOR EMERGENCY MEDICAL CARE RENDERED TO CERTAIN ALIENS.
Section 322 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 249) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d)(1) The Secretary shall establish and implement a 5-year pilot program under which funds made available under paragraph (6) are used to reimburse providers for items and services described in section 411(b)(1) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (8 United States Code 1621(b)(1)) provided in Arizona to aliens described in paragraph (3), and to reimburse suppliers of emergency ambulance services furnished to such aliens for which the transportation originates in Arizona (where the use of other methods of transportation is contraindicated by the alien's condition), if payment may not be made to reimburse the provider or supplier under any Federal program or law other than this subsection (such as title XIX of the Social Security Act), any State or local program or law, any group or individual health plan, or any insurance policy.
As part of the pilot program, in a case in which an alien described in paragraph (3) arrived at a hospital in Arizona and the hospital provided for such medical examination and treatment of the alien as the hospital determined was required to stabilize an emergency medical condition (within the meaning of section 1867(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395dd(e)(1))), the Secretary shall use funds made available under paragraph (6) to reimburse the hospital for any transportation costs paid by the hospital to return the alien to the United States border, if-- ``(A) the hospital requested the Attorney General to take the alien into custody after such stabilization; ``(B) such request was denied within 24 hours after its receipt, or the Attorney General gave no response to it within such period; and ``(C) the hospital determined that discharging the alien without providing for such transportation might pose a threat to the health or safety of the alien (or, with respect to a pregnant alien, the health or safety of the alien or her unborn child).
An alien is described in this paragraph if the alien-- ``(A) is not lawfully present in the United States and not detained by any Federal, State, or local law enforcement authority; or ``(B) is paroled into the United States under section 212(d)(5) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182(d)(5)) for less than one year in order to receive treatment for an emergency medical condition.
During the period in which the pilot program is operating, the Secretary shall submit annual reports to the Congress on its operation.
Each report shall contain at least the following information: ``(A) The number of aliens to whom assistance was rendered for which payment was made under this subsection during the previous year.
The nationality of such aliens.
The average cost per alien of such assistance.
The total annual amount paid to each provider or supplier of assistance.
The feasibility and estimated cost of expanding the pilot program to items and services provided anywhere in the Southwest border region of the United States.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to authorize any reduction in the funds payable to any person under any Federal program or law other than this subsection (such as title XIX of the Social Security Act), any State or local program or law, any group or individual health plan, or any insurance policy.
To the extent provided in appropriations Acts, from amounts made available to the Immigration and Naturalization Service for enforcement and border affairs for each of the 5 fiscal years following the fiscal year in which the Border Hospital Survival and Illegal Immigrant Care Act is enacted, the Attorney General may transfer to the Health Resources and Services Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services such amounts as may be necessary to carry out this subsection, not to exceed $50,000,000 for each such year.