This Act may be referred to as the ``Small Business Investment and Promotion Act of 2006''.
TEMPORARY CREDIT AGAINST INCOME TAX FOR SMALL BUSINESSES, FARMERS, AND FISHERMEN TO OFFSET HIGH FUEL COSTS.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related credits) is amended by inserting after section 45M the following new section: ``SEC.
TEMPORARY CREDIT FOR SMALL BUSINESSES, FARMERS, AND FISHERMEN TO OFFSET HIGH FUEL COSTS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible taxpayer, the excessive fuel cost credit determined under this section is an amount equal to the excessive fuel cost paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year for any creditable fuel used in any trade or business of the taxpayer.
Excessive Fuel Cost.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `excessive fuel cost' means, with respect to any creditable fuel, the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) the amount paid or incurred by the taxpayer for such fuel, over ``(B) the adjusted base price for such fuel.
Adjusted base price.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `adjusted base price' means, with respect to any creditable fuel, the amount determined by the Secretary to be the applicable Labor Day 2004 price for such fuel adjusted for inflation.
Applicable price.--The applicable Labor Day 2004 price for any fuel is the average price for such fuel for the region in which the taxpayer purchased such fuel (as determined using data of the Energy Information Agency of the Department of Energy).
Inflation adjustment.--The inflation adjustment shall be determined under the principles of section 1(f); except that, the Secretary shall use estimates of the monthly Consumer Price Index (as defined in such section) where possible to more closely reflect current inflation.
Eligible Taxpayer.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `eligible taxpayer' means any person engaged in a trade or business if-- ``(A) such trade or business is-- ``(i) a farming business (as defined by section 263A(e)(4), or ``(ii) commercial fishing (as defined in section 3 of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1802)), or ``(B) such person is a small business.
Small business.--The term `small business' means a trade or business that employs an annual average of not more than 50 employees.
Creditable fuel.--The term `creditable fuel' means-- ``(A) gasoline, ``(B) diesel fuel, ``(C) heating oil, and ``(D) natural gas.
Adjustment of Standard Mileage Rate.--An eligible taxpayer may elect, in lieu of the credit under this section, a standard mileage allowance under section 162 equal to 60 cents for each mile traveled during the period described in subsection (e).
The Secretary shall modify the standard mileage rate under the preceding sentence to the extent that 60 cents does not accurately reflect that value of the credit under this section.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to fuels purchased during the 2-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section.''.
Credit to Be Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (25), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (26) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(27) in the case of an eligible taxpayer (as defined in section 45N(c)), the excessive fuel cost credit determined under section 45N(a).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 45M the following new item: ``Sec.
Temporary credit for small businesses, farmers, and fishermen to offset high fuel costs.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PERMANENT EXTENSION OF RESEARCH CREDIT.
In General.--Section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for increasing research activities) is amended by striking subsection (h).
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (1) of section 45C(b) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (D).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TREATMENT OF QUALIFIED RESTAURANT PROPERTY, QUALIFIED RETAIL IMPROVEMENT PROPERTY, AND CERTAIN SYSTEMS INSTALLED IN NONRESIDENTIAL BUILDINGS AS 15-YEAR PROPERTY FOR PURPOSES OF DEPRECIATION DEDUCTION.
Qualified Restaurant Property.--Clause (v) of section 168(e)(3)(E) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining 15-year property) is amended by striking ``placed in service before January 1, 2006''.
Qualified Retail Improvement Property and Certain Systems Installed in Nonresidential Buildings.-- (1) 15-year recovery period.--Subparagraph (E) of section 168(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to 15- year property) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (vii), by striking the period at the end of clause (viii) and inserting a comma, and by adding at the end the following new clauses: ``(ix) any qualified retail improvement property, and ``(x) any property-- ``(I) which is part of a heating, ventilation, air conditioning, or commercial refrigeration system, ``(II) which is installed on or in a building which is nonresidential real property, and ``(III) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer.''.
Definition.--Section 168(e) of such Code (relating to classification of property) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Qualified retail improvement property.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified retail improvement property' means any improvement to an interior portion of a building which is nonresidential real property if-- ``(i) such portion is open to the general public, ``(ii) such portion is used by a trade or business that sells tangible personal property or services to the general public, ``(iii) such trade or business employs an annual average of not more than 50 employees, and ``(iv) such improvement is placed in service more than 3 years after the date the building was first placed in service.
Certain improvements not included.--Such term shall not include any improvement for which the expenditure is attributable to-- ``(i) the enlargement of the building, ``(ii) any elevator or escalator, or ``(iii) the internal structural framework of the building.''.
Requirement to use straight line method.--Paragraph (3) of section 168(b) of such Code (relating to applicable depreciation method) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: ``(I) Qualified retail improvement property described in subsection (e)(8).
Property described in subsection (e)(3)(E)(x).''.
Alternative system.--The table contained in section 168(g)(3)(B) of such Code (relating to special rule for certain property assigned to classes) is amended by inserting after the item relating to subparagraph (E)(viii) the following new items: ``(E)(ix).................................................. 39 (E)(x)..................................................... 25''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Advanced Technology Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for the Advanced Technology Program under section 28 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278n) $140,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and $145,000,000 for fiscal year 2008.
SCORE.--There are authorized to be appropriated for the Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE) under section 8(b)(1)(B) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(b)(1)(B) $7,500,000 for fiscal year 2007 and $8,000,000 for fiscal year 2008.
Small Business Development Centers.--There are authorized to be appropriated for small business development centers under section 21 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 648) $137,500,000 fiscal year 2007 and $140,000,000 for fiscal year 2008.
Manufacturing Extension Partnership.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for the Manufacturing Extension Partnership program under sections 25 and 26 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k and 278l) $115,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and $120,000,000 for fiscal year 2008.
Women's Business Centers.--There are authorized to be appropriated for the Women's Business Center Program under section 29 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 656) $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and $15,500,000 for fiscal year 2008.
SENSE OF CONGRESS ON FUNDING FOR SMALL BUSINESS PROGRAMS.
Funding for 7(a) Loan Program.--It is the sense of Congress that Congress should appropriate $79,000,000 for offsetting the cost of borrowers participating in the loan program under section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)).
Funding for Other Programs.--It is the sense of Congress that Congress should appropriate funds for the Advanced Technology Program, the Service Corps of Retired Executives, the Small Business Development Centers, the Manufacturing Extension Partnership, and the Women's Business Center Program at the levels authorized under section 4 of this Act.
MARKET-BASED ADJUSTMENT IN ANNUAL H-1B AND H-2B NONIMMIGRANT NUMERICAL LIMITATIONS.
Section 214(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1184(g)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``(beginning with fiscal year 1992)''; (B) in subparagraph (A)-- (i) in clause (vi), by striking ``and'' at the end; (ii) in clause (vii), by striking ``succeeding fiscal year; or'' and inserting ``of fiscal years 2004, 2005, and 2006; and''; and (iii) by inserting after clause (vii) the following new clause: ``(viii) 85,000 in each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2007, except as provided in paragraph (12); or''.
by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following subparagraph: ``(B) under section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b) may not exceed-- ``(i) 66,000 in each fiscal year before fiscal year 2007; and ``(ii) 85,000 in each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2007, subject to paragraph (10) and except as provided in paragraph (12)(D).
''; (2) in paragraph (10)-- (A) by striking ``limitations of paragraph (1)(B) shall be allocated for a fiscal year so that the total number of aliens subject to such numerical limits'' and inserting ``limitation of paragraph (1)(B) shall be allocated to the greatest extent practicable for a fiscal year so that the total number of aliens subject to such numerical limit''; and (B) by striking ``33,000'' and inserting ``50 percent of the number determined under such paragraph''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12)(A) If, as of a date before September 30 of a fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2007), the total number of aliens who have been issued visas or have otherwise been provided nonimmigrant status under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) reaches the adjusted numerical limitation (as defined in subparagraph (C)) for the fiscal year, the numerical limitation under such subparagraph for the remainder of the fiscal year and the numerical limitation under such subparagraph for the subsequent fiscal year shall be adjusted as follows: If the date the adjusted numerical limitation was reached is in-- ``(i) the first quarter of such fiscal year, the numerical limitation for the fiscal year shall be increased by 20 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation of the fiscal year and the numerical limitation for the subsequent fiscal year shall be equal to 120 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation for the fiscal year before such subsequent fiscal year; ``(ii) the second quarter of such fiscal year, the numerical limitation for the fiscal year shall be increased by 15 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation of the fiscal year and the numerical limitation for the subsequent fiscal year shall be equal to 115 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation for the fiscal year before such subsequent fiscal year; or ``(iii) the third or fourth quarter of such fiscal year, the numerical limitation for the fiscal year shall be increased by 10 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation of the fiscal year and the numerical limitation for the subsequent fiscal year shall be equal to 110 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation for the fiscal year before such subsequent fiscal year.
If, as of September 30 of each fiscal year (beginning with fiscal year 2008), the total number of aliens who have been issued visas or have otherwise been provided nonimmigrant status under subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) is less than the adjusted numerical limitation for the fiscal year, and if such shortfall is not due solely to administrative causes, including processing delays or delays in promulgating regulations, the numerical limitation under such subparagraph for the subsequent fiscal year shall be equal to 90 percent of the adjusted numerical limitation for the fiscal year before such subsequent fiscal year.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `adjusted numerical limitation' means, with respect to a fiscal year, the numerical limitation specified in paragraph (1)(A) for the fiscal year as adjusted under subparagraphs (A) and (B) as of October 1 of the fiscal year.
The provisions of subparagraphs (A) through (C) shall apply with respect to subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) for a fiscal year in the same manner as they apply to subparagraph (A) of such paragraph for such fiscal year.''.
SMALL BUSINESS CONTRACTING GOAL.
Application to Contracts Performed Overseas.--Section 15(g)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code) is amended in the second sentence by inserting ``(including awards for contracts performed outside the United States)'' after ``all prime contract awards''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to fiscal years beginning after September 30, 2006.