This Act may be cited as the ``Thrift Charter Conversion Tax Act of 1995''.
TREATMENT OF RESERVES FOR BAD DEBTS OF SAVINGS ASSOCIATIONS WHICH ARE REQUIRED TO CONVERT INTO BANKS.
In General.--Section 593 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to reserves for losses on loans) is hereby repealed.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (d) of section 50 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Paragraphs (1)(A), (2)(A), and (4) of the section 46(e) referred to in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply to any taxable year beginning after December 31, 1995.''
Subsection (e) of section 52 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (1) and by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
Subsection (a) of section 57 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (4).
Section 246 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (f).
Clause (i) of section 291(e)(1)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``or to which section 593 applies''.
Subparagraph (A) of section 585(a)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``other than an organization to which section 593 applies''.
Section 595 of such Code is hereby repealed.
Section 596 of such Code is hereby repealed.
Subsection (a) of section 860E of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``Except as provided in paragraph (2), the'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``The'', (B) by striking paragraphs (2) and (4) and redesignating paragraphs (3) and (5) as paragraphs (2) and (3), respectively, and (C) by striking in paragraph (2) (as so redesignated) all that follows ``subsection'' and inserting a period.
Paragraph (3) of section 992(d) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 593''.
Section 1038 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (f).
Clause (ii) of section 1042(c)(4)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 593''.
Subsection (c) of section 1277 of such Code is amended by striking ``or to which section 593 applies''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 1361(b)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``or to which section 593 applies''.
The table of sections for part II of subchapter H of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the items relating to sections 593, 595, and 596.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
Repeal of section 595.--The amendment made by subsection (b)(7) shall apply to property acquired in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
6-Year Spread of Adjustments.-- (1) In general.--In the case of any taxpayer who is required by reason of the amendments made by this section to change its method of computing reserves for bad debts-- (A) such change shall be treated as a change in a method of accounting, (B) such change shall be treated as initiated by the taxpayer and as having been made with the consent of the Secretary, and (C) the net amount of the adjustments required to be taken into account by the taxpayer under section 481(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986-- (i) shall be determined by taking into account only applicable excess reserves, and (ii) as so determined, shall be taken into account ratably over the 6-taxable year period beginning with the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1995.
Applicable excess reserves.-- (A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ``applicable excess reserves'' means the excess (if any) of-- (i) the balance of the reserves described in section 593(c)(1) of such Code (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act) as of the close of the taxpayer's last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1996, over (ii) the balance of such reserves as of the close of the taxpayer's last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1988.
Special rule for thrifts which become small banks.--In the case of a bank (as defined in section 581 of such Code) which was not a large bank (as defined in section 585(c)(2) of such Code) for its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1995-- (i) the balance taken into account under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not be less than the amount which would be the balance of such reserve as of the close of its last taxable year beginning before January 1, 1996, if the additions to such reserve for all taxable years had been determined under section 585(b)(2)(A) of such Code, and (ii) the opening balance of the reserve for bad debts as of the beginning of such first taxable year shall be the balance taken into account under subparagraph (A)(ii) (determined after the application of clause (i) of this subparagraph).
The preceding sentence shall not apply for purposes of paragraphs (4), (5), and (6).
Suspension of recapture if residential loan requirement met.-- (A) In general.--In the case of a taxpayer which meets the residential loan requirement of subparagraph (B) for any taxable year-- (i) no adjustment shall be taken into account under paragraph (1) for such taxable year, and (ii) such taxable year shall be disregarded in determining-- (I) whether any other taxable year is a taxable year for which an adjustment is required to be taken into account under paragraph (1), and (II) the amount of such adjustment.
Residential loan requirement.--A taxpayer meets the residential loan requirement of this subparagraph for any taxable year if-- (i) the principal amount of the residential loans made by the taxpayer during such year is not less than the base amount for such year, or (ii) the principal amount of the residential loans made by the taxpayer during each of the 2 preceding taxable years is not less than the base amount for such preceding years.
Clause (ii) shall not apply for purposes of determining whether a taxpayer meets the residential loan requirement of this subparagraph for any taxable year beginning before January 1, 1998.
Residential loan.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``residential loan'' means any loan described in clause (v) of section 7701(a)(19)(C) of such Code but only if such loan is incurred in acquiring, constructing, or improving the property described in such clause.
Base amount.--For purposes of subparagraph (B), the base amount is the average of the principal amounts of the residential loans made by the taxpayer during the 6 most recent taxable years beginning before January 1, 1996.
At the election of the taxpayer who made such loans during each of such 6 taxable years, the preceding sentence shall be applied without regard to the taxable year in which such principal amount was the highest and the taxable year in such principal amount was the lowest.
Such an election may be made only for the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1995, and, if made for such taxable year, shall apply to all succeeding taxable years unless revoked with the consent of the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.
Inflation adjustment of base amount.--In the case of a taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1996, the amount determined under subparagraph (D) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- (i) the amount so determined, multiplied by (ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) of such Code for such calendar year, by substituting ``calendar year 1995'' for ``calendar year 1992'' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Controlled groups.--In the case of a taxpayer which is a member of any controlled group of corporations described in section 1563(a)(1) of such Code, subparagraph (B) shall be applied with respect to such group.
Continued application of fresh start under section 585 transitional rules.--In the case of a taxpayer to which paragraph (1) applied and which was not a large bank (as defined in section 585(c)(2) of such Code) for its first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1995: (A) In general.--For purposes of determining the net amount of adjustments referred to in section 585(c)(3)(A)(iii) of such Code, there shall be taken into account only the excess of the reserve for bad debts as of the close of the last taxable year before the disqualification year over the balance taken into account by such taxpayer under paragraph (2)(A)(ii) of this subsection.
Treatment under elective cut-off method.--For purposes of applying section 585(c)(4) of such Code-- (i) the balance of the reserve taken into account under subparagraph (B) thereof shall be reduced by the balance taken into account by such taxpayer under paragraph (2)(A)(ii) of this subsection, and (ii) no amount shall be includible in gross income by reason of such reduction.
Continued application of section 593(e).-- Notwithstanding the amendments made by this section, in the case of a taxpayer to which paragraph (1) of this subsection applies, section 593(e) of such Code (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act) shall continue to apply to such taxpayer as if such taxpayer were a domestic building and loan association but the amount of the reserve taken into account under such section 593(e) shall be only the balance taken into account by such taxpayer under paragraph (2)(A)(ii) of this subsection.
Certain items included as section 381(c) items.--The balance of the applicable excess reserves, and the balance taken into account by a taxpayer under paragraph (2)(A)(ii) of this subsection, shall be treated as items described in section 381(c) of such Code.
Regulations.--The Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection, including regulations providing for the application of paragraph (3) in the case of mergers, spin-offs, and other reorganizations.
DEDUCTION FOR SPECIAL ASSESSMENTS.
For purposes of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the amount allowed as a deduction under section 162 of such Code for a taxable year shall include the amount paid during such year as a special assessment under section 7(b)(6)(B) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as amended by the Thrift Charter Conversion Act of 1995, as contained in subtitle B of title II of H.R.
2491 of the 104th Congress, as passed by the House of Representatives.