This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Workforce Digital Access Act''.
RESIDENTIAL DIGITAL ACCESS BENEFITS.
In General.--Chapter 79 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Residential digital access benefits ``(a) For purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `employee' means an individual who-- ``(A) is employed in or under an agency; and ``(B) has completed the applicable probationary or trial period (if any), or at least 1 year of current continuous service in the same or similar positions (disregarding any break in service of 3 days or less); but does not include an employee excluded under paragraph (2)(B) or (3) of subsection (g); ``(2) the terms `agency' and `entity of the legislative branch' have the same respective meanings as given them under section 7905, except that the term `agency' does not include a Government corporation (as defined by section 103); and ``(3) the term `Government' means the Government of the United States.
(1) In order to promote greater technological proficiency within the Government's workforce, the General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management shall (to the extent of the duties and responsibilities assigned to each of them by the President, in conformance with succeeding provisions of this section) establish and operate a program under which there shall be furnished to each employee, at no cost to the employee, his or her own home computer, complete with Internet service (hereinafter in this section referred to collectively as `digital access benefits').
An employee not wishing to receive digital access benefits under this section may instead elect-- ``(A) to receive free Internet service alone; or ``(B) to decline benefits under this section altogether.
For purposes of this section-- ``(A) the term `home computer' means a computer (including any necessary peripheral devices and software) that-- ``(i) at a minimum, is capable of providing access to the Internet, and is able to perform office automation and e-learning functions; and ``(ii) is furnished for home use; and ``(B) the term `Internet service' means access to the Internet through an Internet Service Provider (including the ability to send and receive electronic mail) from one's home.
Any digital access benefits furnished under this section shall include at least the following: ``(1) Training on the use of computers and applications (both Internet-based and, to the extent practicable, through facilities at or convenient to the employee's workplace).
One or more upgrade options, available at the employee's request and expense.
Any Internet service furnished under this section shall include at least the following: ``(1) A permanent home page that includes a component linking the employee to designated Government sites and resources.
Features that allow for information sharing and communication, including a means by which an agency may readily contact or communicate with employees at home (on a nationwide, regional, or other basis, as the agency may require).
Inclusion on the permanent home page of a means by which an employee may directly reach the employing agency's Web site or intranet, if appropriate.
All training and support services under subsection (c) that are relevant to Internet service.
Nothing in this section shall be considered to permit or require-- ``(1) that employees declining benefits in accordance with subsection (b)(1)(B) be denied access to training on the use of computers and applications (as described in subsection (c)); or ``(2) that employees electing free Internet service alone be denied access to training on the use of computers and applications (as so described) beyond that specified in subsection (d)(4).
(1) The General Services Administration may contract with any qualified person to procure the goods and services required in order to carry out this section.
Contracts under this subsection shall include appropriate provisions relating to the following: ``(A) The time and manner in which any transfers of title to personal property shall be made.
Restrictions to prevent inappropriate financing or subsidization of benefits, including commercial advertising.
Measures to prevent unauthorized tracking of computer use and to otherwise protect a user's privacy.
Measures to prevent the unauthorized sale or release of names or other identifying information.
Provisions to make benefits under this section accessible to persons with disabilities, such as through appropriate modifications or accessories.
Options for the renewal or extension of benefits, including the conditions under which a computer (or other piece of equipment) will periodically be replaced with a new one.
Measures to permit the donation of used equipment to schools, nonprofit organizations, or other similar entities, to the extent practicable.
Measures to prevent unauthorized access to Government databases, sites, and other functions or capabilities intended for employees only, such as upon an employee's separation from service.
The General Services Administration may prescribe any regulations necessary to carry out its duties and responsibilities under this section.
(1) In order to carry out this section, the Office of Personnel Management shall-- ``(A) upon request, furnish information or technical assistance-- ``(i) on the design or operation of the program or any aspect of the program; and ``(ii) on the design or delivery of Internet-based training; ``(B) establish procedures for the communication of information to and from employees, including procedures for the election of benefits; and ``(C) provide general program oversight, and perform such other functions as the Office considers appropriate to facilitate the efficient delivery (and, to the extent practicable, the optimal use) of benefits.
The Office may prescribe any regulations necessary to carry out its duties and responsibilities under this section, including-- ``(A) in the case of an employee who has previously received or declined benefits under this section, provisions relating to if, and under what conditions, such employee may become eligible for benefits under this section based on subsequent employment; and ``(B) provisions for the exclusion of any employees abroad as to whom the application of this section would be impracticable or inappropriate.
There may, under this paragraph, be excluded any employees as to whom the application of this section would be impracticable or inappropriate by reason of their temporary or intermittent employment.
Authority under this paragraph may be exercised-- ``(A) by the same official or agency as under section 8347(g), (i), (j), (l), or (p) (in connection with retirement); and ``(B) by the respective committees named in section 7905(c)(2)-(3), in the case of the entities of the legislative branch to which those provisions relate.
(1) The General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management shall carry out their respective duties and responsibilities under this section in consultation with one another and with such other agencies as each considers appropriate.
In carrying out this subsection, the General Services Administration shall afford employing agencies reasonable opportunity to communicate any needs or concerns specific to that agency.
Each employing agency shall keep such records, make such certifications, and furnish such information-- ``(1) as the General Services Administration may require to carry out its duties and responsibilities under this section; and ``(2) as the Office of Personnel Management may require to carry out its duties and responsibilities under this section.
(1) There are authorized to be appropriated to each agency (including to the General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management, both as employing agencies and as administering agencies) such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
The costs associated with furnishing benefits to an employee under this section shall be paid-- ``(A) by that individual's employing agency; ``(B) out of amounts made available to that agency under paragraph (1); and ``(C) at the times and in the amounts specified by the General Services Administration.
(A) The amounts paid by an agency under this subsection shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the Employees' Digital Access Fund.
The Fund is available-- ``(i) without fiscal year limitation for all payments to persons providing goods or services under this section (as referred to in subsection (f)); and ``(ii) to pay the respective expenses of the General Services Administration and the Office of Personnel Management in administering this section, within the limitations that may be specified annually by Congress.
The Secretary of the Treasury may, with respect to the Fund, exercise the same authorities as described in section 8909(c).
The provisions of section 8909(f) shall similarly apply with respect to-- ``(i) any payment made from the Fund to any qualified person (as referred to in subsection (f)) in consideration for any goods or services provided by such person under this section; and ``(ii) the net income or profit accruing to or realized by such person from business conducted under this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 79 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``7906.
Residential digital access benefits.''.
In General.--The Office of Management and Budget shall prepare and submit to the President and each House of Congress a report on the operation of the program established under section 7906 of title 5, United States Code, as amended by this Act.
The report shall be submitted by the end of the third year of the program's operation, and shall specifically address the following: (1) Any cost savings, efficiencies, or other benefits realized through the program, such as: (A) Improved individual or collective organizational performance.
Better employee productivity or morale.
Greater flexibilities in the performance of work outside of the customary hours or workplace.
Enhancement of Government recruitment and retention efforts.
Reduced printing or mailing costs to the Government.
Improved communications capabilities, especially with regard to individuals in rural or remote locations.
New Internet-based training opportunities.
Best practices developed by particular agencies to take advantage of any technologies or capabilities made available through the program.
The extent to which family members of employees were able to make use of or otherwise share in the benefits made available through the program.
The extent to which the program (A) benefited communities or segments of the population that historically have been technologically underserved, and (B) otherwise helped alleviate the problem commonly referred to as the ``digital divide''.
Assistance.--Each agency shall (to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law) submit to the Office of Management and Budget such information as the Office may require in order to prepare its report under this section.
Any contract authority under this Act shall be available only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation Acts.
COMMENCEMENT AND TERMINATION PROVISIONS.
Benefits under section 7906 of title 5, United States Code, as amended by this Act, may be furnished only on the basis of elections made during the 48-month period beginning on the first day of the first fiscal year beginning at least 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act.