This Act may be cited as the ``Bosnia Force Realignment Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) United States ground combat forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina have accomplished the military mission assigned to them as a component of the Implementation Force and the Stabilization Force.
The continuing and open-ended commitment of United States ground combat forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina is subject to the oversight authority of the Congress.
The Congress may limit the use of appropriated funds to create the conditions for an orderly and honorable withdrawal of United States ground combat forces from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
On November 27, 1995, the President affirmed that United States participation in the multinational military Implementation Force in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina would terminate in approximately 1 year from that date.
The President declared the expiration date of the mandate for the Implementation Force to be December 20, 1996.
The Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff expressed confidence that the Implementation Force would complete its mission in approximately one year.
The Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff expressed the critical importance of establishing a firm deadline, in the absence of which there is a potential for expansion of the mission of United States ground combat forces.
On October 3, 1996, the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff announced the intention of the United States Administration to delay the removal of United States ground combat forces from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina until March 1997.
In November 1996 the President announced his intention to further extend the deployment of United States ground combat forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina until June 1998.
The President did not request authorization by the Congress of a policy that would result in the further deployment of United States ground combat forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina until June 1998.
Notwithstanding the passage of two previously established deadlines, the reaffirmation of those deadlines by senior national security officials, and the endorsement by those same national security officials of the importance of having a deadline as a hedge against an expanded mission, the President announced on December 17, 1997, that establishing a deadline had been a mistake and that United States ground combat forces were committed to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO)-led mission in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina for the indefinite future.
NATO military forces have increased their participation in law enforcement, particularly police activities, in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
United States military commanders of the NATO-led mission in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina have stated on several occasions that, in accordance with the Dayton Peace Agreement, the principal responsibility for such law enforcement and police activities lies with the Bosnian parties themselves.
WITHDRAWAL OF UNITED STATES GROUND COMBAT FORCES FROM THE REPUBLIC OF BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA.
Limitation.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1999 or any subsequent fiscal year may be used for the deployment of any United States ground combat forces in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina after June 30, 1999.
Exceptions.--The limitation in subsection (a) shall not apply-- (1) to the extent necessary to support a limited number of United States military personnel sufficient only to protect United States diplomatic facilities in existence on the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) to the extent necessary to support non-combat military personnel sufficient only to advise the commanders of the NATO peacekeeping operations in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Limitation on Support for Law Enforcement Activities.--No funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1999 or any subsequent fiscal year may be used for any of the following activities after June 30, 1999: (1) Conduct of, or direct support for, law enforcement and police activities in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina, except for the training of law enforcement personnel or to prevent imminent loss of life.
Conduct of, or support for, any activity in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina that may have the effect of jeopardizing the primary mission of the NATO-led force in preventing armed conflict between the Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republika Srpska (``Bosnian Entities'').
The transfer of refugees within the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina that, in the opinion of the commander of NATO Forces involved in such transfer-- (A) has as one of its purposes the acquisition of control by a Bosnian Entity of territory allocated to the other Bosnian Entity under the Dayton Peace Agreement; or (B) may expose United States Armed Forces to substantial risk to their personal safety.
The implementation of any decision to change the legal status of any territory within the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina unless expressly agreed to by all signatories to the Dayton Peace Agreement.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the authority of the President under the Constitution to protect the lives of United States citizens.
In General.--Not later than December 1, 1998, the President shall prepare and transmit to the Congress a report on the progress of the withdrawal of United States ground combat forces from the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Contents of Report.--The report under subsection (a) shall include an identification of the specific steps taken by the United States Government to transfer the United States portion of the peacekeeping mission in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina to European allied nations or organizations.
In this Act: (1) Dayton peace agreement.--The term ``Dayton Peace Agreement'' means the General Framework Agreement for Peace in Bosnia and Herzegovina, initialed by the parties in Dayton, Ohio, on November 21, 1995, and signed in Paris on December 14, 1995.
Implementation force.--The term ``Implementation Force'' means the NATO-led multinational military force in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina (commonly referred to as ``IFOR''), authorized under the Dayton Peace Agreement.
NATO.--The term ``NATO'' means the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.
Stabilization force.--The term ``Stabilization Force'' means the United Nations-led follow-on force to the Implementation Force in the Republic of Bosnia and Herzegovina and other countries in the region (commonly referred to as ``SFOR''), authorized under United Nations Security Council Resolution 1088 (December 12, 1996).