KAGEET POINT LAND SELECTION.
The lands contained in the western half of Township 21 South, Range 24 East, Copper River Meridian, commonly known as ``Kageet Point'', shall be considered and treated as acreage allotted to the Chugach Alaska Corporation for the purpose of making selections under section 12(c) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1611(c)).
RATIFICATION OF CERTAIN CASWELL AND MONTANA CREEK NATIVE ASSOCIATIONS CONVEYANCES.
The conveyance of approximately 11,520 acres to Montana Creek Native Association, Inc., and the conveyance of approximately 11,520 acres to Caswell Native Association, Inc., shall be considered and treated as conveyances under section 14(h)(2) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1613(h)(2)).
The group corporations for Montana Creek and Caswell are hereby declared to have received their full entitlement and shall not be entitled to the receipt of any additional lands under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
MINING CLAIMS AFTER LANDS PATENTED TO REGIONAL CORPORATION.
Section 22(c) of Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1621(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) After the fee or subsurface lands subject to a valid mining claim have been patented to a Regional Corporation-- ``(A) any person holding such valid mining claim shall continue to meet all requirements of the general mining laws and section 314 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1744); ``(B) the United States shall continue to administer the mining claim, unless and until the Secretary, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, waives administration in favor of the Regional Corporation; and ``(C)(i) except as provided in clause (ii), all revenues from the mining claim otherwise due the United States shall be remitted to the Regional Corporation for distribution pursuant to section 7(i) of this Act; and ``(ii) if the Regional Corporation patent does not cover all land covered by the mining claim, the Regional Corporation shall be entitled only to the proportion of revenues reasonably allocated to the portion of the mining claim so covered.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS TO IMPLEMENT CONVEYANCES.
Section 14(c) of Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1613(c)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (5) as subparagraphs (A) through (E), respectively; (2) by striking ``Each patent'' and inserting ``(1) Each patent''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to provide technical assistance to Village Corporations in carrying out this subsection.
The Secretary may make amounts available pursuant to this subsection through contracts with nonprofit organizations, whose function is to provide technical assistance in planning, developing, and administering assistance to Village Corporations in fulfilling the requirements of this subsection.''.
OPEN SEASON FOR CERTAIN NATIVE ALASKA VETERANS FOR ALLOTMENTS.
In General.--During the 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, an individual described in subsection (b) is eligible for an allotment of not to exceed 160 acres under the Act of May 17, 1906 (chapter 2469; 34 United States Statutes at Large 197), as such Act was in effect before December 18, 1971.
Eligible Individuals.-- (1) In general.--An individual is eligible under subsection (a) if the individual would have been eligible under the Act of May 17, 1906 (chapter 2469; 34 United States Statutes at Large 197), as such Act was in effect before December 18, 1971, and the individual is a veteran of the Korean conflict or the Vietnam era.
Deceased persons.--In the case of an individual described in paragraph (1) who is deceased, the heirs of the individual shall be treated as the individual described in paragraph (1).
Conveyance Deadline.--The Secretary of the Interior shall complete land conveyances pursuant to this section not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Implementation.--The Secretary shall prescribe such rules as are necessary to carry out this section.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section, the terms ``veteran'', ``Korean conflict'', and ``Vietnam era'' have the meaning given such terms in paragraphs (2), (9), and (29), respectively, of section 101 of title 38, United States Code.
TRANSFER OF WRANGELL INSTITUTE.
Property Return.--Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, is authorized to transfer to the United States the 10-acre site of the Wrangell Institute in Wrangell, Alaska, and the structures contained thereon.
The Administrator of General Services shall accept title to such property and the structures contained thereon, on behalf of the United States.
Restoration of Bidding Credits.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), in exchange for the land and structures at the Wrangell Institute transferred pursuant to subsection (a), the Administrator of General Services shall restore bidding credits to the Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated property account in the Treasury established pursuant to section 12(b) of Public Law 94-204 (43 United States Code 1611 note), in an amount equal to the sum of-- (A) $382,305, plus interest; and (B) the cost of legal and other expenses incurred as a result of the return of the property.
Calculation of interest.--The interest credited to the Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated property account pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be compounded semiannually at the same interest rate that was in effect for 5-year United States Treasury bonds on November 2, 1987.
The interest shall be calculated for the period beginning on November 2, 1987, and ending on the date that the land is conveyed to the United States.
Use of restored credits.--Bidding credits restored to the Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated property account pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be available solely for the acquisition of General Services Administration properties.
Hold harmless.--The United States shall defend and hold harmless Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, and its subsidiaries, in any claim arising from Federal or Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, ownership of the land and structures, prior to the return of such land and structures to the United States.
Section 22(c)(2)(A) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1621(c)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i)-- (A) by striking ``outside the boundaries of a conservation system unit (as such term is defined in the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act) and''; and (B) by striking ``The Secretary shall promptly determine the validity of such claims or locations within conservation system units.
''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``outside a conservation system unit'' each place such phrase appears.