This Act may be cited as the ``General Accounting Office Reform Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) an objective General Accounting Office, primarily limited to auditing and accounting functions that are carried out in a professionally responsible manner, provides an essential service to the Congress and the United States; (2) the General Accounting Office maintains substantial staff with expertise in a wide variety of fields to provide comprehensive technical evaluations to the Congress; (3) the General Accounting Office is required to coordinate its audits with offices of inspector generals to provide Congress with factual analysis of waste, fraud and abuse; (4) the General Accounting Office may have exceeded its accounting and auditing mission and increasingly makes policymaking reports on subjects not directly related to accounting and auditing; (5) there have been serious allegations questioning the General Accounting Office's nonpartisanship, objectivity, integrity and qualifications in carrying out its functions and responsibilities under the law; (6) a review of the General Accounting Office's services conducted by a newly established Independent Peer Review Committee, including an examination of its organizational structure, management policies and operations, should be initiated to ensure that financial and accounting functions remain the focus of the agency; and (7) immediate reforms should be enacted to address deficiencies pending the completion of this outside review and report.
TITLE I--INDEPENDENT GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE SEC.
INDEPENDENT GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE PEER REVIEW COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--There is established the Independent General Accounting Office Peer Review Committee (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Committee'').
The Committee shall consist of 11 members as follows-- (1) the Comptroller General of the United States; and (2) 10 members who-- (A) are not officers or regular employees of the General Accounting Office; (B) have expertise in government program analysis, public policy analysis, financial and auditing review; and (C) are appointed by the Majority and Minority Leaders of the House of Representatives and of the Senate in consultation with the chairman and ranking members of the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, the House of Representatives Committee on Government Operations, and the chairman and ranking minority member of the Subcommittee on Legislative Branch of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the chairman and ranking minority member of the Subcommittee on Legislative of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
One of the members appointed pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be appointed chair of the Committee.
Functions.--The Committee shall conduct a review of the organization, administration, management, and operations of the General Accounting Office, including the way the General Accounting Office conducts its reports, studies, and reviews.
To conduct the review, the Committee shall engage the services of accountants or accounting firms and persons or entities with expertise in the fields of auditing, and public program and policy analysis pursuant to the appropriation under the heading ``Contract Study of GAO''.
In planning the review the Committee shall take into account generally accepted standards for an external quality review of an auditing organization.
In conducting the review the Committee shall-- (1) select a sample of General Accounting Office reports, studies, and reviews conducted over the past 24-month period preceding the date of the enactment of this section, which shall encompass a variety of topics, sectors, and subjects that adequately reflect the endeavors of the General Accounting Office; (2) submit the sample reports, studies, and reviews to independent analysis by organizations, selected by the Committee, with recognized expertise in the relevant field of the selected reports, studies, and reviews to assess the accuracy, fairness, and professionalism of the reports, studies, and reviews; and (3) ensure that the Committee or the organization responsible for conducting the analysis includes in each report of the independent analysis-- (A) a thorough examination to determine the objectivity, integrity, validity, and timeliness of each General Accounting Office product; (B) the requesting and clearance procedures to maintain objectivity in analysis; (C) the number of and reasons for the use of outside consultants and contract services required to complete the final General Accounting Office report; (D) the contents and findings of any other support agencies' reports for duplication of scopes of work, and related efforts designed to solicit different findings and recommendations; (E) the costs associated with preparing the final reports by the General Accounting Office, and the costs incurred by other support agencies in preparing similar or identical scopes of work; and (F) a review of the final submission process to determine how the information was released to the appropriate congressional Members or committees, to the public, and to any relevant Federal departments or agencies.
Consultation.--In conducting the review and analysis under subsection (b), the Committee shall ensure that Federal departments and agencies, Members of Congress, appropriate congressional staff, and any other relevant organizations or individuals are consulted concerning their input, participation in, and responses to General Accounting Office studies, reports, and reviews with the intention of determining the objectivity and integrity of the final analysis.
Reports.--No later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Committee shall consolidate all analyses and submit a report of the review conducted under this section to the Comptroller General of the United States, the chairman and ranking minority member of the Subcommittee on Legislative Branch of the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and the chairman and ranking minority member of the Subcommittee on Legislative of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and to the chairman and ranking minority member of the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs, and the chairman and ranking minority member of the House of Representatives Committee on Government Operations.
Such report shall include an overall summary with recommendations for ways in which the General Accounting Office can accomplish its mandates in the most efficient and professional manner, at the most reasonable cost, with minimal duplication of other support agencies and Office of Inspector General undertakings, and with maximum objectivity and integrity.
Administrative Provision.--The provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the Committee, except the Committee shall consult the guidelines established under section 7(d) of such Act.
Termination.--The Committee shall terminate 30 days after the date of submitting the report under subsection (d).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
TITLE II--GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE REFORM SEC.
LIMITATION ON FUNDS FOR CONSULTING SERVICES.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the General Accounting Office during fiscal year 1993 may not obligate and expend funds for consulting services involving management and professional services, special studies and analyses, technical assistance, and management review program funded organizations, in excess of an amount equal to 75 percent of the amount obligated and expended by the General Accounting Office during fiscal year 1992 for such purposes.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``consulting services'' shall be defined consistent with the provision of the Office of Management and Budget Circular A-120 dated January 4, 1988.
EXAMINATION OF INTERNAL CONTROLS.
The Comptroller General shall submit annually a report to Congress containing-- (1) a description and statement of the Comptroller General's responsibility for establishing and maintaining an adequate internal control structure; and (2) an assessment, as of the most recent fiscal year, of whether such internal control structure reasonably assures compliance with the laws and regulations governing, and the objectives of, the General Accounting Office.
PROHIBITION OF INVESTIGATIONS ON THE INITIATIVE OF THE COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Investigations and Evaluations.--Chapter 7 of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in section 712 by striking out paragraphs (1) and (3) and redesignating paragraphs (2), (4), and (5) as paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively; and (2) in section 717(b) by striking out paragraph (1) and redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
Prohibition on Use of Funds.--The General Accounting Office may not expend any funds to conduct any study, investigation, or audit, or produce or disseminate any material which has not been requested by the Congress or a Federal agency or is not required by statute.
ASSIGNMENTS AND DETAILS TO THE CONGRESS.
Section 734 of title 31, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Assignment and details to Congress ``(a) The Comptroller General may assign or detail an officer or employee of the General Accounting Office to full-time continuous duty with a committee of Congress for not more than one year.
A committee or office of the Congress (including a Member's office) shall reimburse the Comptroller General for the pay of each officer or employee or the Office for the time the officer or employee is assigned or detailed to the committee or office of the Congress.''.
REIMBURSEMENT FOR ASSIGNMENTS AND DETAILS.
A Federal agency shall reimburse the Comptroller General for the pay of each officer or employee of the General Accounting Office for the time the officer or employee is assigned or detailed to the agency.
CONGRESSIONAL COMMENT AND CERTAIN AGENCY REVIEW OF DRAFT REPORTS.
Section 718 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Any draft report on a study or audit requested by any committee or office of the Congress (including a Member's office) shall be submitted to the committees of the Congress with jurisdiction of the subject matter of the report, and if appropriate, to the Congressional Budget Office, the Office of Technology Assessment, and the Congressional Research Service.
Within 30 days of receiving the report, the majority and minority members of such committees, and the offices to which such draft report is submitted may review and submit comments to the General Accounting Office.
Such comments shall be included in the final report.''.
PROHIBITION OF GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE PERSONNEL IN A COMBAT ZONE.
No officer or employee of the General Accounting Office may perform any function or duty of such Office in any military zone of combat operations as designated by the Secretary of Defense.
STUDIES AND AUDITS NOT REVIEWED BY SUBJECT AGENCY.
Section 720 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) If the General Accounting Office submits a report to the Congress or the President, and the agency which is the subject of the study or audit of the report did not review or comment on such report, the lack of such review or comment shall be noted on the front of such report.