This Act may be cited as the ``Second Chance Homes Promotion Act of 2001''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States has the highest rates of teenage pregnancy and births in the western industrialized world.
Teenage pregnancy costs the United States at least $7,000,000,000 annually.
Four in 10 young women become pregnant at least once before they reach the age of 20, for a total of nearly 1,000,000 teenage pregnancies a year.
Eight in 10 of these pregnancies are unintended, and 79 percent are to unmarried teens.
Teenage mothers are less likely than other teens to complete high school.
Only \1/3\ of teenage mothers receive a high school diploma.
Teenage mothers are also more likely than other individuals to become dependent on welfare, with nearly 80 percent of unmarried teenage mothers ending up on welfare.
The children of teenage mothers have lower birth weights, are more likely to perform poorly in school, and are at greater risk of abuse and neglect than are other children.
The sons of teenage mothers are 13 percent more likely than other males to end up in prison, while daughters of teenage mothers are 22 percent more likely than other females to become teenage mothers themselves.
In the amendments made by the 1996 welfare reform legislation, the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, Congress endorsed the concept of ``second chance homes'' as an alternative for minor teenage parents required by the law to live at home or under adult supervision.
The law required States to ``provide, or assist the individual in locating, a second chance home, maternity home, or other appropriate adult-supervised supportive living arrangement''.
According to a 1999 report by the Center for Law and Social Policy, 18 States had no policy for helping families with teenage parents find shelter.
A 1998 survey by the Center on Law and Social Policy found that in the 9 States that keep data on minors ineligible for welfare, 1,300 teens were denied assistance under State temporary assistance for needy families programs because of their living situations.
Second chance homes offer the 3 elements that teenage welfare mothers need to change their lives-- (A) socialization; (B) nurturing and support; and (C) structure and discipline.
These homes have produced the following notable and promising results: (A) Few second pregnancies.
Slightly higher adoption rates.
Better maternal and child health.
Dramatically increased school completion rates for mothers.
SECOND CHANCE HOME PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') is authorized to award grants to eligible entities to enable such eligible entities to carry out the activities described in section 6.
Process.--The Secretary shall award grants under this Act on a competitive basis, after reviewing all applications submitted under section 5.
In General.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this Act, an entity shall be-- (1) a State; (2) a unit of local government; (3) an Indian tribe; or (4) a public or private nonprofit agency, organization, or institution, or other nonprofit entity, including a nonprofit urban Indian organization or an Indian group or community that is not an Indian tribe.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given such term in section 4 of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
In General.--An eligible entity that desires a grant under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary shall reasonably require.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity that submits an application-- (1) proposing to establish a new second chance home, especially in a rural area or tribal community; (2) proposing to collaborate with a non-profit entity in establishing, expanding, or enhancing a second chance home; or (3) demonstrating that the eligible entity will use funds under a State temporary assistance for needy families program under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et sequentes) to support a portion of the operating costs of the applicable second chance home.
In General.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this Act shall use such grant funds to establish, expand, or enhance a second chance home.
Second Chance Home.--In this Act, the term ``second chance home'' means a community-based, adult-supervised group home that provides young mothers and their children with a supportive and supervised living arrangement in which such mothers are required to learn parenting skills, including child development, family budgeting, health and nutrition, and other skills to promote their long-term economic independence and the well-being of their children.
Requirement.--A second chance home that receives grant funds under this Act shall provide services to mothers who are not more than 23 years of age and their children.
The Secretary shall not award a grant to an eligible entity under this Act unless the eligible entity agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred in carrying out the activities for which the grant was awarded, the eligible entity will make available non-Federal contributions in an amount equal to not less than 20 percent of the Federal funds provided under the grant.
Such contributions may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly valued, including plant, equipment, or services.
Grants under this Act shall be awarded for a period of 5 years.
In General.--The Secretary shall enter into a contract with a public or private entity for the evaluation of the second chance homes that are supported by grant funds under this Act.
Information.--The evaluation shall include the collection of information about the relevant characteristics of individuals who benefit from second chance homes such as those that are supported by grant funds under this Act and what services provided by such second chance homes are most beneficial to such individuals.
Report.-- (1) In general.--The entity conducting the evaluation under this section shall submit to Congress an interim report and a final report in accordance with paragraph (2) containing the results of the evaluation.
Date.-- (A) Interim report.--The interim report shall be submitted not later than 2 years after the date on which the entity enters into a contract.
Final report.--The final report shall be submitted not later than 5 years after the date on which the entity enters into a contract.
In General.--From amounts appropriated under section 11(a), the Secretary may use an amount not to exceed $500,000 to enter into a contract, with a public or private entity, for the provision of technical assistance to eligible entities receiving grant funds under this Act.
Conferences.--The technical assistance provided under this section may include conferences for the purpose of disseminating information concerning best practices for second chance homes.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, other than section 9, $45,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.
Evaluation.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 9, $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.
Availability.--Any amounts authorized under the authority of subsections (a) and (b) shall remain available until expended.