This Act may be cited as the ``Animal Fighting Prohibition Enforcement Act''.
ENFORCEMENT OF ANIMAL FIGHTING PROHIBITIONS UNDER THE ANIMAL WELFARE ACT.
In General.--Section 26 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2156) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (c) through (h) as subsections (d) through (i), respectively; (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) Sharp Instruments.--It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly sell, buy, transport, or deliver in interstate or foreign commerce a knife, a gaff, or any other sharp instrument attached, or designed or intended to be attached, to the leg of a bird for use in an animal fighting venture.
''; (3) in subsection (e) (as redesignated by paragraph (1)), by striking ``(c)'' and inserting ``(d)''; (4) in subsection (f) (as redesignated by paragraph (1))-- (A) by striking ``(a), (b), or (c)'' and inserting ``(a), (b), (c), or (d)''; and (B) by striking ``1 year'' and inserting ``2 years''; (5) by striking subsection (g) (as redesignated by paragraph (1)) and inserting the following: ``(g) Investigations.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary or any person authorized by the Secretary shall make such investigations as the Secretary considers necessary to determine whether any person has violated or is violating any provision of this section.
Assistance.--Through cooperative agreements, the Secretary may obtain the assistance of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Department of the Treasury, and other law enforcement agencies of the United States and of State, tribal, and local governmental agencies in the conduct of an investigation under paragraph (1).
Warrants.-- ``(A) Issuance.--A judge of the United States, United States magistrate judge, or judge of a State or tribal court of competent jurisdiction in the district in which is located an animal, paraphernalia, instrument, or other property or thing that there is probable cause to believe was involved, is about to be involved, or is intended to be involved in a violation of this section shall issue a warrant to search for and seize the animal or other property or thing.
Application; execution.--A United States marshal or any person authorized under this section to conduct an investigation may apply for and execute a warrant issued under subparagraph (A), and any animal, paraphernalia, instrument, or other property or thing seized under such a warrant shall be held by the authorized person pending disposition of the animal, paraphernalia, instrument, or other property or thing by a court in accordance with this subsection.
Storage of animals.-- ``(A) In general.--An animal seized by a United States marshal or other authorized person under paragraph (3) shall be taken promptly to an animal housing facility in which the animal shall be stored humanely.
No facility available.--If there is not available a suitable animal storage facility sufficient in size to hold all of the animals involved in a violation, a United States marshal or other authorized person shall-- ``(i) seize a representative sample of the animals for evidentiary purposes to be transported to an animal storage facility in which the animals shall be stored humanely; and ``(ii)(I) keep the remaining animals at the location where the animals were seized; ``(II) provide for the humane care of the animals; and ``(III) cause the animals to be banded, tagged, or marked by microchip and photographed or videotaped for evidentiary purposes.
Care.--While a seized animal is held in custody, a United States marshal or other authorized person shall ensure that the animal is provided necessary care (including housing, feeding, and veterinary treatment).
Forfeiture.-- ``(A) In general.--Any animal, paraphernalia, instrument, vehicle, money, or other property or thing involved in a violation of this section shall be liable to be proceeded against and forfeited to the United States at any time on complaint filed in any United States district court or other court of the United States for any jurisdiction in which the animal, paraphernalia, instrument, vehicle, money, or other property or thing is found.
Disposition.--On entry of a judgment of forfeiture, a forfeited animal shall be disposed of by humane means, as the court may direct.
Costs.--Costs incurred by the United States for care of an animal seized and forfeited under this section shall be recoverable from the owner of the animal-- ``(i) in the forfeiture proceeding, if the owner appears in the forfeiture proceeding; or ``(ii) in a separate civil action brought in the jurisdiction in which the owner is found, resides, or transacts business.
Claim to property.-- ``(i) In general.--The owner, custodian, or other person claiming an interest in a seized animal may prevent disposition of the animal by posting, or may be ordered by any United States district court or other court of the United States, or by any tribal court, for any jurisdiction in which the animal is found to post, not later than 10 days after the animal is seized, a bond with the court in an amount sufficient to provide for the care of the animal (including housing, feeding, and veterinary treatment) for not less than 30 days.
Renewal.--The owner, custodian, or other person claiming an interest in a seized animal may renew a bond, or be ordered to renew a bond, by posting a new bond, in an amount sufficient to provide for the care of the animal for at least an additional 30 days, not later than 10 days after the expiration of the period for which a previous bond was posted.
Disposition.--If a bond expires and is not renewed, the animal may be disposed of as provided in subparagraph (A).
Euthanization.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (6), an animal may be humanely euthanized if a veterinarian determines that the animal is suffering extreme pain.
''; and (6) in subsection (h) (as redesignated by paragraph (1))-- (A) in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2), by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``(including a movement to, from, or within land under the jurisdiction of an Indian tribe)''; and (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``telephone, radio, or television'' and inserting ``telephone, the Internet, radio, television, or any technology''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 23 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2153) is amended-- (1) by striking ``Sec.
The Secretary'' and inserting the following: ``SEC.
FEES; AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
Fees.--The Secretary''; and (2) by striking the third sentence and inserting the following: ``(b) Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on the later of-- (1) the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) May 13, 2003.