This Act may be cited as the ``Yukon River Salmon Act of 1995''.
It is the purpose of this Act-- (1) to implement the interim agreement for the conservation of salmon stocks originating from the Yukon River in Canada agreed to through an exchange of notes between the Government of the United States and the Government of Canada on February 3, 1995; (2) to provide for representation by the United States on the Yukon River Panel established under such agreement; and (3) to authorize to be appropriated sums necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the United States under such agreement.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``Agreement'' means the interim agreement for the conservation of salmon stocks originating from the Yukon River in Canada agreed to through an exchange of notes between the Government of the United States and the Government of Canada on February 3, 1995; (2) the term ``Panel'' means the Yukon River Panel established by the Agreement; and (3) the term ``Yukon River Joint Technical Committee'' means the technical committee established by paragraph C.2 of the Memorandum of Understanding concerning the Pacific Salmon Treaty between the Government of the United States and the Government of Canada recorded January 28, 1985.
Representation.--The United States shall be represented on the Panel by six individuals, of whom-- (1) one (1) shall be an official of the United States Government with expertise in salmon conservation and management; (2) one (1) shall be an official of the State of Alaska with expertise in salmon conservation and management; and (3) four (4) shall be knowledgeable and experienced with regard to the salmon fisheries on the Yukon River.
Appointments.--Panel members shall be appointed as follows: (1) The Panel member described in subsection (a)(1) shall be appointed by the Secretary of State.
The Panel member described in subsection (a)(2) shall be appointed by the Governor of Alaska.
The Panel members described in subsection (a)(3) shall be appointed by the Governor of Alaska, who shall consider nominations provided by organizations with expertise in Yukon River salmon fisheries.
The Governor of Alaska shall appoint at least one member under subsection (a)(3) who is qualified to represent the interests of Lower Yukon River fishing districts, and at least one member who is qualified to represent the interests of Upper Yukon River fishing districts.
At least one of the Panel members under subsection (a)(3) shall be an Alaska Native.
Alternates.--The Secretary of State and Governor of Alaska may designate an alternate Panel member for each Panel member they appoint under subsection (b), who meets the same qualifications, to serve in the absence of the Panel member.
Term Length.--Panel members and alternate Panel members shall serve four-year terms.
Any individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of any term shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Reappointment.--Panel members and alternate Panel members shall be eligible for reappointment.
Decisions.--Decisions by the United States section of the Panel shall be made by the consensus of the Panel members appointed under paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (a).
Consultation.--In carrying out their functions under the Agreement, Panel members may consult with such other interested parties as they consider appropriate.
Appointments.--The Governor of Alaska may appoint an Advisory Committee of not less than eight (8), but not more than twelve (12), individuals who are knowledgeable and experienced with regard to the salmon fisheries on the Yukon River.
Members of the Advisory Committee may attend all meetings of the United States section of the Panel, and shall be given the opportunity to examine and be heard on any matter under consideration by the United States section of the Panel.
Compensation.--The members of such advisory committee shall receive no compensation for their services.
Term Length.--Advisory Committee members shall serve two-year terms.
Any individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of any term shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Reappointment.--Advisory Committee members shall be eligible for reappointment.
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
1 et sequentes) shall not apply to the Panel, the Yukon River Joint Technical Committee, or the Advisory Committee created under section 5 of this Act.
Responsible Management Entity.--The State of Alaska Department of Fish and Game shall be the responsible management entity for the United States for the purposes of the Agreement.
Effect of Designation.--The designation under subsection (a) shall not be considered to expand, diminish or change the management authority of the State of Alaska or the Federal Government with respect to fishery resources.
Recommendations of Panel.--In addition to recommendations made by the Panel to the responsible management entities in accordance with the Agreement, the Panel may make recommendations concerning the conservation and management of salmon originating in the Yukon River to the Department of Interior, Department of Commerce, Department of State, North Pacific Fishery Management Council, and other Federal or State entities as appropriate.
Recommendations by the Panel shall be advisory in nature.
In the event that the Treaty between Canada and the United States of America Concerning Pacific Salmon, signed at Ottawa, January 28, 1985, terminates prior to the termination of the Agreement, and the functions of the Panel are assumed by the ``Yukon River Salmon Commission'' referenced in the Agreement, the provisions of this Act which apply to the Panel shall thereafter apply to the Yukon River Salmon Commission, and the other provisions of this Act shall remain in effect.
Panel members and alternate Panel members who are not State or Federal employees shall receive compensation at the daily rate of GS-16 of the General Schedule when engaged in the actual performance of duties.
Travel and other necessary expenses shall be paid for all Panel members, alternate Panel members, United States members of the Joint Technical Committee, and members of the Advisory Committee when engaged in the actual performance of duties.
Except for officials of the United States Government, individuals described in subsection (b) shall not be considered to be Federal employees while engaged in the actual performance of duties, except for the purposes of injury compensation or tort claims liability as provided in chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, and chapter 71 of title 28, United States Code.
There are authorized to be appropriated from time to time such sums as may be necessary for carrying out the purposes and provisions of the Agreement and this Act including-- (1) necessary travel expenses of Panel members, alternate Panel members, United States members of the Joint Technical Committee, and members of the Advisory Committee in accordance with Federal Travel Regulations and sections 5701, 5702, 5704 through 5708, and 5731 of title 5, United States Code; (2) the United States share of the joint expenses of the Panel and the Joint Technical Committee, provided that Panel members and alternate Panel members shall not, with respect to commitments concerning the United States share of the joint expenses, be subject to section 262(b) of title 22, United States Code, insofar as it limits the authority of United States representatives to international organizations with respect to such commitments; and (3) by the Secretary of Commerce, $400,000 in each of fiscal years 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 to be contributed to the Yukon River Restoration and Enhancement Fund and used in accordance with the Agreement.