Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``65th Infantry Regiment Commemorative Coin Act''.
Findings.--The Congress hereby finds that the brave and gallant soldiers from the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico who comprised the 65th Infantry Regiment of the United States Army deserve a special commemoration and a commemorative coin for their contributions during the Korean conflict for the following reasons: (1) The Puerto Rican soldiers of the 65th Infantry Regiment unselfishly fought, bled, and died for the rights and privileges of all citizens of the United States and the Republic of Korea.
129 soldiers of the United States Army's 65th Infantry Regiment were awarded the Silver Star and 8 received the Distinguished Service Cross for their heroism during the Korean conflict.
The 65th Infantry Regiment went to the rescue of the 1st Division of the United States Marine Corps in Hagaru-ri when that division was surrounded by forces of the Peoples Republic of China, provided a safe corridor through which the Marines escaped, and formed a protective rear guard during the retreat to Hungnam.
After bitter fighting, and with the forces of the Peoples Republic of China on their heels, the 65th Infantry Regiment was the last regiment to leave the beachhead in the Christmas eve evacuation of Hungnam on December 24, 1950.
On the night of February 13-14, 1951, while the 65th Infantry Regiment was encamped near the command post of the 3d Infantry Division of the United States Army during a rest and recreation leave away from the front lines, the command post of the 3d Infantry Division was attacked by over 1,000 North Korean soldiers who had infiltrated through the front lines without being detected and the 65th Infantry Regiment rallied, attacked, and subsequently destroyed the North Korean force, thereby saving the commanding officer and staff of the 3d Infantry Division from death or capture.
For their heroism in battle, the soldiers of the 65th Infantry Regiment were showered with many accolades but for them perhaps the most significant and meaningful came in the form of a letter from the commander of the United Nations forces in Korea, General of the Army Douglas MacArthur which read in part as follows: ``The Puerto Ricans forming the ranks of the gallant 65th Infantry Division on the battlefields of Korea by valor, determination and a resolute will to victory give daily testament to their invincible loyalty to the United States and the fervor of their devotion to those immutable standards of human relations to which the Americans and the Puerto Ricans are in common dedicated.
They are writing a brilliant record of achievement in battle and I am proud indeed to have them in this command.
I wish that we might have many more like them.''.
$1 Silver Coins.--In commemoration of all the Puerto Ricans in the 65th Infantry Regiment of the United States Army who fought in the Korean conflict, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 60,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the courage and valor of the Puerto Ricans who served in the 65th Infantry Regiment during the Korean conflict.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``1999''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Puerto Rican Veterans Association of Massachusetts, the Puerto Rican-American Research Institute, and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning January 1, 1999.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 1999.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly deposited in the Korean War Veterans Memorial Fund for use by the American Battle Monuments Commission in accordance with subsection (b).
Use of Proceeds.-- (1) Costs relating to the korean war veterans memorial.-- Except as provided in paragraph (2), amounts deposited in the Korean War Veterans Memorial Fund pursuant to subsection (a) shall be available to the American Battle Monuments Commission for the uses described in section 8(b) of Public Law 101-495.
Ceremony for the 65th regiment.--The American Battle Monuments Commission shall use such amount of the surcharges from the sale of coins issued as the Commission determines to be necessary and appropriate, after consulting with the Puerto Rican Veterans Association of Massachusetts and the Puerto Rican-American Research Institute, to conduct a ceremony at the Korean War Veterans Memorial commemorating the Puerto Ricans comprising the 65th Infantry Regiment of the United States Army for their service and contributions during the Korean conflict.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the American Battle Monuments Commission as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (a).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.