ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL MILITARY MUSEUM FOUNDATION.
In General.--(1) Part B of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 1519 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 1520--NATIONAL MILITARY MUSEUM FOUNDATION ``Sec.
Duty to maintain tax-exempt status.
Establishment ``There is established a nonprofit corporation to be known as the National Military Museum Foundation (in this chapter referred to as the `Foundation').
The Foundation is not an agency or instrumentality of the United States.
Purposes ``The Foundation shall have the following purposes: ``(1) To encourage and facilitate the preservation of military artifacts having historical or technological significance.
To promote innovative solutions to the problems associated with the preservation of such artifacts.
To facilitate research on and educational activities relating to military history.
To promote voluntary partnerships between the Federal Government and the private sector for the preservation of such artifacts and of military history.
To facilitate the display of such artifacts for the education and benefit of the public.
To develop publications and other interpretive materials pertinent to the historical collections of the Armed Forces of the United States that will supplement similar publications and materials available from public, private, and corporate sources.
To provide financial support for educational, interpretive, and conservation programs of the Armed Forces relating to such artifacts.
To broaden public understanding of the role of the military in United States history.
To recognize and honor the individuals who have served in the Armed Forces.
Membership ``Eligibility for membership in the Foundation and the rights, privileges, and designation of classes of members of the Foundation shall be as provided in the constitution and bylaws of the Foundation.
Governing body ``(a) Board of Directors.--(1) The Foundation shall have a Board of Directors (in this chapter referred to as the `Board') composed of nine individuals appointed by the Secretary of Defense from among individuals who are United States citizens.
Of the individuals appointed under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) at least one shall have an expertise in historic preservation; ``(B) at least one shall have an expertise in military history; ``(C) at least one shall have an expertise in the administration of museums; and ``(D) at least one shall have an expertise in military technology and materiel.
Chairperson.--(1) The Secretary shall designate one of the individuals first appointed to the Board under subsection (a) as the chairperson of the Board.
The individual so designated shall serve as chairperson for a term of 2 years.
Upon the expiration of the term of chairperson of the individual designated as chairperson under paragraph (1), or of the term of a chairperson elected under this paragraph, the members of the Board shall elect a chairperson of the Board from among its members.
Term.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), members appointed to the Board shall serve on the Board for a term of 4 years.
If a member of the Board misses three consecutive meetings of the Board, the Board may remove the member from the Board for that reason.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Board shall not affect its powers but shall be filled, not later than 60 days after the vacancy, in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
Meetings.--The Board shall meet at the call of the chairperson of the Board.
The Board shall meet at least once a year.
Organizational matters ``The members of the Board first appointed under section 151954(a) of this title shall-- ``(1) adopt a constitution and bylaws for the Foundation; ``(2) serve as incorporators of the Foundation; and ``(3) take whatever other actions the Board determines appropriate in order to establish the Foundation as a nonprofit corporation.
Officers and employees ``(a) Executive Director.--The Foundation shall have an executive director appointed by the Board and such other officers as the Board may appoint.
The executive director and the other officers of the Foundation shall be compensated at rates fixed by the Board and shall serve at the pleasure of the Board.
Employees.--Subject to the approval of the Board, the Foundation may employ such individuals, and at such rates of compensation, as the executive director determines appropriate.
Volunteers.--Subject to the approval of the Board, the Foundation may accept the services of volunteers in the performance of the functions of the Foundation.
Service of Federal Employees.--A person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the Federal Government may not serve as a full- time or part-time employee of the Foundation and shall not be considered for any purpose an employee of the Foundation.
Powers ``In order to carry out the purposes of this chapter, the Foundation may-- ``(1) accept, hold, administer, invest, and spend any gift, devise, or bequest of real or personal property made to the Foundation; ``(2) enter into contracts with individuals, public or private organizations, professional societies, and government agencies for the purpose of carrying out the functions of the Foundation; and ``(3) enter into such other contracts, leases, cooperative agreements, and other transactions as the executive director of the Foundation considers appropriate to carry out the activities of the Foundation.
Duty to maintain tax-exempt status ``The Foundation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1 et sequentes).
Additional annual reports ``In addition to the annual report required by section 10101(b) of this title, the Foundation shall submit to the Secretary of Defense on an annual basis a report on the activities of the Foundation during the preceding fiscal year, including a full and complete statement of the receipts, expenditures, investment activities, and other financial activities of the Foundation during such fiscal year.''.
The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 1519 the following new item: ``1520.
National Military Museum Foundation................. 151951''.
Initial Support.--(1) There is authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 2000, $250,000 for the purpose of making a grant to the National Military Museum Foundation established by chapter 1520 of title 36, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), in order to assist the Foundation in defraying the costs of its activities.
Such amount shall be available for such purpose until expended.
In each of fiscal years 2000 through 2002, the Secretary of Defense may provide, without reimbursement, personnel, facilities, and other administrative services of the Department to the Foundation.