NATIONAL TASK FORCE ON VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN.
Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall establish a task force to be known as the ``National Task Force on Violence against Women'' (referred to in this Act as the ``task force'').
General Purpose of Task Force.--The task force shall develop a uniform Federal, State, and local law enforcement strategy aimed at protecting women against violent crime, punishing persons who commit such crimes, and enhancing the rights of victims of such crimes.
Duties of Task Force.--The task force shall perform such functions as the Attorney General deems appropriate to carry out the purposes of the task force, including-- (1) considering the reports of past Federal and State task forces or commissions on violent crime, family violence, and crime victims, including the President's Task Force on Victims of Crime (1982), the Attorney General's Task Force on Family Violence (1984), and the task forces and commissions established by the States of Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Hawaii, Idaho, Indiana, Kansas, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Nebraska, New Mexico, New York, North Carolina, Rhode Island, Virginia, Texas, Wisconsin, and Wyoming; (2) developing strategies for Federal, State, and local law enforcement designated to protect women against violent crime, and to prosecute and punish those responsible for such crime; (3) evaluating the adequacy of sentencing, incarceration, and release of violent offenders against women, and making recommendations designated to ensure that such offenders receive appropriate punishment; and (4) evaluating the adequacy of the treatment of victims of violent crime against women within the criminal justice system, and making recommendations designed to improve such treatment.
In General.--The task force shall consist of up to 10 members, who shall be appointed by the Attorney General not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
The Attorney General shall ensure that the task force includes representatives of State and local law enforcement, the State and local judiciary, and groups dedicated to protecting the rights of victims.
Chairperson.--The Attorney General or a designee shall serve as the chairperson of the task force.
No Additional Compensation.--Members of the task force who are officers or employees of a governmental agency shall receive no additional compensation by reason of their service on the task force.
Per Diem.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of duties for the task force, members of the task force shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR AND STAFF.
Executive Director.-- (1) Appointment.--The task force shall have an Executive Director who shall be appointed by the Attorney General not later than 30 days after the task force is fully constituted under subsection (c).
Compensation.--The Executive Director shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of the basic pay payable under GS-15 of the General Schedule as contained in title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--With the approval of the task force, the Executive Director may appoint not more than 12 individuals to serve as staff and fix the compensation of such additional personnel as the Executive Director considers necessary to carry out the duties of the task force.
Applicability of Civil Service Laws.--The Executive Director and the additional personnel of the task force appointed under paragraph (2) may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
POWERS OF TASK FORCE.
Hearings.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, the task force may conduct such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the task force considers appropriate.
The task force may administer oaths before the task force.
Delegation.--Any member or employee of the task force may, if authorized by the task force, take any action that the task force is authorized to take under this section.
Access to Information.--The task force may secure directly from any executive department or agency such information as may be necessary to enable the task force to carry out this section, to the extent access to such information is permitted by law.
Mail.--The task force may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Not later than 1 year after the date on which the task force is fully constituted under subsection (c), the Attorney General shall submit a detailed report to the Congress on the findings and recommendations of the task force.
There are authorized to be appropriated $500,000 to carry out the purposes of this Act.
The task force shall cease to exist 30 days after the date on which the Attorney General's report is submitted under section 8.