Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Pursuant to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, as approved by the Assistant Secretary of the Interior on March 3, 1964, the Minnesota Chippewa Tribal Executive Committee is the governing body of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, comprised of the six member Reservations (Bois Forte, Fond du Lac, Grand Portage, Leech Lake, Mille Lacs, and White Earth).
The Minnesota Chippewa Tribe was the plaintiff in cases referred to as Docket Nos.
19 and 188 (hereinafter referred to as the ``Claims'') originally before the Indian Claims Commission and, subsequently, before the United States Court of Federal Claims.
The Claims arose from the disposition of tribal lands, interests in lands, and other tribal assets.
The expenses of prosecuting the Claims were shared equally by the 6 member Reservations and the decisions regarding such prosecution were made by the Minnesota Chippewa Tribal Executive Committee.
On July 1, 1998, the Minnesota Chippewa Tribal Executive Committee enacted Resolution No.
01-99, approving a settlement of the Claims by a vote of 6 for and 3 against with 10 members present.
On January 7, 1999, the Associate Solicitor, Division of Indian Affairs, Department of the Interior, advised the United States Department of Justice that Resolution 01-99 was sufficient under the tribal constitution to approve the settlement of the Claims.
On May 17, 1999, the United States Court of Federal Claims entered an order adopting certain findings including a finding that ``the Tribal Executive Committee has the constitutional authority to enter into the proposed settlement on behalf of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe''.
On May 26, 1999, the United States Court of Federal Claims approved the settlement of the Claims and entered a final judgment in the amount of $20,000,000 against the United States in favor of the plaintiff Minnesota Chippewa Tribe.
The Minnesota Chippewa Tribal Executive Committee is authorized by the tribal constitution to make decisions to administer, expend and apportion funds within the control of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe.
On September 9, 1999, the Minnesota Chippewa Tribal Executive Committee enacted Resolution No.
40-00, allocating each member Reservation an equal share of the judgment funds from the Claims, by a vote of 10 for and 2 against, with 12 members present.
The judgment funds were deposited into trust fund account JA1041696.
For purposes of the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use or Distribution Act (25 United States Code 1401 et sequentes), the sole present- day beneficiary of the funds is the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to acknowledge that the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe is the sole beneficiary entity of the judgment funds, that its governing body, the Tribal Executive Committee, has the sovereign authority under the tribal constitution to allocate funds amongst its member Reservations, and accordingly that the judgment funds should be allocated as determined by the Tribal Executive Committee in its Resolution No.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other law, not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall distribute the funds awarded to the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe in Minnesota Chippewa Tribe v. United States, Docket Nos.
19 and 188 in the United States Court of Federal Claims together with all interest and investment income accrued on deposit in trust account JA1041696 in equal shares to each of the following constituent bands of the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe: (1) The Bois Forte Band of Chippewa Indians.
The Fond du Lac Band of Chippewa Indians.
The Grand Portage Band of Chippewa Indians.
The Leech Lake Band of Chippewa Indians.
The Mille Lacs Band of Chippewa Indians.
The White Earth Band of Chippewa Indians.
Use of Funds.--The shares of the bands shall be available for use in the manner determined by the governing body of each band, except not less than 20 percent of such funds shall be set aside for social and economic development, education, reservation infrastructure needs, and other governmental purposes.
Application of Other Law.--Section 7 of Public Law 93-134 (25 United States Code 1407) shall apply to funds distributed pursuant to this Act.