This Act may be cited as the ``Brownfield Cleanup and Redevelopment Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds: (1) Nationwide, older abandoned or under-used commercial and industrial sites known as brownfields are often overlooked for redevelopment because of real or perceived contamination from past commercial or industrial activities.
Reuse of these sites often requires site assessment and cleanup, adding costs and uncertainties to the redevelopment process, and prompting many developers to pursue cheaper, less complicated development options on undeveloped sites.
Industrialized metropolitan areas and small towns alike are affected adversely by these competing pressures, as loss of tax revenues and job opportunities for community residents lead to a deterioration of the urban environment, including the presence of unremediated environmental contamination.
States have created remedial action programs to allow a person to respond voluntarily to a release or suspected release of hazardous substances at low and medium priority facilities.
Such programs have flourished due to the States' ability to streamline duplicative State and Federal regulatory requirements and affect a timely, cost-effective, and environmentally protective cleanup of sites.
The benefits of State voluntary cleanup programs would be significantly enhanced in the context of a Federal system that encourages Federal-State partnerships, provides legal finality to the cleanup process, and removes Federal requirements for certain procedural permits for cleanups conducted under certified State voluntary cleanup programs.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to ensure the quality of State brownfield cleanup and redevelopment efforts by establishing Federal criteria for State voluntary cleanup programs and to provide certainty by removing the cleanup of eligible brownfield facilities and properties remediated through certified State voluntary cleanup programs from coverage under certain other Federal laws.
CERTIFICATION OF STATE VOLUNTARY CLEANUP PROGRAMS.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Administrator'') shall establish, and publish in the Federal Register, certification criteria under subsection (d) for State programs for the voluntary cleanup of eligible facilities.
If a State meets the criteria for certification, the Administrator shall certify the State to carry out the cleanup program in such State at eligible Facilities in lieu of any Federal program that addresses the cleanup of such facilities under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 or the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Certification of State Programs.--The Administrator shall certify a State program for the voluntary cleanup of eligible facilities within 120 days after the Administrator receives adequate documentation from the State indicating that the State program meets the certification criteria established under subsection (d).
Federal-State Cooperation and State Certification.--The Administrator shall cooperate with the State to ensure that State programs continue to meet the terms of the certification issued pursuant to subsection (b).
The Administrator shall convene annual meetings to discuss the status of the State program and to encourage continuing dialogue.
The Administrator shall notify the State of any failure of the State program to continue to meet the certification criteria established under subsection (d) and shall assist the State in remedying such deficiency.
If any such deficiency is substantial and is not remedied in a timely manner, the Administrator may withdraw the certification.
Withdrawal of certification shall not affect any cleanup completed and approved by the State as of the date of such withdrawal.
Certification Criteria.--In order for a State voluntary cleanup program to be certified under this section, the program shall meet each of the following criteria: (1) The program shall provide that only eligible facilities, as described in subsection (d), may participate in the program.
The program shall provide adequate opportunities for meaningful public participation in the development and implementation of cleanup plans for eligible facilities.
Public participation requirements shall include, but not be limited to, providing opportunity for affected parties to review and comment on cleanup documents and plans, and providing opportunity for public input to the remedy selection process.
Affected parties shall include, but not be limited to, local work force representatives, adjacent community residents, and local environmental and health officials and other public interest organizations.
The program shall ensure that technical assistance is available throughout each voluntary cleanup.
The program shall ensure that adequate resources are available to carry out cleanup under the program and to administer the program.
The program shall ensure adequate oversight and enforcement authority.
The program shall provide for a certification from the State to the owner or prospective purchaser of an eligible facility that the cleanup is complete.
Eligible Facilities.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``eligible facility'' means a facility or property that is a low- or medium-priority environmental hazard for the State, but whose environmental contamination is thought to be preventing the timely use, redevelopment, or reuse of the facility or property, and is thought to be limited in scope and readily assessable, except that such term shall not include any of the following: (1) A facility for which an abatement action has been taken or is scheduled to be taken under section 106 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 or for which an action has been taken or is scheduled to be taken under section 7003 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
A facility that is the subject of a Federal response action under section 104 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
A facility included on the National Priorities List or proposed for inclusion and for which documentation for listing has been prepared by the State or the Administrator.
A facility required to have a permit under section 3005 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act that does not have a permit under that section and does not qualify for authorization to operate in interim status under subsection (e) of that section.
A land disposal unit with respect to which a closure requirement under subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6921 et sequentes) is submitted and closure requirements are specified in a closure plan or permit.
A facility that is the subject of a corrective action under section 3004(u) or 3008(h) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 5924(u) or 6928(h)) that has been evaluated as high priority under the Environmental Protection Agency's National Corrective Action Priority System as set forth in regulations under subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
A facility at which assistance for response activities may be obtained pursuant to subtitle I of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6991 et sequentes) from the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund established under section 9508 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
A facility owned or operated by a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States.
Relationship to Permit Requirements.--For any cleanup conducted under a State voluntary cleanup program certified under this section, if the cleanup is carried out in compliance with the certified program the State may modify any procedural permit requirement in order to expedite the cleanup.
Notwithstanding subsection (a) of section 3, the Administrator may-- (1) take any action authorized by section 103 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9603), or (2) carry out investigations, monitoring, surveys, testing, or other information gathering authorized under section 104(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 9604(b)) with respect to facilities that are subject to a State voluntary response program, but only for purposes of determining whether the facility qualifies for listing on the National Priorities List pursuant to section 105 (42 United States Code 9605) of that Act.