This Act may be cited as the ``Equal Access to Medicare Home Health Care Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Over 30,000,000 beneficiaries under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act rely on providers of home health services to provide them with cost- effective, high quality home health care.
The medicare home health benefit enables many medicare beneficiaries to remain at home and to live with dignity and independence despite serious health conditions.
The medicare home health benefit helps alleviate the burden of medicare beneficiaries on hospitals and skilled nursing facilities, where services provided to medicare beneficiaries are more expensive.
The amendments made by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 to title XVIII of the Social Security Act were originally projected to cut $16,100,000,000 from the medicare home health benefit between fiscal years 1998 and 2002.
The Congressional Budget Office recently projected that those amendments made by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 will actually cut $69,400,000,000 from the medicare home health benefit between fiscal years 1998 and 2002.
The recent projections by the Congressional Budget Office represent more than 4 times the amount of the reduction in the medicare home health benefit originally projected to take effect as a result of the amendments made by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
The failure of the Health Care Financing Administration to disburse payments under the interim payment system established by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 under section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act in a timely manner has resulted in medicare overpayments to thousands of providers of home health services, leaving many of these providers on precarious financial footing.
Access to care, particularly for high-cost and long- term patients, has become a growing problem because the amount of payment for these types of patients under the current interim payment system is insufficient.
Under the proposed regulation implementing the new prospective payment system, 50 percent of the prospective payment amount will be paid upon receipt and processing of the providers initial claim for reimbursement and 50 percent of that amount will be delayed until the final claim is processed at the end of the 60-day episode period.
Medicare beneficiaries incur most home health care expenses during the first 30 days of a 60-day episode period and providers of home health services do not have large cash reserves to support delayed payment for those services under the medicare program.
It is essential that the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration ensure that the initial payment to providers of home health services during a 60-day episode period of home health care provided under the medicare home health benefit provides a steady cash flow for those providers so that medicare beneficiaries may continue to receive necessary home health services.
Studies by the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission established under section 1805 of the Social Security Act have indicated that certain populations of medicare beneficiaries risk not receiving necessary home health services because of the systemic changes made by the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
Because the aggregate amount of payment made for all home health services during the first year in which payment will be made for those services under the prospective payment system is limited to the amount that would have been paid in such year for those services under the interim payment system, there is an enormous risk that this limited amount will be insufficient, resulting in a perpetuation of the current crisis under the interim payment system for home health services.
ELIMINATION OF 15 PERCENT REDUCTION IN PAYMENT RATES UNDER THE MEDICARE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1895(b)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)(A)), as amended by sections 302(b) and 303(f) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement Act of 1999 (113 United States Statutes at Large 1501A-359, 361), as enacted into law by section 1000(a)(6) of Public Law 106-113, is amended to read as follows: ``(A) Initial basis.--Under such system the Secretary shall provide for computation of a standard prospective payment amount (or amounts).
Such amount (or amounts) shall initially be based on the most current audited cost report data available to the Secretary and shall be computed in a manner so that the total amounts payable under the system for the 12-month period beginning on the date the Secretary implements the system shall be equal to the total amount that would have been made if the system had not been in effect and if section 1861(v)(1)(L)(ix) had not been enacted.
Each such amount shall be standardized in a manner that eliminates the effect of variations in relative case mix and area wage adjustments among different home health agencies in a budget neutral manner consistent with the case mix and wage level adjustments provided under paragraph (4)(A).
Under the system, the Secretary may recognize regional differences or differences based upon whether or not the services or agency are in an urbanized area.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Balanced Budget Refinement Act of 1999 (Public Law 106-113).
36-Month Repayment Period.--In the case of an overpayment by the Secretary of Health and Human Services to a home health agency for home health services furnished during a cost reporting period beginning on or after October 1, 1997, as a result of payment limitations provided for under clause (v), (vi), or (viii) of section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), the home health agency may elect to repay the amount of such overpayment over a 36- month period beginning on the date of notification of such overpayment.
Interest on Overpayment Amounts.-- (1) 36-month grace period.-- (A) In general.--In the case of an agency that makes an election under subsection (a), no interest shall accrue on the outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment during such 36-month period.
Overdue balances.--In the case of such an agency, interest shall accrue on any outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment after termination of such 36-month period.
Interest shall accrue under this subparagraph at the rate of interest charged by banks for loans to their most favored commercial customers, as published in the Wall Street Journal on the Friday immediately following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Other agencies.--In the case of an agency described in subsection (a) that does not make an election under subsection (a), interest shall accrue on the outstanding balance of the amount of overpayment at the rate described in the second sentence of paragraph (1)(B).
Termination.--No election under subsection (a) may be made for cost reporting periods, or portions of cost reporting periods, beginning on or after the date of the implementation of the prospective payment system for home health services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
Effective Date.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
ADDITIONAL PAYMENTS UNDER THE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR SERVICES FURNISHED IN RURAL AREAS AND SECURITY SERVICES.
Increase in Payment Rates for Rural Agencies.--Section 1895(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Additional payment amount for services furnished in rural areas.--In the case of home health services furnished in a rural area (as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D)), the Secretary shall provide for an addition or adjustment to the payment amount otherwise made under this section for services furnished in a rural area in an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount otherwise determined under this subsection.''.
Additional Payment for Security Services.--Section 1895(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(8) Additional payment for security services.--The Secretary shall provide for an addition or adjustment to the payment amount otherwise made under this section for the reasonable cost (as defined in section 1861(v)(1)(A)) of furnishing protective services to individuals furnishing home health services under this title in areas where such individuals are at risk of physical harm, as determined by the Secretary.''.
Waiving Budget Neutrality.--Section 1895(b)(3) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) No adjustment for additional payments for rural services and security services.--The Secretary shall not reduce the standard prospective payment amount (or amounts) under this paragraph applicable to home health services furnished during a period to offset the increase in payments resulting from the application of paragraph (7) (relating to services furnished in rural areas) and paragraph (8) (relating to costs of security services).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date that is 270 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
RULE OF CONSTRUCTION RELATING TO TELEHOMEHEALTH SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1895(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)), as amended by section 3, is further amended by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(9) Rule of construction relating to telehomehealth services.-- ``(A) In general.--Nothing in this section, or in section 4206(a) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (42 United States Code 1395l note), shall be construed as preventing a home health agency receiving payment under this section from furnishing a home health service via a telecommunications system.
Limitation.--The Secretary shall not consider a home health service provided in the manner described in subparagraph (A) to be a home health visit for purposes of-- ``(i) determining the amount of payment to be made under this section; or ``(ii) any requirement relating to the certification of a physician required under section 1814(a)(2)(C).''.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress a report containing the recommendations of the Secretary with respect to the feasibility and advisability of including home health services furnished by telecommunications systems as a home health service for purposes of-- (1) payment for such services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff), and (2) requirements with respect to physician certification of the need for home health services under section 1814(a)(2)(C) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395f(a)(2)(C)).