This Act may be cited as the ``Worksite Wellness Act of 1993''.
The Congress hereby finds that-- (1) more businesses are promoting disease prevention, healthy lifestyles, and good nutrition through wellness programs than did so in the past; (2) businesses can save on insurance premiums and reduce the number of health insurance claims filed by their employees if employees would participate in a wellness program; (3) wellness programs lead to lower health care costs, reduced absenteeism, increased productivity, and higher morale; (4) one of the Healthy People 2000 national health objectives is to have disease prevention and health promotion programs in at least 85 percent of worksites with 50 or more employees; (5) a recent survey conducted by the Office of Disease Prevention and Health Promotion reported that 81 percent of companies with 50 or more employees had at least 1 health promotion activity in 1992 compared with 66 percent in 1985; and (6) small businesses have less money to devote to employee benefits and therefore shall be given greater incentives to invest in wellness programs for their employees.
CREDIT FOR EXPENDITURES TO IMPLEMENT HEALTH PROMOTION AND DISEASE REDUCTION PROGRAMS.
General Rule.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
EXPENDITURES TO IMPLEMENT WELLNESS PROGRAMS FOR EMPLOYEES.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an eligible small employer, the amount of the wellness program credit determined under this section for the taxable year is 50 percent of the qualified wellness program expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitation.--The credit determined under subsection (a) with respect to any eligible small employer for any taxable year shall not exceed $10,000.
Eligible Small Employer.--The term `eligible small employer' means any employer if-- ``(1) either-- ``(A) the gross receipts of such employer for the preceding taxable year did not exceed $3,500,000, or ``(B) in the case of any employer to which subparagraph (A) does not apply, such employer employee not more than 500 full-time employees during the preceding taxable year, and ``(2) such employer elects the application of this section for the taxable year.
For purposes of paragraph (1)(B), an employee shall be considered a full-time employee if such employee is employed at least 30 hours per week for 20 or more calendar weeks in the calendar year.
Qualified Wellness Program Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the term `qualified wellness program expenses' means the expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer in providing services (and other benefits) to employees under a qualified wellness program of the taxpayer.
Depreciation allowances.--For purposes of this subsection, depreciation allowances under section 167 shall be treated as expenses.
Only domestic employment qualified.--Amounts may be taken into account under paragraph (1) with respect to any services only if such services are provided in the United States.
Qualified Wellness Program.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified wellness program' means any separate written plan of an employer for the exclusive benefit of his employees if-- ``(1) such plan provides employees with 1 or more of the following benefits: ``(A) physical fitness or sports programs, ``(B) nutrition or weight control programs, ``(C) programs to reduce use of tobacco, alcohol, or other drugs, ``(D) mental health programs, ``(E) maternal and infant health programs, ``(F) heart disease prevention programs, ``(G) immunization programs, and ``(H) programs for clinical prevention services.
such plan benefits employees who qualify under a classification set up by the employer and found by the Secretary not to be discriminatory in favor of employees who are highly compensated employees (within the meaning of section 414(q)) or their dependents, and ``(3) such plan does not provide eligible employees with a choice between benefits under such plan and other remuneration includible in gross income.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Application of discrimination rules.--For purposes of subsection (e)(2), there shall be excluded from consideration employees not included in the program who are included in a unit of employees covered by an agreement which the Secretary of Labor finds to be a collective bargaining agreement between employee representatives and 1 or more employers.
Certain business practices.--For purposes of subsection (e)(3), the business practices of the employer (as well as the written plan) shall be taken into account.
Certain other rules made applicable.--For purpose of this section, rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) of section 44(d) shall apply.''
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(9) in the case of an eligible small employer, the wellness program credit determined under section 45A(a).''
Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Credit for Wellness Program Expenses.--No deduction shall be allowed for that portion of the qualified wellness program expenses (as defined in section 45A(c)) otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the credit determined for such taxable year under section 45A(a).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.