This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Energy Nuclear Employees Exposure Compensation Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Federal nuclear activities have long been explicitly recognized by the Government as an ultra-hazardous activity under law.
Since the inception of the Federal nuclear weapons program, the Department of Energy and its predecessors have self-regulated worker safety and health, which places a unique responsibility upon the Department to ensure a safe working environment.
Since the inception of the nuclear weapons program, nuclear workers at sites operated by the Department of Energy and its predecessor agencies were put at risk of exposure to harmful substances without the knowledge or consent of the workers.
For decades the Department of Energy and its predecessor agencies withheld information about worker health risks for reasons that were not in the national interest--while actively resisting efforts by workers to seek compensation.
The Department of Energy currently does not have accurate and complete records of exposure to radioactive and hazardous substances--which unfairly places the burden of proof of harm upon workers.
Current remedies under State compensation programs are ill-suited to address chronic diseases and those that have long latency periods which are associated with exposure to radioactive and hazardous substances at Department of Energy facilities.
Scientific evidence shows that ionizing radiation is a carcinogenic substance and that specific types of cancer are considered radiogenic by the scientific and medical community.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Department of energy.--The term ``Department of Energy'' includes the predecessor agencies of the Department.
DOE nuclear employee.--The term DOE nuclear employee`` means an individual employed by-- (A) the Department of Energy; (B) an entity that contracted with the Department of Energy to provide management and operations, management and integration, production, testing, research, development, environmental remediation, or waste management at facilities at locations, including the following: (i) Portsmouth, Ohio; (ii) Paducah, Kentucky.
25, Tennessee; (iv) O.R.
12, Tennessee; (v) O.R.
10, Tennessee; (vi) Hanford, Washington; (vii) Idaho National Engineering Laboratory; (viii) Rocky Flats, Colorado; (ix) Fernald, Ohio; (x) Miamisburg, Ohio; (xi) Los Alamos National Laboratory, New Mexico; (xii) Pinellas, Florida; (xiii) Pantex, Texas; (xiv) Nevada Test Site; (xv) Brookhaven, New York; (xvi) Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory; (xvii) Sandia National Laboratory, New Mexico (xviii) Burlington, Iowa; (xix) Fermi Nuclear Facility, Illinois; (xx) Weldon Spring, Maryland; or (xxi) Savannah River, South Carolina (xxii) Argonne National Lab, Illinois (C) a supplier that supplied uranium conversion or manufacturing services, including Allied Signal Facility in Metropolis, Illinois, Nuclear Fuels Services in Erwin, Tennessee, Linde Air Products, Tonowanda, New York, and Reactive Metals in Ashtabula, Ohio.
Specified disease.--The term ``specified disease'' means-- (A) leukemia (other than chronic lymphocytic leukemia); (B) the following diseases; (i) multiple myeloma; (ii) lymphomas (other than Hodgkins disease); and (iii) primary cancer or a pre-cancerous condition of the bone, lung, thyroid, male or female breast, esophagus, kidney, salivary gland, skin, urinary bladder, stomach pharynx, small intestine, pancreas, bile ducts, gall bladder, or liver; and (C) additional diseases covered by the Nuclear Claims Tribunal of the Marshall Islands.
DOE NUCLEAR FACILITY EMPLOYEES' EXPOSURE COMPENSATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury the DOE Nuclear Employees' Exposure Compensation Fund (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Fund'').
Purpose.--The amounts in the Fund are available only for disbursement by the Attorney General under section 6.
Termination.--The Fund shall terminate 22 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
If all of the amounts in the Fund have not been expended by the end of the 22-year period, amounts remaining in the Fund shall be deposited in the miscellaneous receipts account in the Treasury.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Amounts appropriated to the fund shall remain available until expended or deposited in the Treasury.
Authority.--Authority under this Act to enter into contracts or to make payments is effective in any fiscal year only to the extent, or in the amounts, provided in advance in an appropriation Act.
A DOE nuclear employee who-- (1) was employed at a DOE nuclear facility for at least a year; (2) during the employees' employment period-- (A) was or should have been monitored through the use of dosimetry badges for exposure of the employees's body to radiation at the facility, and (B) submits written medical documentation as to having contracted a specified disease after beginning employment as described in paragraph (1) and after beginning being monitored or beginning work, is authorized to receive $100,000 and first dollar coverage for all medical and diagnostic costs related to a claim for a specified disease, including complicating factors, if the claim for payment is filed with the Attorney General and the Attorney General determines, in accordance with section 6, that the claim meets the requirements of this Act.
DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
Filing Procedures.--The Attorney General shall establish procedures under which an eligible employee may submit a claim for payment under this section.
Determination.--The Attorney General shall determine if each claim filed under this section meets the requirements of this Act.
In making a determination of eligibility for compensation, the Attorney General may consult with the Surgeon General and the Secretary of Energy.
The Attorney General shall-- (1) in consultation with the Surgeon General, establish guidelines for determining what constitutes written medical documentation under section 5 that an individual contracted a specified disease; and (2) in consultation with the Secretary of Energy, establish guidelines for determinations of employment and exposure, as described in section 5.
Payment.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General is authorized to pay, from amounts available in the Fund, claims filed under this section that the Attorney General determines meets the requirements of this Act.
Subrogation.--Upon payment of a claim under paragraph (1), the United States is subrogated for the amount of the payment to a right or claim that the individual to whom the payment was made may have against any person on account of a specified disease contracted following employment and exposure as described in section 5.
Deceased or dying employee.-- (A) Deceased.--In the case of a DOE nuclear employee who is deceased at the time of payment under this section, the payment may be made only as follows: (i) If the DOE nuclear employee is survived by a spouse who is living at the time of payment, the payment shall be made to the surviving spouse.
If there is no surviving spouse at the time of payment, the payment shall be made in equal shares to all the children of the DOE nuclear employee who are living at the time of payment.
If there is no spouse or children living at the time of payment, the payment shall be made in equal shares to the parents of the DOE nuclear employee who are living at the time of payment.
If there are no spouse, children, or parents living at the time of payment, the payment shall be made in equal shares to all grandchildren of the DOE nuclear employee who are living at the time of payment.
If there are no spouse, children, parents, or grandchildren living at the time of payment, the payment shall be made in equal shares to the grandparents of the DOE nuclear employee who are living at the time of payment.
If there are no spouse, children, parents, grandchildren, or grandparents living at the time of payment, the amount of the payment shall remain in the Fund for future claimants.
Dies.--If the DOE nuclear employee eligible for payment under this section dies before filing a claim under this Act, a survivor of that employee who may receive payment under subparagraph (A) may file a claim for payment for such employee.
Definitions.--For purposes of subparagraph (A)-- (i) the term ``spouse'' of a DOE nuclear employee is a wife or husband of that employee who was married to that employee for at least one year immediately before the death of that employee; (ii) the term ``child'' includes a natural child, a step-child in a regular parent-child relationship, and an adopted child; (iii) the term ``parent'' includes fathers and mothers through adoption.
the term ``grandchild'' of a DOE nuclear employee is a child of a child of that employee; (v) the term ``grandparent'' of a DOE nuclear employee is a parent of a parent of that employee.
Action on Claim.-- (1) Determination period.--The Attorney General shall complete the determination of each claim filed under subsection (a) not later than 12 months after the date the claim is filed.
Additional information and documentation.--The Attorney General may request from a claimant, or from an individual or entity on behalf of a claimant, additional information or documentation necessary to complete the determination of the claim under subsection (b).
The period of time from the Attorney General's request for additional information or documentation until the time the information or documentation is provided, or the requested individual or entity informs the Attorney General the information or documentation cannot or will not be provided, is not counted toward the 12-month period established under paragraph (1).
A claimant may sue the Department of Energy or its contractor in a district court of the United States to compel the production of information or documentation requested by the Attorney General if (A) it is more than 60 days after the date the Attorney General's request was made, and (B) the information or documentation has not been provided.
Payments under other Acts limited.--An individual may not receive payment under this Act and under the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act (42 United States Code 2210 note) or under the Veterans' Dioxin and Radiation Exposure Compensation Standards Act (38 U.S.C 354 note).
Costs of Administering the Adjudications.-- (1) Limitation.--Costs incurred by the Attorney General in carrying out this section shall not be paid from the Fund or set off against, or otherwise deducted from, a payment under this section.
Reimbursement.--The Department of Energy shall reimburse the Attorney General for the costs incurred by the Attorney General in connection with establishing and administering the program of compensation under this Act until the duties of the Attorney General terminate under subsection (f).
Termination.--The duties of the Attorney General under this section terminate when the Fund terminates.
Treatment of Payments Under Other Laws.--An amount paid to an individual under this section-- (1) shall not be subject to Federal income tax under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (2) shall not be included as income or resources for purposes of determining eligibility to receive benefits described in section 3803(c)(2)(C) of title 31, United States Code; and (3) shall not be subject to the offset under chapter 37 of title 31, United States Code.
Regulatory Authority.--The Attorney General may issue regulations to carry out this Act.
Issuance of Regulations Guidelines, and Procedures.-- Regulations, guidelines, and procedures to carry out this Act shall be issued not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Administrative Appeals Procedure and Judicial Review.-- (1) Decision denying claim.--A decision denying a claim under this Act may be appealed to an appeals officer designated by the Attorney General.
If the designated appeals officer affirms a decision denying a claim under this Act, the individual who submitted such claim may seek review of such affirmation by a district court of the United States.
CLAIMS NOT ASSIGNABLE OR TRANSFERABLE.
A claim cognizable under this Act is not assignable or transferable.
A claim to which this Act applies is barred unless the claim is filed within 20 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Notwithstanding any contract, the representative of an individual filing a claim under this Act may not receive for services rendered in connection with such claim more than 10 percent of a payment made for such claim.
A representative who violates this section shall be fined not more than $5,000.
CLAIMS NOT AFFECTED BY AWARDS OF DAMAGES.
A payment made under this Act shall not be considered as any form of compensation or reimbursement for a loss for purposes of imposing liability on the individual receiving the payment to repay any insurance carrier for insurance payments made.
A payment under this Act does not affect any claim against any insurance carrier with respect to insurance.