This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Methamphetamine Use Response Act of 1999''.
In this Act: (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
The term ``Committees'' means the Committees on Appropriations and the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
The term ``midsize city'' means a city with a population under 250,000 and over 20,000.
The term ``rural area'' means a county or parish with a population under 50,000.
The term ``small city'' means a city with a population under 20,000.
REPORT ON METHAMPHETAMINE CONSUMPTION IN RURAL AREAS, SMALL CITIES, AND MIDSIZE CITIES.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to the Committees annually a report on the problems caused by methamphetamine consumption in rural areas, small cities, and midsize cities.
Concerns Addressed.--Each report submitted under this section shall include an analysis of-- (1) the manner in which methamphetamine consumption in rural areas differs from methamphetamine consumption in areas with larger populations, and the means by which to accurately measure those differences; (2) the incidence of methamphetamine abuse in rural areas and the treatment resources available to deal with methamphetamine addiction in those areas; (3) any relationship between methamphetamine consumption in rural areas and a lack of substance abuse treatment in those areas; and (4) any relationship between geographic differences in the availability of substance abuse treatment and the geographic distribution of the methamphetamine abuse problem in the United States.
CLEANUP OF METHAMPHETAMINE LABORATORIES AND PRODUCTION MATERIALS.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Drug Enforcement Administration for each fiscal year after fiscal year 1999, $20,000,000 in order to carry out the activities described in subsection (b).
Availability of Amounts.-- (1) In general.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (a) shall be available to the Drug Enforcement Administration for activities to alleviate the growing financial burden on rural communities, small cities, midsize cities, and other communities resulting from the cleanup of clandestine laboratories and other drug- related hazardous waste.
Specific activities.--The activities covered by paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) The cleanup of clandestine laboratories and other drug-related hazardous waste across the United States, whether initiated by the Drug Enforcement Administration or by State or local entities.
The improvement of current contract-related response times for cleanup of such laboratories and waste through the provision of additional contract personnel, equipment, and facilities.
Supplement Not Supplant.--The amounts authorized to be appropriated by subsection (a) for the Drug Enforcement Administration for a fiscal year are in addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Administration for the fiscal year for the activities described in subsection (b).
INVESTIGATIVE ASSISTANCE RELATING TO METHAMPHETAMINE FOR STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Because of the strong connection between methamphetamine trafficking and Mexican drug trafficking organizations, many local law enforcement agencies are confronted with methamphetamine trafficking suspects who speak Spanish.
Most local law enforcement agencies lack the foreign language and specialized investigative skills necessary to communicate with and monitor suspected drug traffickers, thereby limiting their ability to respond effectively to methamphetamine trafficking.
Informants, witnesses, communications intercepts, and other investigative tools are of limited use if an investigator cannot understand the language employed.
The timely provision of select Drug Enforcement Administration Special Agents with Spanish language capability and specialized clandestine laboratory training could greatly assist in the efforts of State and local law enforcement against methamphetamine traffickers and their operations.
Investigative Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator shall establish within the Drug Enforcement Administration a select cadre of Special Agents with Spanish language capabilities who shall work with State and local law enforcement agencies across the United States on matters relating to the combating of methamphetamine- related drug trafficking.
Composition of cadre.--The cadre established under paragraph (1) shall consist of 20 Special Agents with the requisite Spanish language skills.
Allocation.--The Administrator shall determine the allocation of the Special Agents in the cadre referred to in paragraph (1) through ongoing assessments of the national methamphetamine threat.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Drug Enforcement Administration for fiscal year 2000, $4,700,000 of which-- (A) $3,000,000 shall be available for purposes of establishing the cadre required by paragraph (1), including the hiring and training of agents to fill the cadre; and (B) $1,700,000 shall be available to cover the permanent change of stations (PCS) costs associated with the transfer of senior agents selected to staff the cadre.
ADDITIONAL TRAINING FOR DRUG ENFORCEMENT ADMINISTRATION AND STATE AND LOCAL LAW ENFORCEMENT PERSONNEL.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The spread of methamphetamine abuse and production across the United States has forced law enforcement agencies to address challenges that exceed the many years of experience of the personnel within such agencies.
Unlike cocaine or heroin, methamphetamine can be produced easily from readily available everyday products using recipes readily available on the Internet.
The chemicals involved in methamphetamine production can be caustic or explosive if handled improperly.
In order to meet the demand for training and certification of local law enforcement personnel to meet the challenges posed by methamphetamine production and abuse, it is necessary to expand the training capabilities of the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Most of the costs associated with the training of State and local law enforcement personnel are cost relating to air travel.
Because the Drug Enforcement Administration already provides training for State and local law enforcement personnel, the establishment of regional training centers in the Administration will both reduce travel costs associated with the training of such personnel and enhance the training provided.
Such regional training centers will permit enhanced training of State and local law enforcement personnel at reduced cost over the long term.
Regional Satellite Training Centers.-- (1) Requirement.--The Administrator shall establish within the Drug Enforcement Administration four regional satellite training centers for purposes of providing clandestine laboratory training to Federal, State, and local law enforcement personnel.
The Administrator shall establish the training centers at appropriate locations throughout the United States.
Personnel.--The Administrator shall assign to the centers established under paragraph (1) 12 Special Agents, 4 Drug Prevention Specialists, and 8 Support personnel, as appropriate.
Activities of drug prevention specialists.--The Drug Prevention Specialists assigned to the centers under paragraph (2) shall work with communities that have been previously assisted by the Mobile Enforcement and Regional Enforcement Teams of the Drug Enforcement Administration in order to assist such communities in the development of drug prevention programs and coalitions and provide a solid foundation for the long-term elimination of drug trafficking, abuse, and violence in such communities.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Drug Enforcement Administration for fiscal year 2000, $30,000,000 for purposes of establishing the regional centers required by paragraph (1), including the assignment of personnel to such centers under paragraph (2), and for training-related support for such centers.
Specialized Clandestine Laboratory Training.-- (1) Specialized clandestine laboratory training.--In addition to any other clandestine laboratory training programs currently administered by the Drug Enforcement Administration, the Administrator shall establish the following: (A) Advanced Clandestine Laboratory Investigations schools for State and local law enforcement personnel.
Additional Basic Clandestine Laboratory Certification Schools for both Drug Enforcement Administration personnel and State and local law enforcement personnel.
A program, to be known as the ``Train the Trainer'' program, in accordance with paragraph (2).
Train the trainer program.--The purpose of Train the Trainer program shall be to provide State and local law enforcement personnel with the skills necessary to provide clandestine laboratory recertification and awareness training to other law enforcement personnel within their jurisdictions.
Authorization of appropriations.-- (A) Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Drug Enforcement Administration for each fiscal year after fiscal year 1999, the following: (i) $750,000 for Advanced Clandestine Laboratory Investigation Schools required under paragraph (1)(A).
$2,000,000 for the additional Basic Clandestine Laboratory Certification Schools required under paragraph (1)(B).
$1,000,000 for the awareness materials required for the Train the Trainer program required under paragraph (1)(C).
Supplement not supplant.--The amounts authorized to be appropriated by subparagraph (A) are in addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Drug Enforcement Agency for the activities referred to in paragraph (1).
ANNUAL STRATEGY ON METHAMPHETAMINE PRODUCTION AND ABUSE.
Requirement.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Attorney General shall submit to the Committees a report containing a detailed strategy to combat the problem of methamphetamine production and abuse in the United States.
Initial Report.--The first report submitted under this section shall include the following: (1) An assessment of the progress made in achieving the goals first outlined in the April 1996 document entitled ``National Methamphetamine Strategy'', including a description of any successes and failures in achieving such goals.
A description of the progress made in controlling methamphetamine in light of the goals established by the Performance Measures of Effectiveness established by the National Drug Control Strategy.
Any recommendations for legislative action that the Attorney General considers necessary to implement the strategy under subsection (a).
Subsequent Reports.--Each report submitted under this section after the first such report shall include the following: (1) An evaluation by the Attorney General of the progress made in implementing the strategy.
A description of the successes and failures associated with implementing the strategy contained in the report.
Any recommendations for legislative action that the Attorney General considers appropriate to facilitate the continuing implementation of the strategy.
THEFT AND TRANSPORTATION OF ANHYDROUS AMMONIA.
In General.--Part D of the Controlled Substances Act (title II of Public Law 91-513; 21 United States Code 841 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``anhydrous ammonia ``Sec.
423 (a) It is unlawful for any person-- ``(1) to steal anhydrous ammonia; or ``(2) to transport stolen anhydrous ammonia across State lines.
Any person who violates subsection (a) shall be imprisoned or fined, or both, in accordance with section 403(d) as if such violation were a violation of a provision of section 403.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for that Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 421 the following new items: ``Sec.
Assistance for Certain Research.-- (1) Agreement.--The Administrator shall seek to enter into an agreement with Iowa State University in order to permit the University to continue and expand its current research into the development of inert agents that, when added to anhydrous ammonia, eliminate the usefulness of anhydrous ammonia as an ingredient in the production of methamphetamine.
Reimbursable provision of funds.--The agreement under paragraph (1) may provide for the provision to Iowa State University, on a reimbursable basis, of $500,000 for purposes the activities specified in that paragraph.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Drug Enforcement Agency for fiscal year 2000, $500,000 for purposes of carrying out the agreement under this subsection.