This Act may be cited as the ``Water Resource Study Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that-- (1) water resources in the United States are among the most plentiful in the world; (2) for many years, the effective development and use of water resources in the United States has been the focus of a wide array of Federal policies and programs; (3) in recent years, unprecedented growth, multiple competing water uses, and growing public interest in environmental protection have combined to create an atmosphere of conflicting policy interests; (4) large-scale water conflicts continue to emerge between communities, States, and stakeholder interests in the southeastern region of the United States; and (5) Federal support is needed to assess the utility and effectiveness of current Federal policies and programs as they relate to resolving State and local water supply needs.
In this Act: (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Tennessee.
STUDIES ON EMERGING WATER SUPPLY NEEDS.
Designation.--The Secretary shall offer to provide assistance to the State to conduct the studies described in this section.
Studies.--As a condition of receiving assistance under this section, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, in consultation with the Secretary, the State shall-- (1) select a geographic area within the State having consistent, emerging, water supply needs; and (2) conduct a study on the emerging water supply needs of the geographic area.
Administration.--A study conducted under this section shall-- (1) identify Federal and State resources, assistance programs, regulations, and sources of funding for water supply development and management that are applicable to the geographic areas selected under subsection (b)(1); (2) identify potential weaknesses, redundancies, and contradictions in those resources, assistance programs, regulations, policies, and sources of funding; (3) conduct a water resource inventory in the geographic study area to determine, with respect to the water supply needs of the area-- (A) projected demand; (B) existing supplies and infrastructure; (C) water resources that cannot be developed for water supplies due to regulatory or technical barriers, including-- (i) special aquatic sites (as defined in section 330.2 of title 33, Code of Federal Regulations (or a successor regulation)); and (ii) waters protected under any other Federal or State law; (D) water resources that can be developed for water supplies, such as sites that have few, if any, technical or regulatory barriers to development; (E) any water resources for which further research or investigation, such as testing of groundwater aquifers, is required to determine the potential for water supply development for the site; (F) a description of the social, political, institutional, and economic dynamics and characteristics of the geographic study area that may impact the resolution of water supply needs; (G) incentives for cooperation between water districts, local governments, and State governments, including methods that maximize private sector participation in the water supply development; and (H) new water resource development technologies that merit further analysis and testing.
Lead Agency.--For each study under this section, the Corps of Engineers-- (1) shall be the lead Federal agency; and (2) shall consult with the State for guidance in the development of the study.
Participants.-- (1) In general.--In consultation with the Secretary, the State shall select entities to participate in the study under this section.
Tennessee.-- (A) In general.--In addition to entities selected under paragraph (1), the United States Geological Survey and the Tennessee Valley Authority shall participate in the study in the State.
University of tennessee.--The University of Tennessee may elect to participate in the study in the State.
Funding.--The Federal share of each study under this section shall be 100 percent.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the completion of a study under this section, the State completing the study shall submit a report describing the findings of the study to-- (1) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.