ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION TAX CREDIT.
General Rule.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credits allowable) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subpart: ``Subpart H--Environmental Remediation Credit ``Sec.
Amount of environmental remediation credit.
Designation of eligible States.
Allocation of credit limits.
Definitions and special rules.
AMOUNT OF ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION CREDIT.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the environmental remediation credit determined under this section is 40 percent of the costs-- ``(1) which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer for environmental remediation with respect to any qualified contaminated site which is owned by the taxpayer, and ``(2) which are incurred by the taxpayer pursuant to an environmental remediation plan for such site which was approved by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Credit May Not Exceed Allocation.--The environmental remediation credit determined under this section with respect to any qualified contaminated site shall not exceed the remediation credit amount allocated to the taxpayer under section 54B with respect to such site.
Remediation Plan Must Be Completed.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (2)-- ``(A) no environmental remediation credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any qualified contaminated site unless the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency certifies the environmental remediation plan for such site has been completed, and ``(B) if such Administrator certifies that such plan has been completed, such credit shall be taken into account under subsection (a) ratably over the 5 taxable year period beginning with the taxable year in which such plan was completed.
Special rule where extraordinary cost increases.-- If-- ``(A) the taxpayer determines that due to unforeseen circumstances the cost of completing the remediation plan for any qualified contaminated site exceeds 200 percent of the estimated costs of completing such plan, and ``(B) the State or local official administering the remediation credit program agrees with such determination, the taxpayer may cease the implementation of such plan and shall be entitled to an environmental remediation credit with respect to costs incurred before such cessation.
Such credit shall be taken into account under subsection (a) ratably over the 5-taxable-year period beginning with the taxable year in which such cessation occurs.
Certain Parties Not Eligible.--A taxpayer shall not be eligible for any credit determined under this section with respect to any qualified contaminated site if-- ``(1) at any time on or before the date of the enactment of this subpart such taxpayer was the owner or operator of any business on such site, ``(2) at any time before, on, or after such date of enactment such taxpayer-- ``(A) had (by contract, agreement, or otherwise) arranged for the disposal or treatment of any hazardous materials at such site or arranged with a transporter for transport for disposal or treatment of any hazardous materials at such site, or ``(B) had accepted any hazardous materials for transport to such site, or ``(3) the taxpayer is related to any taxpayer referred to in paragraph (1) or (2).
Qualified Contaminated Site.--For purposes of this subpart, the term `qualified contaminated site' means any contaminated site if such site is within a State designated under section 54A(a) for participation in the environmental remediation credit program.
Administration by State or Local Government Agencies Permitted.--Any reference in this section, section 144(d), or section 150(b)(7) to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall include a reference to the head of any State or local government agency designated by the Administrator to carry out the Administrator's functions under such sections with respect to any site.
DESIGNATION OF ELIGIBLE STATES.
In General.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall designate States under this section for participation in the environmental remediation credit program.
Eligibility Requirements.--No State may be designated under this section unless-- ``(1) such State has submitted an application for such a designation to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development in such manner as such Secretary may require, ``(2) such State has established an environmental credit remediation program which shall include-- ``(A) procedures for the assessment of contaminated sites located within such State for purposes of determining whether such sites are appropriate for participation in the environmental remediation credit program, ``(B) a credit allocation plan which contains the selection criteria required under subsection (c), and ``(C) provision for non-Federal contributions to the environmental remediation of selected sites through grants, loans, property or income tax abatement, contributions by private parties or non-Federal governmental sources, or any other direct or indirect financial assistance; and ``(3) such State has designated a State official responsible for the administration of its environmental remediation credit program.
Selection Criteria.--The selection criteria required under this subsection are the following: ``(1) The condition of the contaminated site is such that without participation in the environmental remediation credit program redevelopment is unlikely.
The contaminated site has not been in productive use for at least 1 year before participation in the program.
There is a strong likelihood of redevelopment of the site for industrial or commercial use that will result in creation of jobs and expansion of the tax base.
Environmental remediation and redevelopment are likely to be completed within a reasonable period of time.
ALLOCATION OF CREDIT LIMITS.
Overall Limitation.--For each calendar year after 1995, there shall be an overall credit limitation of $200,000,000.
Method of Making Allocation.-- ``(1) In general.--Any State receiving a portion of the overall credit limitation under subsection (a) may use such portion to make allocations of environmental remediation credit amounts to contaminated sites selected under the credit allocation plan required under section 54A(b)(2)(B).
Period during which allocated amount may be used.-- Any State receiving a portion of the overall credit limitation for any calendar year may use such portion only to make allocations under paragraph (1) during such calendar year or the following calendar year.
DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.
Contaminated Site.--For purposes of this subpart-- ``(1) In general.--The term `contaminated site' means any site if at least 1 of the following environmental conditions are present on such site: ``(A) A release or threatened release of any hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance.
Any storage tanks which contain any hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance.
Any illegal disposal of solid waste.
Hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance.--Any substance, waste, or material shall be treated as a hazardous, toxic, or dangerous substance if it is so treated under-- ``(A) the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 United States Code 9601 et seq.
), ``(B) the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes), or ``(C) any State or local environmental law or ordinance.
The following materials shall in any event be treated as such a substance: petroleum or crude oil or any derivative thereof, friable asbestos or any asbestos containing material, polychlorinated biphenyls, or urea formaldehyde foam insulation.
Environmental Remediation.--For purposes of this subpart, the term `environmental remediation' means-- ``(1) removal or remediation activity in accordance with an approved environmental plan including soil and ground water remediation, ``(2) restoration of natural, historic or cultural resources at the site, or the mitigation of unavoidable losses of such resources incurred in connection with the remediation or response activity, ``(3) health assessments or health effects studies, ``(4) environmental audits, ``(5) remediation of off-site contamination caused by activity on the site, and ``(6) any other costs reasonably required by reason of the environmental conditions of the site including demolition of existing contaminated structures, site security, and permit fees necessary for remediation.
Basis Reduction.--The basis of any qualified contaminated site shall be reduced by the amount of any credit determined under this subpart with respect to such site.
Related Person.--For purposes of this subpart, persons shall be treated as related to each other if such persons are treated as a single employer under the regulations prescribed under section 52(b) or such persons bear a relationship to each other specified in section 267(b) or 707(b).''
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (10), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (11) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(12) the environmental remediation credit under section 54(a).''
Limitation on Carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(7) No carryback of environmental remediation credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit under section 54 may be carried back to a taxable year ending before the date of the enactment of section 54.''
Deduction for Unused Credit.--Subsection (c) of section 196 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(8) the environmental remediation credit determined under section 54.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subparts for part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Subpart H--Environmental remediation credit.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
TAX-EXEMPT FINANCING OF ENVIRONMENTAL REMEDIATION OF QUALIFIED CONTAMINATED SITES.
In General.--Subsection (e) of section 141 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining qualified bond) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (F), by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H), and by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following new subparagraph: ``(G) a qualified contaminated site remediation bond, or''.
Qualified Contaminated Site Remediation Bond.--Section 144 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Qualified Contaminated Site Remediation Bond.--For purposes of this part-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified contaminated site remediation bond' means any bond issued as part of an issue 95 percent or more of the proceeds of which are to finance-- ``(A) the acquisition of a qualified contaminated site, or ``(B) the costs of environmental remediation (as defined in section 54C(b))-- ``(i) with respect to such a site which is owned by the person incurring such costs, and ``(ii) which are incurred pursuant to an environmental remediation plan for such site which was approved by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Limitations.--Such term shall not include any bond issued to provide financing with respect to a qualified contaminated site if-- ``(A) any amount of such financing is provided directly or indirectly to any person who is not eligible for the credit determined under section 54 with respect to such site by reason of section 54(d), ``(B) less than 60 percent of the amount of the financing so provided with respect to such site is for costs described in paragraph (1)(B), or ``(C) the amount of the financing so provided to acquire such site exceeds the excess of-- ``(i) the fair market value of the site after the completion of the environmental remediation plan, over ``(ii) the amount of the financing so provided with respect to such site for costs described in paragraph (1)(B).
Qualified contaminated site.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified contaminated site' has the meaning given such term by section 54(e).
Restriction on land acquisition not to apply.-- Section 147(c) shall not apply to any qualified contaminated site remediation bond.''
Penalty for Failure to Satisfactorily Complete Remediation Plan.--Subsection (b) of section 150 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(7) Qualified contaminated site remediation bonds.--In the case of financing provided by a qualified contaminated site remediation bond for costs described in section 144(d)(1)(C), no deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for interest on such financing during any period during which there is a determination by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency that the remediation plan under which such costs were incurred was not satisfactorily completed.''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The section heading for section 144 of such Code is amended by inserting before the period ``qualified contaminated site remediation bond''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the item relating to section 144 ``; qualified contaminated site remediation bond''.