This Act may be cited as the ``Welfare Fairness Act''.
The Congress find that-- (1) the Wisconsin State Legislature has passed legislation calling upon the Congress of the United States to provide for Federal establishment of benefit levels for aid to families with dependent children (AFDC); (2) the current variation in benefit levels from State to State has discouraged families receiving AFDC from remaining in their home communities, although it is generally in the best interest of all citizens to live close to their families, friends, and support networks, and where job opportunities exist, and decisions on where to live should not be complicated by the level of AFDC benefits; (3) under the current system, taxpayers in States are paying differing amounts, with some States providing comparatively more in AFDC benefits while others are paying well beneath the level of poverty; and (4) because poverty does not know State boundaries, and because of the current disparities in the system for both taxpayers and AFDC recipients, uniform AFDC benefits should be determined federally.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Welfare Fairness'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Within 1 year after the first date there are 8 members of the Commission, the Commission shall, in consultation with State officials responsible for the administration of State programs of aid to families with dependent children-- (1) establish a uniform standard of need for recipients of aid to families with dependent children under a State plan approved under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act; (2) devise a formula for adjusting the uniform standard of need, on an annual basis, for differences among the States in the cost of living for low income persons; and (3) devise a method of adjusting the uniform standard of need to offset any other documented incentive for interstate migration by persons seeking a higher level of benefits under the program of aid to families with dependent children.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed by the President, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and with State officials responsible for the administration of State programs of aid to families with dependent children, and by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, not later than June 1, 1995.
Qualifications.-- (1) Individual qualifications.--Each member of the Commission shall-- (A) have experience in the delivery of social services; or (B) represent advocacy groups that work for the interests of lower income individuals.
Group qualification.--The members of the Commission, as a whole, shall represent the various regions of the United States.
Staggered Terms of Office.-- (1) In general.--Each Commission member shall be appointed for a term of 6 years, except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3).
Terms of initial appointees.--As designated by the President at the time of appointment, of the members first appointed-- (A) 5 shall be appointed for terms of 2 years; and (B) 5 shall be appointed for terms of 4 years.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
Compensation.--The members of the Commission shall not receive compensation by reason of their service on the Commission, except travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--8 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of the members of the Commission.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, with the approval of the Commission, and without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint and fix the pay of a director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint and fix the pay of such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--The Chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail to the Commission, without reimbursement, any personnel of the department or agency to assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Hearings and Sessions.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Broad public participation.--The Commission shall conduct hearings in various areas of the United States, including inner cities, suburbs, and rural areas, to gather a broad spectrum of information on the issues to be addressed by the Commission.
All interested persons shall be afforded an opportunity to testify at such hearings.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of that department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission, to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
First Report.--Upon the establishment of a uniform standard of need and a formula and method for adjusting the uniform standard of need under section 4, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Finance of the Senate a report on the uniform standard of need, and the formula and method for adjusting the uniform standard of need.
Subsequent Reports.--On each anniversary of the date the report required by subsection (a) is submitted, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Finance of the Senate a report that reviews the success of the establishment of a uniform standard of need in curbing interstate migration for the purposes of seeking greater payments of aid to families with dependent children under State plans approved under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act.
In General.--The Commission shall terminate 6 years after the first date there are 8 members of the Commission.
Inapplicability of Termination Provision of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.--Section 14(a)(2)(B) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the Commission.
In General.--Section 402(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 602(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (44); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (45) and inserting a semicolon; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (45) the following: ``(46) provide that the State's standard of need for a family shall be-- ``(A) during the life of the Commission on Welfare Fairness, the uniform standard of need determined for a family of the same size by the Commission on Welfare Fairness under section 4 of the Welfare Fairness Act, adjusted by the Commission (as appropriate) in accordance with the formula and method established under such section; and ``(B) after the termination of the Commission, the uniform standard of need referred to in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, adjusted by the Secretary (as appropriate) in accordance with the formula and method established under such section; and ``(47) provide that, in determining the amount of aid payable to a family under the State plan, the State may not apply any rule not expressly provided in Federal law.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to payments under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act for calendar quarters ending after the date the Commission establishes a uniform standard of need, and a formula and method for adjusting the uniform standard of need, under section 3 of this Act.