This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Land Exchange Improvement Act of 1995''.
LANDS ELIGIBLE FOR APPROXIMATELY EQUAL VALUE TREATMENT.
Section 206(h)(1)(A) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(h)(1)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$150,000'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$500,000, adjusted annually on a fiscal year basis commencing in fiscal year 1997 by the average change over the previous fiscal year of the Consumer Price Index (all items--United States city average) published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics''.
Section 206(b) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(b)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2)(A) Amounts received by the Secretary concerned under paragraph (1) shall be deposited in a special fund in the Treasury of the United States, subject to subparagraph (B).
Such amounts shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, be available to the Secretary concerned for processing land exchanges.
Amounts in the fund referred to in subparagraph (A) may not exceed $12,000,000 at any time.
Amounts received by the Secretary concerned under this section which, but for this subparagraph, would be added to such fund shall instead be covered over into the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.''.
Section 206(b) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716), as amended by section 3, is further amended by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(3)(A)(i) An environmental assessment shall be the document prepared for any exchange under this Act pursuant to section 102(2) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332(2)).
Any conferencing or consultation required for an exchange under this Act pursuant to section 7(a) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1536(a)) shall be completed within 45 days after the date on which the conferencing or consultation is initiated.
After completion of an exchange under this Act, no action may be taken on the non-Federal land acquired in an exchange until the Secretary concerned has complied with section 102(2) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and section 7(a) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 concerning such action, and any necessary amendment to the land management plan applicable to such land and such action.
The Secretary shall complete processing, and make a final decision, on any exchange under this Act within one year from the date of submission of the application for the exchange.
The non-Federal land to be included in any exchange under this Act shall be valued without the application of any Federal or State restriction concerning an environmental value or resource the protection of which is considered by the Secretary concerned as a public benefit to be obtained by the exchange.''.
Section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(j) Notwithstanding the other provisions of this Act and other applicable laws which require that exchanges of land or interests therein be for equal or approximately equal value, the Secretary concerned may dispose of lands by exchange to make such minor adjustments to the boundary of a unit of the public lands or the National Forest System as may be necessary to reflect actual conditions in the unit which are not of comparable character to the unit.
In making such adjustments, the amount of land added to the unit may not exceed the amount of land removed from the unit.''.
REMOVAL ON RESTRICTION ON EXCHANGE OF OREGON AND CALIFORNIA RAILROAD GRANT LANDS ADMINISTERED BY THE SECRETARY OF AGRICULTURE.
Subsection (a) of the first section of the Act entitled ``An Act relating to the administrative jurisdiction of certain public lands in the State of Oregon, and for other purposes'', approved June 24, 1954 (43 United States Code 1181g(a)), is amended by striking out the last sentence.
AMENDMENT TO SISK ACT RELATING TO PRIOR USE OF LANDS TO BE CONVEYED.
The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to facilitate exchanges of land under the Act of March 20, 1922(42 United States Statutes at Large 465), for use for public schools, and for other purposes'', approved December 4, 1967 (16 United States Code 484a), is amended by striking out ``on the date of enactment of this sentence'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``for the five-year period ending on the date of conveyance''.
WAIVER OF PUBLIC USE REQUIREMENT FOR LANDS UNDER BANKHEAD-JONES FARM TENANT ACT.
The Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act is amended in section 32(c) (7 United States Code 1011(c)) by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary may waive the requirements of this paragraph that lands be sold, exchanged, or granted only to public authorities and agencies and only on condition that the property is used for public purposes after the Secretary consults with the head of any other Federal agency that has a property interest in the lands, such as a federally-owned building or other improvements.