This Act may be cited as the ``Food Safety Recall Information Act''.
PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF RETAILERS AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS THAT PURCHASE MEAT, POULTRY, OR EGG PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO VOLUNTARY RECALL.
Meat Products.--The Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601 et sequentes) is amended by-- (1) redesignating section 411 as section 412; and (2) inserting after section 410 the following new section: ``SEC.
PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF RETAILERS AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS THAT PURCHASE MEAT PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO VOLUNTARY RECALL.
Reporting to Secretary.-- ``(1) In general.--A person that voluntarily recalls a meat product shall, not later than 5 days after the date on which the voluntary recall begins, submit to the Secretary a list of all retail stores or public school districts that are known to have purchased a meat product subject to the voluntary recall.
Updated list.--Not later than 5 days after the date on which a person required to submit a list under paragraph (1) learns of a retail store or public school district that has purchased a meat product subject to the voluntary recall referred to in such paragraph that has not been submitted to the Secretary under this subsection, such person shall submit the name of such retail store or public school district to the Secretary.
Publication.--Not later than 5 days after learning that a retail store or public school district has purchased a meat product subject to a voluntary recall, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register and otherwise make publicly available the name of such retail store or public school district.''.
Poultry Products.--The Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 United States Code 451 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF RETAILERS AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS THAT PURCHASE POULTRY PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO VOLUNTARY RECALL.
Reporting to Secretary.-- ``(1) In general.--A person that voluntarily recalls a poultry product shall, not later than 5 days after the date on which the voluntary recall begins, submit to the Secretary a list of all retail stores or public school districts that are known to have purchased a poultry product subject to the voluntary recall.
Updated list.--Not later than 5 days after the date on which a person required to submit a list under paragraph (1) learns of a retail store or public school district that has purchased a poultry product subject to the voluntary recall referred to in such paragraph that has not been submitted to the Secretary under this subsection, such person shall submit the name of such retail store or public school district to the Secretary.
Publication.--Not later than 5 days after learning that a retail store or public school district has purchased a poultry product subject to a voluntary recall, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register and otherwise make publicly available the name of such retail store or public school district.''.
Egg Products.--The Egg Products Inspection Act (21 United States Code 1031 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PUBLICATION OF NAMES OF RETAILERS AND SCHOOL DISTRICTS THAT PURCHASE EGG PRODUCTS SUBJECT TO VOLUNTARY RECALL.
Reporting to Secretary.-- ``(1) In general.--A person that voluntarily recalls a egg product shall, not later than 5 days after the date on which the voluntary recall begins, submit to the Secretary a list of all retail stores or public school districts that are known to have purchased a egg product subject to the voluntary recall.
Updated list.--Not later than 5 days after the date on which a person required to submit a list under paragraph (1) learns of a retail store or public school district that has purchased a egg product subject to the voluntary recall referred to in such paragraph that has not been submitted to the Secretary under this subsection, such person shall submit the name of such retail store or public school district to the Secretary.
Publication.--Not later than 5 days after learning that a retail store or public school district has purchased a egg product subject to a voluntary recall, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register and otherwise make publicly available the name of such retail store or public school district.''.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF NONAMBULATORY LIVESTOCK FOR HUMAN FOOD.
Section 1(m) of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601(m)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (8), by striking ``; or'' and inserting ``;''; (2) in paragraph (9), by striking ``substance.''
and inserting ``substance; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(10) if it is derived from an animal that, at the time of slaughter, is unable to stand and walk unassisted.