TAX TREATMENT OF ALASKA NATIVE SETTLEMENT TRUSTS.
Tax Exemption.--Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(28) A trust which-- ``(A) constitutes a Settlement Trust under section 39 of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1629e), and ``(B) with respect to which an election under subsection (p)(2) is in effect.''
Special Rules Relating to Taxation of Settlement Trust.-- Section 501 of such Code is amended by redesignating subsection (p) as subsection (q) and by inserting after subsection (o) the following new subsection: ``(p) Special Rules for Alaska Settlement Trusts.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the following rules shall apply in the case of a Settlement Trust: ``(A) Conveyance to trust.--No amount shall be includible in the gross income of a beneficiary of the Settlement Trust by reason of a contribution to the Settlement Trust (without regard to whether an election is in effect under paragraph (2)).
Electing trust.--If an election is in effect under paragraph (2) for any taxable year, then except as provided in this subsection, the provisions of subchapter J and section 1(e) shall not apply to the Settlement Trust and its beneficiaries.
Nonelecting trust.--If an election is not in effect under paragraph (2) for any taxable year, the provisions of subchapter J and section 1(e) shall apply to the Settlement Trust and its beneficiaries.
Election.-- ``(A) In general.--A Settlement Trust may elect to have the provisions of this subsection and subsection (c)(28) apply to the trust and its beneficiaries.
Time and method of election.--An election under subparagraph (A) shall be made-- ``(i) before the due date (including extensions) for filing the Settlement Trust's return of tax for the 1st taxable year to which such election is to apply, and ``(ii) by attaching to such return of tax a statement specifically providing for such election.
Period election in effect.--Except as provided in subparagraph (D), an election under subparagraph (A), once made, shall be irrevocable.
Election revoked for failure to meet transfer restriction.-- ``(i) In general.--An election under subparagraph (A) is revoked if, at any time after the 1st day of the 1st taxable year to which such election applies, the trust permits any disposition of a beneficial interest in the trust which would not be permitted under section 7(h) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1606(h)) if such beneficial interest were Settlement Common Stock.
Time election revoked.--The revocation under clause (i) shall take effect on the 1st day of the taxable year in which the failure occurs.
No further election.--If an election is revoked under clause (i), the Settlement Trust (or any successor) may not make any election under this paragraph for the taxable year of revocation or any subsequent taxable year.
Distribution requirement on electing settlement trust.-- ``(A) In general.--If an election is in effect under paragraph (2) for any taxable year, a Settlement Trust shall distribute at least 55 percent of its adjusted taxable income for such taxable year.
Tax imposed if insufficient distribution.--If a Settlement Trust fails to meet the distribution requirement of subparagraph (A) for any taxable year, then, notwithstanding subsection (c)(28), a tax shall be imposed on the trust under section 1(e) on an amount of taxable income equal to the amount of such failure.
Designation of distribution.--Solely for purposes of meeting the requirements of this paragraph, a Settlement Trust may elect to treat any distribution (or portion) during the 12-month period following the close of any taxable year as made on the last day of such taxable year.
Any such distribution (or portion) may not be taken into account under this paragraph for any other taxable year.
Adjusted taxable income.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `adjusted taxable income' means taxable income determined under section 641(b) without regard to any deduction under section 651 or 661.
Tax treatment of distributions to beneficiaries.-- ``(A) Electing trust.--If an election is in effect under paragraph (2) for any taxable year, any distribution to a beneficiary shall be included in gross income of the beneficiary as ordinary income.
Other trusts.--Any distribution to a beneficiary from a Settlement Trust not described in subparagraph (A) shall-- ``(i) be included in gross income of the beneficiary as ordinary income to the extent allocable to the earnings and profits account under subparagraph (C), and ``(ii) be includible in income as provided under subchapter J to the extent not so allocable.
Earnings and profits account.-- ``(i) In general.--Each Settlement Trust shall establish an earnings and profits account for purposes of accounting for earnings and profits transferred from an Alaska Native Corporation by reason of a contribution to the trust.
Increases.--The account shall be increased each time a contribution is made by an Alaska Native Corporation to the Settlement Trust.
Such increase shall be equal to the lesser of-- ``(I) the amount of the contribution, or ``(II) the earnings and profits of the Alaska Native Corporation, determined as of the close of the taxable year in which the contribution was made and without regard to the contribution.
For purposes of this clause, all contributions during a taxable year shall be treated as 1 contribution.
Decreases.--The account shall be decreased by any distribution by the Settlement Fund to its beneficiaries.
Taxation.--For purposes of subparagraph (B), until such time as the balance in the account is zero, all distributions to beneficiaries during a taxable year shall be treated as allocable to the account for purposes of subparagraph (B)(i).
Thereafter, all such distributions shall be taxable as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii) until such time as there is an increase in the balance of the account.
Reduction in earnings and profits.--The earnings and profits of an Alaska Native Corporation shall be reduced by the amount of the earnings and profits transferred to the account under subparagraph (C).
Voluntary withholding.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a beneficiary of a Settlement Trust (whether or not an election under paragraph (2) is in effect) may elect to have Federal income tax withheld on distributions from the Settlement Trust to the beneficiary.
Election.--An election under subparagraph (A) shall-- ``(i) be made to the Settlement Trust in writing, and ``(ii) specify the percentage (not greater than 15 percent) of the distributions to be withheld.
Such election may be revoked or modified with respect to distributions made after the revocation or modification.
Settlement trust.--For purposes of this section, the term `Settlement Trust' means a trust which constitutes a Settlement Trust under section 39 of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1629e).''
Reporting.--Section 6041 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Application to Alaska Settlement Trusts.--In the case of any distribution from a Settlement Trust (as defined in section 501(p)(6)) to a beneficiary, this section shall apply, except that-- ``(1) this section shall apply to such distribution without regard to the amount thereof, ``(2) the Settlement Trust shall include on any return or statement required by this section information as to the character of such distribution (if applicable) and the amount of tax imposed by chapter 1 deducted and withheld from such distribution, and ``(3) the filing of any return or statement required by this section shall satisfy any requirement to file any other form or schedule under this title with respect to distributive share information (including any form or schedule included with the trust's tax return).''
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of Settlement Trusts beginning after December 31, 1996, and to contributions to such trusts after such date.
Requirement for election.--An election under section 501(p)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for a taxable year beginning in 1997 shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of section 501(p)(2)(B) of such Code if such election is filed with the return of tax for the first taxable year after such taxable year.