Title V of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 (15 United States Code 695 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 504 the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--The Administration shall establish an Accredited Lenders Program for qualified State or local development companies that meet the requirements of subsection (b).
Designation of Accredited Lenders.--The Administration shall designate a qualified State or local development company as an accredited lender if such company-- ``(1) demonstrates adequate knowledge of applicable laws and regulations concerning the guaranteed loan program under section 504; ``(2) demonstrates proficiency in meeting the requirements of such guaranteed loan program; and ``(3) meets such other requirements as the Administration may prescribe by regulation.
Expedited Processing.--The Administration may expedite the processing of any loan application or servicing action submitted by a qualified State or local development company that has been designated as an accredited lender in accordance with subsection (b).
Suspension or Revocation of Designation.--The designation of a qualified State or local development company as an accredited lender shall be suspended or revoked if the Administration determines that-- ``(1) the development company is not adhering to the Administration's rules and regulations or is violating any other applicable provision of law; or ``(2) the loss experience of the development company is excessive as compared to other lenders; but such suspension or revocation shall not affect any outstanding loan guarantee.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified State or local development company' has the same meaning as in section 503(e).
Regulations.--The Administration shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
ACCREDITED LOAN PACKAGERS PILOT PROGRAM.
Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(22) Accredited loan packagers pilot program.-- ``(A) In general.--The Administration shall establish an Accredited Loan Packagers Pilot Program (hereafter in this paragraph referred to as the `Program') for loan packagers, which shall be administered in accordance with subparagraphs (B) through (G).
Designation of accredited loan packagers.-- ``(i) Qualifications.--Subject to the limitation contained in clause (ii), the Administration may designate a loan packager as an accredited loan packager if such loan packager-- ``(I) is located in a rural area in which, in the determination of the Administration, there is a severe shortage or an absence of lenders that have been designated as-- ``(aa) certified lenders under the Certified Lenders Program authorized by paragraph (19); or ``(bb) preferred lenders under the Preferred Lenders Program authorized by section 5(b)(7); ``(II) demonstrates adequate knowledge of applicable laws and regulations concerning guaranteed loan programs under this subsection; ``(III) demonstrates proficiency in meeting the requirements of such guaranteed loan programs; and ``(IV) meets such other requirements as the Administration may prescribe by regulation.
Total number.--In carrying out the Program, the Administration shall designate not less than 10 and not more than 15 loan packagers as accredited loan packagers.
Expedited processing.--During the 3-year period described in subparagraph (G), the Administration may expedite the processing of any loan application or servicing action prepared by a loan packager that has been designated as an accredited loan packager in accordance with subparagraph (B).
Suspension or revocation of designation.--The designation of a loan packager as an accredited loan packager shall be suspended or revoked if the Administration determines that-- ``(i) the loan packager is not adhering to the Administration's rules and regulations or is violating any other applicable provision of law; or ``(ii) the loss experience of the loan packager is excessive as compared to other loan packagers; but such suspension or revocation shall not affect any outstanding loan guarantee.
Definition.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `loan packager' means any-- ``(i) qualified State or local development company, as such term is defined in section 503(e) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958; or ``(ii) other regional or local development organization selected by the Administration.
Regulations.--The Administration shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this paragraph.
Sunset.--The Program shall terminate 3 years after the date of enactment of this paragraph.