This Act may be cited as the ``Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) in order to promote efficiency, productivity, and the improvement of administrative functions, to enhance public service and public trust in the administrative resolution of disputes, and to enhance the enforcement of the administrative law provisions of title 5, United States Code, the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States should be established; (2) the existing system of permanent agency assignments of administrative law judges appointed under section 3015 of title 5, United States Code, will be enhanced, by creating the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States and will serve the public with maximum economy and efficiency; (3) the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States will enhance legal specialization of administrative law judges by establishing initial and continuing education programs, after consulting with the appropriate agency, to insure that each such judge has the necessary training in the specialized field of law to hear cases assigned by the agency; (4) the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States will establish a system of administrative law judge professional accountability and implement a process to protect the public by establishing procedures to handle allegations of judicial misconduct; and (5) the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States will effect no change in the rulemaking, interpretative, or policymaking authority of an agency which would retain full authority to review and change administrative law judge decisions.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER VI--THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES ``Sec.
Definitions ``For the purposes of this subchapter-- ``(1) the term `agency' means an authority referred to in section 551(1); ``(2) the term `Conference' means the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States established under section 598; ``(3) the term `administrative law judge' means an administrative law judge appointed under section 3105 before or after the effective date of this subchapter; and ``(4) the term `chief judge' means the chief administrative law judge appointed and serving under section 599.
Establishment; membership ``(a) Establishment.--There is established the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States consisting of all administrative law judges in accordance with subsection (b).
Such office shall be administered in Washington, DC.
Membership.--An administrative law judge serving as such on the date of the commencement of the operation of the Conference, or who is appointed to the position of administrative law judge thereafter, shall be transferred to the Conference for personnel management and related support functions.
Each administrative law judge shall be assigned to an agency as provided under section 599A.
Chief administrative law judge ``(a) Appointment; Term; Pay.--The chief administrative law judge shall be the chief administrative officer and presiding judge of the Conference.
The chief judge shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The chief judge shall have served as an administrative law judge for at least 5 years before the date of appointment.
The term of office of the chief judge shall be 5 years or until a successor is appointed and qualifies to serve.
A chief judge may be reappointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, for 1 additional term upon the expiration of the term of such judge.
The chief judge shall be paid at the rate of 105 percent of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Service After Term Expires.--After serving as chief judge, an individual may continue to serve as an administrative law judge unless such individual has been removed from office in accordance with section 7521.
Powers of the Chief Judge.--The chief judge shall-- ``(1) enhance and develop the administrative law process and the administrative law judge function and ensure that adjudications by administrative law judges are conducted in accordance with sections 553, 554, and 556 and other applicable law.
maintain and be the custodian of the personnel file for each administrative law judge; ``(3) maintain a senior administrative law judge register; ``(4) develop training programs, in coordination with the agencies, to promote judicial education, specialization, and efficiency of administrative law judges; ``(5) encourage the efficient use of administrative law judges through temporary reassignment of administrative law judges based upon workload; ``(6) consult with agencies and Office of Management and Budget regarding resources necessary to support administrative law functions; and ``(7) make rules and procedures to implement this subchapter and the functions of the Conference.
The chief judge shall make an annual written report to the President and the Congress including recommendations to improve the administrative law process.
Transfer.--All administrative law judge functions currently performed by the Office of Administrative Law Judges of the United States Office of Personnel Management shall be transferred to the Conference.
Administrative law judge ``(a) Assignment to Agencies.--After selection for appointment to the position of administrative law judge by an agency, the chief judge shall assign each administrative law judge to such agency for the adjudication of cases for the agency.
Agencies.--Each agency with assigned administrative law judges shall be responsible for the following: ``(1) To provide for all the budget, resources, and support requirements for each administrative law judge assigned to the agency.
To maintain the finance records for each administrative law judge assigned to the agency.
Appointment of Agency Chief Judges.--The chief administrative law judge of each agency shall be appointed by the agency head.
Council of the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States ``(a) In General.--The advisory body on policy of the Conference shall be the Council of the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States.
The chief judge shall preside over the Council.
Membership.--Membership of the Council shall consist of 6 agency chief judges, a public member, 3 elected administrative law judges, and the chief judge.
In addition to the chief judge, there shall be 3 permanent members, 3 temporary members, 3 elected administrative law judges, and 1 public member.
The 3 permanent members shall consist of the agency chief judge from each of the 3 agencies which have the greatest number of administrative law judges.
The 3 temporary members shall be selected by the chief judge, on a rotating basis, from the agency chief judges of the other agencies that have administrative law judges.
The public member shall be an attorney with administrative law experience who is selected by the American Bar Association.
Each temporary member and the public member shall serve a term of 1 year.
The 3 elected administrative law judges shall be selected by popular vote of the currently employed administrative law judges.
Not more than one administrative law judge shall be from the same agency and they shall serve for a term of 2 years.
The chief judge will conduct the election.
The agency of each administrative law judge serving on the Council shall pay the expenses and per diems of each administrative law judge for attending Council meetings and performing Council business.
Responsibilities.--The Council shall meet at least quarterly and shall make recommendations to the chief judge relating to the administrative law process and administrative law judge personnel matters ``(d) Public Member Compensation.--The public member of the Council shall be compensated as provided in section 599D(b).
Jurisdiction ``(a) Duties.--An administrative law judge who is a member of the Conference and who is assigned to an agency shall hear and render a decision upon every type of claim, case, action, or controversy of adjudication, subject to the provisions of section 553, 554, or 556, and for every type of claim, case, action, or controversy assigned to administrative law judges at the time of the enactment of this subchapter.
An administrative law judge shall adhere to the existing legal precedent as established by the decisions of the United States court of appeals for the circuit in which the case is heard.
Referral of Cases by Courts.--Courts are authorized to refer, subject to the approval of the chief judge and the parties in the court proceeding, those cases, or portions thereof, in which they seek an administrative law judge to act as a special master pursuant to the provisions of Rule 53(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or otherwise seek an administrative law judge to make findings of fact in a case on behalf of the referring court, which shall continue to have exclusive and undiminished jurisdiction over the case.
When a court has referred a case to an administrative law judge, the recommendations, rulings, and findings of fact of the administrative law judge are subject to de novo review by the referring court.
Application of Agency Policy.--The provisions of this subchapter shall effect no change in-- ``(1) an agency's rulemaking, interpretative, or policymaking authority in carrying out the statutory responsibilities vested in the agency or agency head; ``(2) the adjudicatory authority of administrative law judges; or ``(3) the authority of an agency to review decisions of administrative law judges under any applicable provision of law.
Removal and discipline ``(a) In General.--The chief judge, upon the recommendation of the Council of the Administrative Law Conference of the United States and after providing notice and a period for comment, shall adopt and issue rules of judicial conduct for administrative law judges.
An administrative law judge may not be removed, suspended, reprimanded, or disciplined except for misconduct or neglect of duty, as provided in section 7521, but may be removed for physical or mental disability (consistent with prohibitions on discrimination otherwise imposed by law).
Complaint Resolutions Board.--The rules of the chief judge under subsection (a) shall contain a Complaints Resolution Board which consists of both administrative law judges and attorneys.
The attorneys shall be nominated by the American Bar Association.
Compensation shall be paid for work performed by board members, who are not Federal Government employees, at the level of AL-3, rate C under section 5372 , plus expenses and per diems authorized employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 .
The agency that employs the administrative law judge, who is the subject of the complaint, shall pay all expenses, per diem, and costs relating to the disciplinary action.
Complaint.--(1) A complaint against an administrative law judge shall be in writing and filed with the chief judge.
The chief judge may-- ``(A) dismiss the complaint, if the chief judge finds the complaint to be-- ``(i) directly related to the merits of a decision or procedural ruling; or ``(ii) frivolous; ``(B) conclude the proceeding if the chief judge finds that appropriate corrective action has been taken or that action on the complaint is no longer necessary because of intervening events; or ``(C) refer the complaint to the Complaints Resolution Board.
A panel selected from the Complaints Resolution Board, and consisting of 2 administrative law judges and 1 attorney, shall conduct an investigation of the complaint, may hold a hearing, and shall issue findings and recommendations.
The recommendations of the panel shall include one of the following: ``(A) dismissal of all or part of the complaint; ``(B) direct informal reprimand; ``(C) direct formal reprimand; ``(D) suspension; or ``(E) referral to the Merit Systems Protections Board for further proceedings under section 7521.
The recommendations of the panel are binding on the chief judge, but if the administrative law judge does not accept the recommendations of the panel, the agency may petition the Merit Systems Protections Board as provided under section 7521.''.
MISCELLANEOUS (a) Satisfaction of Other Procedural Requirements.--Compliance with subchapter VI of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, shall satisfy all requirements imposed under section 916 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 for the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``subchapter vi--the administrative law judge conference of the united states ``597.
Chief administrative law judge.
Council of the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States.
Transfers.--There shall be transferred to the Conference the personnel, assets, property, unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, and other funds employed and held by the United States Office of Personnel Management and relating to the administrative law function administered by the United States Office of Personnel Management.
Appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds paid or transferred by agencies to the United States Office of Personnel Management for the administration of the administrative law judge function shall, after the date of the enactment of this Act, be paid or transferred to the Conference.
Collective Bargaining Agreements.--Collective bargaining agreements, relating to personnel transferred by subsection (a), shall remain in effect according to the terms thereof.
Disputes.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, at such time or times as the Director may provide, shall make such determinations as may be necessary with regard to any dispute arising from the transfer of personnel or assets by subsection (a).
OPERATION OF THE CONFERENCE.
Operation of the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States shall commence on the date the first chief judge of the Conference takes office under section 599 of title 5, United States Code.
Except as otherwise provided, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.