This Act may be cited as the ``Export Enhancement Act of 1999''.
Section 235(a)(2) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2195(a)(3)) is amended by striking ``1999'' and inserting ``2003''.
IMPACT OF OPIC PROGRAMS.
Additional Requirements.--Section 231A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2191a) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) Environmental Impact.--The Board of Directors of the Corporation shall not vote in favor of any action proposed to be taken by the Corporation that is likely to have significant adverse environmental impacts that are sensitive, diverse, or unprecedented, unless for at least 60 days before the date of the vote-- ``(1) an environmental impact assessment or initial environmental audit, analyzing the environmental impacts of the proposed action and of alternatives to the proposed action has been completed by the project applicant and made available to the Board of Directors; and ``(2) such assessment or audit has been made available to the public of the United States, locally affected groups in the host country, and host country nongovernmental organizations.
''; and (3) in subsection (c), as so redesignated-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``The Board''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) In conjunction with each meeting of its Board of Directors, the Corporation shall hold a public hearing in order to afford an opportunity for any person to present views regarding the activities of the Corporation.
Such views shall be made part of the record.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF OPIC.
Section 233(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2193(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking the second and third sentences; (2) in the fourth sentence by striking ``(other than the President of the Corporation, appointed pursuant to subsection (c) who shall serve as a Director, ex officio)''; (3) in the second undesignated paragraph-- (A) by inserting ``the President of the Corporation, the Administrator of the Agency for International Development, the United States Trade Representative, and'' after ``including''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``The United States Trade Representative may designate a Deputy United States Trade Representative to serve on the Board in place of the United States Trade Representative.
''; and (4) by inserting after the second undesignated paragraph the following: ``There shall be a Chairman and a Vice Chairman of the Board, both of whom shall be designated by the President of the United States from among the Directors of the Board other than those appointed under the second sentence of the first paragraph of this subsection.''.
TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT AGENCY.
Purpose.--Section 661(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2421(a)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the second sentence the following: ``, with special emphasis on economic sectors with significant United States export potential, such as energy, transportation, telecommunications, and environment''.
Contributions of Costs.--Section 661(b) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2421(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Contributions to costs.--The Trade and Development Agency shall, to the maximum extent practicable, require corporations and other entities to-- ``(A) share the costs of feasibility studies and other project planning services funded under this section; and ``(B) reimburse the Trade and Development Agency those funds provided under this section, if the corporation or entity concerned succeeds in project implementation.''.
Funding.--Section 661(f) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2421(f)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(A) by striking ``$77,000,000'' and all that follows through ``1996'' and inserting ``$48,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year thereafter''; and (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``in fiscal years'' and all that follows through ``provides'' and inserting ``in carrying out its program, provide, as appropriate, funds''.
IMPLEMENTATION OF PRIMARY OBJECTIVES OF TPCC.
The Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee shall-- (1) report on the actions taken or efforts currently underway to eliminate the areas of overlap and duplication identified among Federal export promotion activities; (2) coordinate efforts to sponsor or promote any trade show or trade fair; (3) work with all relevant State and national organizations, including the National Governors' Association, that have established trade promotion offices; (4) report on actions taken or efforts currently underway to promote better coordination between State, Federal, and private sector export promotion activities, including co-location, cost sharing between Federal, State, and private sector export promotion programs, and sharing of market research data; and (5) by not later than March 30, 2000, and annually thereafter, include the matters addressed in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) in the annual report required to be submitted under section 2312(f) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(f)).
TIMING OF TPCC REPORTS.
Section 2312(f) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(f)) is amended by striking ``September 30, 1995, and annually thereafter,'' and inserting ``March 30 of each year,''.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.