This Act may be cited as the ``United Kingdom-NAFTA Accession Act''.
ACCESSION OF UNITED KINGDOM TO THE NORTH AMERICAN FREE TRADE AGREEMENT.
In General.--Subject to section 3, the President is authorized to enter into an agreement described in subsection (b) and the provisions of section 151(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191(c)) shall apply with respect to a bill to implement such agreement if such agreement is entered into on or before December 31, 2003.
Agreement Described.--An agreement described in this subsection means an agreement that-- (1) provides for the accession of United Kingdom to the North American Free Trade Agreement; or (2) is a bilateral agreement between the United States and United Kingdom that provides for the reduction and ultimate elimination of tariffs and other nontariff barriers to trade and the eventual establishment of a free trade area between the United States and United Kingdom.
INTRODUCTION AND FAST-TRACK CONSIDERATION OF IMPLEMENTING BILL.
Introduction in House and Senate.--When the President submits to Congress a bill to implement a trade agreement described in section 2, the bill shall be introduced (by request) in the House and the Senate as described in section 151(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191(c)).
Restrictions on Content.--A bill to implement a trade agreement described in section 2-- (1) shall contain only provisions that are necessary to implement the trade agreement; and (2) may not contain any provision that establishes (or requires or authorizes the establishment of) a labor or environmental protection standard or amends (or requires or authorizes an amendment of) any labor or environmental protection standard set forth in law or regulation.
Point of Order in Senate.-- (1) Applicability to all legislative forms of implementing bill.--For the purposes of this subsection, the term ``implementing bill'' means the following: (A) The bill.--A bill described in subsection (a), without regard to whether that bill originated in the Senate or the House of Representatives.
Amendment.--An amendment to a bill referred to in subparagraph (A).
Conference report.--A conference report on a bill referred to in subparagraph (A).
Amendment between houses.--An amendment between the houses of Congress in relation to a bill referred to in subparagraph (A).
Motion.--A motion in relation to an item referred to in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D).
Making of point of order.-- (A) Against single item.--When the Senate is considering an implementing bill, a Senator may make a point of order against any part of the implementing bill that contains material in violation of a restriction under subsection (b).
Against several items.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law or rule of the Senate, when the Senate is considering an implementing bill, it shall be in order for a Senator to raise a single point of order that several provisions of the implementing bill violate subsection (b).
The Presiding Officer may sustain the point of order as to some or all of the provisions against which the Senator raised the point of order.
Effect of sustainment of point of order.-- (A) Against single item.--If a point of order made against a part of an implementing bill under paragraph (2)(A) is sustained by the Presiding Officer, the part of the implementing bill against which the point of order is sustained shall be deemed stricken.
Against several items.--In the case of a point of order made under paragraph (2)(B) against several provisions of an implementing bill, only those provisions against which the Presiding Officer sustains the point of order shall be deemed stricken.
Stricken matter not in order as amendment.-- Matter stricken from an implementing bill under this paragraph may not be offered as an amendment to the implementing bill (in any of its forms described in paragraph (1)) from the floor.
Waivers and appeals.-- (A) Waivers.--Before the Presiding Officer rules on a point of order under this subsection, any Senator may move to waive the point of order as it applies to some or all of the provisions against which the point of order is raised.
Such a motion to waive is amendable in accordance with the rules and precedents of the Senate.
Appeals.--After the Presiding Officer rules on a point of order under this subsection, any Senator may appeal the ruling of the Presiding Officer on the point of order as it applies to some or all of the provisions on which the Presiding Officer ruled.
Three-fifths majority required.-- (i) Waivers.--A point of order under this subsection is waived only by the affirmative vote of at least the requisite majority.
Appeals.--A ruling of the Presiding Officer on a point of order under this subsection is sustained unless at least the requisite majority votes not to sustain the ruling.
Requisite majority.--For purposes of clauses (i) and (ii), the requisite majority is three-fifths of the Members of the Senate, duly chosen and sworn.
Applicability of Fast Track Procedures.--Section 151 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)-- (A) by inserting ``section 3 of the United Kingdom- NAFTA Accession Act,'' after ``the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988,''; and (B) by amending subparagraph (C) to read as follows: ``(C) if changes in existing laws or new statutory authority is required to implement such trade agreement or agreements or such extension, provisions, necessary to implement such trade agreement or agreements or such extension, either repealing or amending existing laws or providing new statutory authority.
''; and (2) in subsection (c)(1), by inserting ``or under section 3 of the United Kingdom-NAFTA Accession Act,'' after ``the Uruguay Round Agreements Act,''.