This Act may be cited as the ``Secure Our Schools Act''.
MATCHING GRANT PROGRAM FOR SCHOOL SECURITY.
Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 is amended by inserting after part Z the following new part: ``PART AA--MATCHING GRANT PROGRAM FOR SCHOOL SECURITY ``SEC.
In General.--The Attorney General is authorized to make grants to States, units of local government, and Indian tribes to provide improved security, including the placement and use of metal detectors and other deterrent measures, at schools and on school grounds.
Uses of Funds.--Grants awarded under this section shall be distributed directly to the State, unit of local government, or Indian tribe, and shall be used to improve security at schools and on school grounds in the jurisdiction of the grantee through one or more of the following: ``(1) Placement and use of metal detectors, locks, lighting, and other deterrent measures.
Security training of personnel and students.
Coordination with local law enforcement.
Any other measure that, in the determination of the Attorney General, may provide a significant improvement in security.
Preferential Consideration.--In awarding grants under this part, the Attorney General shall give preferential consideration, if feasible, to an application from a jurisdiction that has a demonstrated need for improved security, has a demonstrated need for financial assistance, and has evidenced the ability to make the improvements for which the grant amounts are sought.
Matching Funds.-- ``(1) The portion of the costs of a program provided by a grant under subsection (a) may not exceed 50 percent.
Any funds appropriated by Congress for the activities of any agency of an Indian tribal government or the Bureau of Indian Affairs performing law enforcement functions on any Indian lands may be used to provide the non-Federal share of a matching requirement funded under this subsection.
The Attorney General may provide, in the guidelines implementing this section, for the requirement of paragraph (1) to be waived or altered in the case of a recipient with a financial need for such a waiver or alteration.
Equitable Distribution.--In awarding grants under this part, the Attorney General shall ensure, to the extent practicable, an equitable geographic distribution among the regions of the United States and among urban, suburban, and rural areas.
Administrative Costs.--The Attorney General may reserve not more than 2 percent from amounts appropriated to carry out this Act for administrative costs.
In General.--To request a grant under this part, the chief executive of a State, unit of local government, or Indian tribe shall submit an application to the Attorney General at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Attorney General may require.
Each application shall-- ``(1) include a detailed explanation of-- ``(A) the intended uses of funds provided under the grant; and ``(B) how the activities funded under the grant will meet the purpose of this part; and ``(2) be accompanied by an assurance that the application was prepared after consultation with individuals not limited to law enforcement officers (such as school violence researchers, child psychologists, social workers, teachers, principals, and other school personnel) to ensure that the improvements to be funded under the grant are-- ``(A) consistent with a comprehensive approach to preventing school violence; and ``(B) individualized to the needs of each school at which those improvements are to be made.
Guidelines.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this part, the Attorney General shall promulgate guidelines to implement this section (including the information that must be included and the requirements that the States, units of local government, and Indian tribes must meet) in submitting the applications required under this section.
ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS.
``Not later than November 30th of each year, the Attorney General shall submit a report to the Congress regarding the activities carried out under this part.
Each such report shall include, for the preceding fiscal year, the number of grants funded under this part, the amount of funds provided under those grants, and the activities for which those funds were used.
``For purposes of this part-- ``(1) the term `school' means a public elementary or secondary school; ``(2) the term `unit of local government' means a county, municipality, town, township, village, parish, borough, or other unit of general government below the State level; and ``(3) the term `Indian tribe' has the same meaning as in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)).
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part the following amounts: ``(1) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.
$60,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.
$60,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.