This Act may be cited as the ``San Rafael Western Legacy District and National Conservation Act''.
In this Act: (1) Conservation area.--The term ``Conservation Area'' means the San Rafael National Conservation Area established by section 201.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Western legacy district.--The term ``Western Legacy District'' means the San Rafael Western Legacy District established by section 101.
TITLE I--SAN RAFAEL WESTERN LEGACY DISTRICT SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE SAN RAFAEL WESTERN LEGACY DISTRICT.
In General.--In order to promote the preservation, conservation, interpretation, scientific research, and development of the historical, cultural, natural, recreational, archeological, paleontological, environmental, biological, educational, wilderness, and scenic resources of the San Rafael region of the State of Utah, as well as the economic viability of rural communities in the region, there is hereby established the San Rafael Western Legacy District, to include the San Rafael National Conservation Area established by section 201.
Areas Included.--The Western Legacy District shall consist of approximately 2,842,800 acres of land in the County of Emery, Utah, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``San Rafael Western Legacy District and National Conservation Area'' and dated ______________.
Map and Legal Description.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a map and legal description of the Western Legacy District.
The map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such map and legal description.
Copies of the map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, and in the appropriate office of the Bureau of the Land Management in Utah.
Legacy Council.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a Legacy Council to advise the Secretary with respect to the Western Legacy District.
The Legacy Council may furnish advice and recommendations to the Secretary with respect to management, grants, projects, and technical assistance.
Membership.--The Legacy Council shall consist of not more than 10 members appointed by the Secretary.
Two members shall be appointed from among the recommendations submitted by the Governor of Utah and 2 members shall be appointed from among the recommendations submitted by the Emery County Commissioners.
The remaining members shall be persons recognized as experts in conservation of the historical, cultural, natural, recreational, archeological, environmental, biological, educational, and scenic resources or other disciplines directly related to the purposes for which the Western Legacy District is established.
Relationship to other law.--The establishment and operation of the Legacy Council established under this section shall conform to the requirement of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
and the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants and provide technical assistance to accomplish the purposes of this section to any nonprofit or unit of government with authority in the boundaries of the Western Legacy District.
Permitted uses.--Grants and technical assistance made under this section may be used for planning, reports, studies, interpretive exhibits, historic preservation projects, construction of cultural, recreational, educational, and interpretive facilities that are open to the public, and such other expenditures as are consistent with this Act.
Planning.--Up to $100,000 of amounts available to carry out this section each fiscal year, up to a total amount not to exceed $200,000, may be provided under this subsection only to a unit of government or a political subdivision of the State of Utah for use for planning activities.
Matching funds.--Federal funding provided under this section may not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the activity carried out with such funding, except that non-Federal matching funds are not required with respect to-- (A) planning activities carried out with assistance under paragraph (3); and (B) use of assistance under this section for facilities located on public lands and that are owned by the Federal Government.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated under this section not more than $1,000,000 annually for any fiscal year, not to exceed a total of $10,000,000.
MANAGEMENT AND USE OF THE SAN RAFAEL WESTERN LEGACY DISTRICT.
In General.--The Secretary, through the Bureau of Land Management and subject to all valid existing rights, shall administer the public lands within the Western Legacy District pursuant to this Act and the applicable provisions of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
The Secretary shall allow such uses of the public land as the Secretary determines will further the purposes for which the Western Legacy District was established.
Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Utah with respect to fish and wildlife within the Western Legacy District.
Private Lands.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting private property rights within the Western Legacy District.
Public Lands.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as in any way diminishing the Secretary's or the Bureau of Land Management's authorities, rights, or responsibilities for managing the public lands within the Western Legacy District.
TITLE II--SAN RAFAEL NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA SEC.
DESIGNATION OF THE SAN RAFAEL NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
Purposes.--In order to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations the unique and nationally important values of the Western Legacy District and the public lands described in subsection (b), including historical, cultural, natural, recreational, scientific, archeological, paleontological, environmental, biological, wilderness, wildlife, educational, and scenic resources, there is hereby established the San Rafael National Conservation Area in the State of Utah.
Areas Included.--The Conservation Area shall consist of approximately 947,000 acres of public lands in the County of Emery, Utah, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``San Rafael Western Legacy District and National Conservation Area'' and dated ________.
Notwithstanding any depiction on such map, the boundary of the Conservation Area shall be set back 300 feet from the edge of the Interstate 70 right-of-way and 300 feet from the edge of the State Route 24 right-of-way.
Map and Legal Description.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a map and legal description of the Conservation Area.
The map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such map and legal description.
Copies of the map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management and in the appropriate office of the Bureau of Land Management in Utah.
MANAGEMENT OF THE SAN RAFAEL NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
Management.--The Secretary, acting through the Bureau of Land Management, shall manage the Conservation Area in a manner that conserves, protects, and enhances its resources and values, including those resources and values specified in section 201(a), and pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et seq.
), and other applicable provisions of law, including this Act.
Uses.--The Secretary shall allow only such uses of the Conservation Area as the Secretary finds will further the purposes for which the Conservation Area is established.
Vehicular Uses.-- (1) In general.--Except where needed for administrative purposes or to respond to an emergency, and subject to paragraph (2), use of motorized vehicles in the Conservation Area shall be-- (A) prohibited at all times in areas where roads and trails did not exist as of February 2, 2000; (B) limited to roads and trails that-- (i) existed as of February 2, 2000; and (ii) are designated for motorized vehicle use as part of the management plan prepared pursuant to subsection (f); and (C) managed consistent with section 8340 of title 43, Code of Federal Regulations (relating to designating public lands as open, limited, or closed to the use of off-road vehicles and establishing controls governing the use and operation of off-road vehicles in such areas).
Limitation on application.--(A) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) do not limit the provision of reasonable access to private lands or State lands within the Conservation Area.
Any access to private lands or State lands pursuant to subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be restricted to exclusive use by, respectively, the owner of the private lands or the State.
Withdrawals.-- (1) In general.--Subject to valid existing rights and except as provided in paragraph (2), all Federal lands within the Conservation Area and all lands and interests therein that are hereafter acquired by the United States are hereby withdrawn from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws and from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws, and from operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws and all amendments thereto.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to effect discretionary authority of the Secretary under other Federal laws to grant, issue, or renew rights-of-way or other land use authorizations consistent with the other provisions of this Act.
Communication facilities.--The Secretary may authorize the installation of communications facilities within the Conservation Area, but only to the extent that they are necessary for public safety purposes.
Such facilities must have a minimal impact on the resources of the Conservation Area and must be consistent with the management plan established under subsection (f).
Hunting, Trapping, and Fishing.--Hunting, trapping, and fishing shall be permitted within the Conservation Area in accordance with applicable laws and regulations of the United States and the State of Utah, except that the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, or the Secretary after consultation with the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources, may issue regulations designating zones where and establishing periods when no hunting, trapping, or fishing shall be permitted for reasons of public safety, administration, or public use and enjoyment.
Management Plan.--Within 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a comprehensive plan for the long-range protection and management of the Conservation Area.
The plan shall describe the appropriate uses and management of the Conservation Area consistent with the provisions of this Act.
The plan shall include, as an integral part, a comprehensive transportation plan for the lands within the Conservation Area.
In preparing the transportation plan the Secretary shall conduct a complete review of all roads and trails within the Conservation Area.
The plan may incorporate appropriate decisions contained in any current management or activity plan for the area and may use information developed in previous studies of the lands within or adjacent to the Conservation Area.
State Trust Lands.--The State of Utah and the Secretary may agree to exchange Federal lands, Federal mineral interests, or payment of money for lands and mineral interests of approximately equal value that are managed by the Utah School and Institutional Trust Lands Administration and inheld within the boundaries of the Conservation Area.
Access.--The Bureau of Land Management, the State of Utah, and Emery County may agree to resolve section 2477 of the Revised Statutes and other access issues within the Conservation Area.
Wildlife Management.--Nothing in this Act shall be deemed to diminish the responsibility and authority of the State of Utah for management of fish and wildlife within the Conservation Area.
Grazing.--Where the Secretary of the Interior currently permits grazing, such grazing shall be allowed subject to all applicable laws, regulations, and executive orders.
No Buffer Zones.--The Congress does not intend for the establishment of the Conservation Area to lead to the creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones around the Conservation Area.
The fact that there may be activities or uses on lands outside the Conservation Area that would not be permitted in the Conservation Area shall not preclude such activities or uses on such lands up to the boundary of the Conservation Area consistent with other applicable laws.
Water Rights.--Because the available water resources in the drainage basins included in part within the exterior boundaries of the Conservation Area have already been appropriated-- (1) nothing in this Act, the management plan required by subsection (f), or any action taken pursuant thereto, shall constitute either an express or implied reservation of surface or ground water; (2) nothing in this Act affects any valid existing water rights in existence before the date of enactment of this Act, including any water rights held by the United States; and (3) if the United States determines that additional water resources are needed for the purposes of this Act, the United States shall work, with or through any agency that is eligible to hold instream flow water rights, to acquire such rights in accordance with Utah State water law.
Wilderness Acts.--Nothing in this Act alters the provisions of the Wilderness Act of 1964 (16 United States Code 1131) or the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) as they pertain to wilderness resources within the Conservation Area.
Recognizing that the designation of wilderness areas requires an Act of Congress, the Bureau of Land Management, the State of Utah, Emery County, and affected stakeholders may work toward resolving various wilderness issues within the Conservation Area.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this title such sums as may be necessary.