This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Credit Availability and Economic Recovery Act''.
The Congress finds and declares that: (1) Adequate credit is necessary for the revitalization and growth for all sectors of our economy.
Financial institutions are subject to layers of unnecessary regulations, some of which, impose large costs without increasing the safety and soundness of our financial system.
The regulatory burden amounts to a tax on our financial systems that has been estimated by the Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council to be as high as $17,000,000,000.
This regulatory burden cost is draining capital from financial institutions and significantly contributing to the lack of available credit for small business.
The lack of available credit for small businesses hampers the growth of small businesses and is directly contributing to the high rate of unemployment in the United States.
The overwhelming majority of new jobs are created by small businesses in the United States.
The President should be given the authority to provide financial institutions with relief from this regulatory burden in order to provide immediate credit relief to all sectors of the economy, especially credit worthy small businesses and to sustain economic growth.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to authorize the President to increase the availability of credit, (2) to enhance the economic recovery, and (3) to provide sustained noninflationary economic growth, through the immediate suspension of laws, rules, regulations, and guidelines that impose unnecessarily burdensome costs on insured depository institutions.
As used in this Act, the term ``insured depository institution'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
PRESIDENTIAL RESPONSIBILITY AND AUTHORITY.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall conduct a thorough review and evaluation of all statutory and regulatory provisions affecting insured depository institutions.
This review shall include-- (1) an analysis of the purposes of the provision; (2) the effectiveness of the provision in achieving such purposes; (3) whether any other provision provides an alternative or duplicative means of achieving those purposes; (4) the cost imposed by compliance with such provisions upon insured depository institutions and consumers; and (5) the relationship between such provision, its compliance costs, and the availability of credit in the United States.
Authority To Suspend.--The President may, by executive order, suspend the applicability of-- (1) any Federal law affecting insured depository institutions or depository institution holding companies (or any portion thereof); and (2) any regulation or guideline promulgated by a Federal banking agency (or any portion thereof); if the President makes a determination described in subsection (c).
Determination.--For the purpose of subsection (b), a determination is described in this subsection if it is a determination that-- (1) the law, regulation, or guideline has already accomplished its goal and the law, regulation, or guideline is therefore no longer necessary; (2) the law, regulation, or guideline is not as effective in achieving its intended purpose as other available alternatives that would impose lesser costs on financial institutions, their customers, or the economy; (3) the cost of compliance with the law, regulation, or guideline outweighs the potential benefits sought to be accomplished by the law, regulation, or guideline; or (4) the law, regulation, or guideline has a negative impact on the availability of credit in the United States which outweighs the benefits sought to be accomplished by the law, regulation, or guideline.
Publication and Effective Date.--A Presidential order issued pursuant to this section shall be published in the Federal Register, and shall become effective 30 days after such publication, unless the President, for good cause, determines that a shorter period is necessary and in the public interest.
Consultation.--Prior to making a finding under section 5 that a law, regulation, or guideline is to be suspended, the President shall consult with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairperson of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision.
Notification.--The President shall notify the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives prior to issuing any order under section 5.
Nothing in this Act authorizes the President to suspend any law, regulation, or guideline-- (1) that is necessary for the safe and sound operation of insured depository institutions; or (2) that-- (A) prohibits discrimination in the provision of financial services based on race, sex, national origin, marital status, or age; (B) relates directly to the conduct of monetary policy; or (C) pertains to an enforcement proceeding or supervisory action with respect to a particular institution or party.
This Act shall be effective on the date of its enactment.
The authority of the President to suspend any law, regulation, or guideline under this Act shall terminate on January 1, 1997.