This Act may be cited as the ``Early Childhood Family Education Pilot Project Act''.
The purpose of this Act is-- (1) to strengthen families by helping all parents provide the best possible environment for the healthy growth and development of their young children who are between the ages of 0 and 5 years; and (2) to support parents in their role as their child's first and most important teacher by enabling the parents' participation in the early learning process through integrating early childhood education, parent education, and joint parent- child interaction activities in a comprehensive program.
In General.--The terms used in this Act have the meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Local Agency.--In this Act, the term ``local agency'' means-- (1) a local educational agency; (2) a school that administers early childhood education programs; (3) an agency administering a Head Start, Early Head Start, or Even Start program; and (4) an agency administering any other Federal, State, or local government child care or early childhood education program within a local school district.
The Secretary is authorized to award grants from amounts made available under section 11 to States having applications approved under section 5 to enable such States to award subgrants in accordance with the requirements of section 6.
In General.--Each State desiring a grant under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted under subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) A description of how the State, through a local agency, will achieve the following goals: (A) Helping parents support their children's optimal physical, intellectual, social, and emotional development during the first 5 years of life.
Increasing parent involvement in children's learning, development, and education.
Enhancing effective communication and healthy parent-child-family relationships.
Encouraging the development and effective use of community resources for families.
Preventing child abuse, family violence, and other negative family outcomes.
Making educational materials available for home use.
Coordinating activities under this Act with parent involvement and education under part C of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1431 et sequentes).
A description of how the State will target funds to the highest need areas with need being determined from the levels of access to high quality early childhood education opportunities and numbers of children living in poverty relative to the population of the area.
An assurance that within the criteria described in paragraph (2) the State will award subgrants equitably among the geographic regions of the State.
Peer Review.--The Secretary shall use a peer review process in reviewing applications submitted under subsection (a) for the purpose of selecting States to receive grants under this Act.
Applications shall be peer reviewed by a panel of experts in early childhood and family education.
STATE USE OF FUNDS.
Subgrants.--A State that receives a grant under this Act for a fiscal year shall use the grants funds to award subgrants to local agencies to enable such local agencies to establish or enhance early childhood family education programs involving children between 0 and 5 years of age and their parents.
Administration.--A State may use not more than 5 percent of the amount received under this Act for any fiscal year to pay for administrative costs.
Waiver of Age Requirement.--If a State administers a program that provides early childhood family education in all school districts or areas in the State that desire to participate in the program under this Act, and families in those school districts or areas are provided universal access to early childhood family education programs, then the State may use funds provided under this Act to award subgrants to local agencies for activities authorized under this Act that serve children who are not older than 8.
LOCAL USE OF FUNDS.
In General.--Each local agency receiving a subgrant under this Act shall use subgrant funds to develop and carry out a program to establish or enhance early childhood family education programs.
Consultation.--Each local agency receiving a subgrant under this Act shall develop the program described in subsection (a) in consultation with, and shall provide for ongoing advice from, other Federal, State or local government sponsored early childhood education programs in the local area, including child care, Head Start, Early Head Start, and Even Start programs.
Requirements.--Each program carried out by a local agency under this section shall comply with the following requirements: (1) Universal access.--The program shall be open to every family who lives within the boundaries of the school district served by the local agency, including every such family with a young child having special developmental or health needs.
Setting.--The program shall be center-based or school- based and shall provide instruction to parents and children together or in concurrent settings.
Activities.--The program shall include-- (A) early childhood education activities to enhance children's intellectual, social, emotional, and physical development; (B) parent education activities to enhance the skills of parents to provide for and understand their children's learning processes and intellectual, social, emotional, and physical development; (C) activities that include parent-child interaction; (D) activities designed to detect children's physical, intellectual, emotional, or behavioral problems that may cause learning problems; (E) coordination with and referral to related community resources; (F) coordination with local elementary schools, including activities such as joint professional development and training in early childhood development, appropriate practices, and kindergarten and first grade standards and curricula to help teachers, early childhood educators, and parents prepare children for school; (G) training for teachers, early childhood educators, and parents in identifying and preventing child abuse and neglect; and (H) other programs or activities to improve the health, development, and school readiness of children.
Staff.--Each teacher in the program shall meet the applicable State requirements for State-funded pre-kindergarten programs or parent education programs, as applicable.
Restrictions.--Local agencies receiving subgrant funds under this section may not use such funds for-- (1) parental involvement activities, such as newsletter related activities, parent-teacher conferences, or other parent outreach activities, except for the use of such parental involvement activities to support the activities described in subsection (c); or (2) routine child care or early childhood education services, as contrasted to supplemental activities that serve parents and children together or in concurrent settings.
Advisory Council.-- (1) In general.--Each local agency receiving a subgrant under this Act, in consultation with the local educational agency or local governing board, as appropriate, serving the local agency shall appoint an advisory council from individuals residing in the school district in which the program funded by the subgrant is to be provided.
Members.--A majority of the members of the advisory council shall be parents who are participating in the program.
Duties.--The advisory council shall assist the local educational agency or local governing board, as appropriate, in developing, planning, and monitoring the program assisted under this section.
Report.--In carrying out the advisory council's duties, the council shall report to the local educational agency or local governing board, as appropriate, serving the local agency administering the program assisted under this section.
In general.--Each State receiving a grant under this Act shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an annual evaluation of the effectiveness of the programs carried out within such State using grant funds received under this Act.
Submission to Congress.--The Secretary shall submit the results of the evaluations prepared under subsection (a) to Congress.
SUPPLEMENT AND NOT SUPPLANT.
Grant and subgrant funds provided under this Act shall supplement, and not supplant, other Federal, State, and local funds that are available for early childhood family education programs.
States receiving grant funds and local agencies receiving subgrant funds under this Act may provide additional funds, other than those received under this Act, to enhance the early childhood family education programs that are supported by such grant or subgrant funds.
Family participation in any program funded under this Act shall be voluntary and shall not preclude participation in other Federal, State, or local programs.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, 200,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.