This Act may be cited as the ``Domestic Violence Community Response Team Act of 1994''.
The purpose of this Act is to-- (1) establish and strengthen the partnership between law enforcement and community groups in order to assist victims of domestic violence; (2) provide early intervention and follow up services in order to prevent future incidents of domestic violence; and (3) establish a central technical assistance center for the collection and provision of programmatic information and technical assistance.
GRANTS AUTHORIZED FOR COMMUNITY RESPONSE TEAMS.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary''), is authorized to award grants to encourage eligible entities to develop community response teams to combat domestic violence.
Grants shall be awarded in a manner that ensures geographic and demographic diversity.
Maximum Amount.--The Secretary shall not award a grant under this section in an amount which exceeds $500,000.
Duration.--The Secretary shall award grants under this section for a period not to exceed 3 years.
Eligible Entity.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a nonprofit, community-based organization whose primary purpose involves domestic violence prevention.
The organization must have a proven track record of expertise in providing services to victims of domestic violence and collaborating with existing service providers and support agencies in the community.
Additional requirements.--An eligible entity shall-- (A) act in partnership with local law enforcement agencies to carry out the purposes of this Act; and (B) understand, be able to respond adequately to, and if possible reflect the racial, ethnic, and lingual diversity of the community.
Role of Community Response Teams.--Community response teams established pursuant to this section shall-- (1) provide community advocates to work (in conjunction with local police) with victims immediately after incidents of domestic violence; (2) educate victims about the legal process with respect to restraining orders and civil and criminal charges; (3) discuss immediate safety arrangements and child care needs, and educate victims about resources provided by local agencies; (4) provide for follow-up services and counseling with local support agencies; and (5) educate victims regarding abuse tactics, including increased incidence of violence that occurs after repeated episodes of violence.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--Applications for grants pursuant to this section shall be submitted to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include a complete description of the eligible entity's plan for operating a community-based partnership between law enforcement officials and community organizations; (B) demonstrate effective community leadership, commitment to community action, and commitment to working with affected populations; (C) provide for periodic project evaluation through written report and analysis in order to assist in applying successful programs to other communities; and (D) demonstrate an understanding of the population to be served (racial, ethnic, and socioeconomic characteristics which influence women's roles and affect treatment).
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award a contract to an eligible entity to serve as a technical assistance center under this Act.
The technical assistance center shall-- (1) serve as a national information, training, and material development source for the development and support of community response teams nationwide; and (2) provide technical support and input to community programs, including helping local groups start their own programs and providing training for community volunteer staff persons.
Eligible Entity.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a nonprofit organization with a primary focus on domestic violence prevention and a proven track record of expertise in providing technical assistance, information, training, and resource development on some aspect of domestic violence service provision or prevention.
An eligible entity shall be selected by the Secretary under this section based on competence, experience, and a proven ability to conduct national-level organization and program development.
The eligible entity shall provide the Secretary with evidence of support from community-based domestic violence organizations for the designation of the eligible entity as the technical assistance center.
There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998 to carry out the provisions of this Act of which $300,000 shall be available for a grant under section 4.
Not to exceed 5 percent of any grant made under this Act may be used by the grantee for administrative purposes.