This Act may be cited as the ``Brownsville Wetlands Policy Act of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF WETLANDS POLICY CENTER AT THE PORT OF BROWNSVILLE, TEXAS.
Establishment of Center.--For purposes of utilizing grants made by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service there may be established in accordance with this Act, on property owned or held in trust by the Brownsville Navigation District at the Port of Brownsville, Texas, a wetlands policy center which shall be known as the ``Brownsville Wetlands Policy Center at the Port of Brownsville, Texas'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Center'').
The Center shall be operated and maintained by the Port of Brownsville with programs to be administered by the University of Texas at Brownsville.
Mission of the Center.--The primary mission of the Center shall be to utilize the unique wetlands property at the Port of Brownsville and adjacent waters of South Texas to focus on wetland matters for the purposes of protecting, restoring, and maintaining the Lagoon Ecosystems of the Western Gulf of Mexico Region.
Board of Directors.--The Center shall be governed by a Board of Directors to oversee the management and financial affairs of the Center.
The Board of Directors shall be cochaired by the Port of Brownsville, the University of Texas at Brownsville, and the designee of the Director of the Fish and Wildlife Service, and shall include as members other representatives considered appropriate by those cochairs.
Oversight of the Center.-- (1) Annual report.--The Board of Directors of the Center shall prepare an annual report and submit it through the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to the Congress.
Contents.--Annual reports under this subsection shall cover the programs, projects, activities, and accomplishments of the Center.
The reports shall include a review of the budget of the Center, including all sources of funding received to carry out Center operations.
Availability of information.--The Board of Directors of the Center shall make available all pertinent information and records to allow preparation of annual reports under this subsection.
General accounting office.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall periodically submit to the Congress reports on the operations of the Center.
The Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, make grants to the Center for use for carrying out activities of the Center.
The Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, subject to the availability of appropriations, may enter into a long- term lease with the Port of Brownsville for use by the Center of wetlands property owned by the Port of Brownsville.
Terms of the lease shall be negotiated, and the lease shall be signed by both parties, prior to the disposal of any Federal funds pursuant to this Act.
The lease shall include a provision authorizing the Director to terminate the lease at any time.
As conditions of receiving assistance under this Act-- (1) the University of Texas at Brownsville shall make available to the Center for fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997-- (A) administrative office space; (B) classroom space; and (C) other in-kind contributions for the Center, including overhead and personnel; and (2) the Port of Brownsville shall make available up to 7,000 acres of Port Property for the programs, projects, and activities of the Center.
The Board of Directors of the Center shall include in their annual report under section 2(d) a statement of whether these conditions have been met.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1997, for making grants to the Center under section 3, including for use for the establishment, operation, maintenance, and management of the Center.
RELATIONSHIP OF CENTER WITH THE CENTER FOR ENVIRONMENTAL STUDIES AND SERVICES, CORPUS CHRISTI, TEXAS.
None of the funds appropriated pursuant to this Act may be used to relocate any of the administrative operations of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service from the Center for Environmental Studies and Services Building on the campus of Corpus Christi State University, to the Brownsville Wetlands Policy Center at the Port of Brownsville, Texas, established pursuant to this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives September 21, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.