SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medical Cost Containment Act of 1993''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Section 125A is added to the Code to read as follows: ``SEC.
MEDICAL CARE SAVINGS BENEFITS.
In General.--A medical care savings benefit is a qualified benefit which consists of a Health Plan meeting the requirements of this section that includes, as part thereof, a Medical Care Savings Account, as set forth in section 408A.
Establishment of Medical Care Savings Benefit.--A medical care savings benefit shall be established as a Health Plan which provides that all or part of the premium differential realized by instituting a Qualified Higher Deductible Health Plan is credited to a participating employee during a plan year to pay for medical care described in section 213(d) subject to the limitations set forth in subsection (e) hereof.
To the extent that any amount remains credited to that participant at the end of each plan year, such amount shall be deposited to a section 408(A) medical care savings account (which may also be referred to as a `Medical IRA') for that participant.
Payments from Account Balance.--If the plan provides for level installment payments, the plan may also provide that the maximum amount of reimbursement at a particular time during the period of coverage may be limited to the amount of actual contributions to the participant's benefit account.
A participant may be advanced, interest free, such amounts necessary to cover incurred medical expenses which exceed the amount then credited to the participant's benefit account, upon the participant's agreement to repay such advancement from future installments or upon ceasing to be a participant.
Reporting.--Employers shall cause to be issued to participating employees, not less frequently than quarterly, a statement setting forth amounts remaining in their accounts.
Limitations on Medical Care Savings Benefits.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an Employer who has a Health Plan in existence immediately prior to the adoption of the Medical Care Savings Benefit, the maximum amount that may be contributed annually to a participant's benefit account shall be equal to-- ``(A) the cost of that Health Plan for that participant's type of coverage; plus ``(B) a cost of living adjustment for the calendar year in which the plan year begins, determined under section 1(f)(3) of the Code as adjusted annually based on the CPI-Medical cost of living component.
Other employers.--In the case of an Employer to whom paragraph (1) does not apply, the contribution limit shall be equal to the 67th percentile of the per employee health plan expenditures (for the calendar year for which such plan begins) for the type of coverage applicable to such employee based on a broad representative survey using methodology the same as or similar to that used by States to develop an average market premium for small group guarantee access legislation.
Such study may be no broader than each State and may be broken down into representative surveys for areas within a State.
The amount of such contribution shall be adjusted annually in accordance with the cost of living adjustment provided for in subsection (1)(b) of this section.
Overall limitation.--In no event may any contribution described above exceed the deductible amount of the Qualified Higher Deductible Plan.
Health Plan.--The term `Health Plan' means an employee welfare benefit plan providing medical care (as defined in section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954) to participants or beneficiaries directly or through insurance, reimbursement, or otherwise.
Qualified Higher Deductible Plan.--The term `Qualified Higher Deductible Plan' is a Health Plan which provides for payment of covered benefits in excess of the higher deductible, which higher deductible shall not exceed $5,000 in 1993 and, adjusted annually thereafter for increases in the cost of living in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Coordination With Health Flexible Spending Accounts.--If, during a Plan Year, a participating employee has a Medical Care Savings Benefit in effect and a health flexible spending account established under section 125, coverage under the health flexible spending account, for the type of medical expenses that may be reimbursed under the Medical Care Savings Benefit, would be limited to 100 percent of the deductible under the Qualified Higher Deductible Plan, less the amount credited in the current year to the Employee's Medical Care Savings Benefit Account.
For purposes of section 125, a Medical Care Savings Benefit is not considered to involve the deferral of compensation for purposes of the Code.
Separate Determinations for Categories of Employees and Separate Lines of Business.--Contributions to Health Plans established by an Employer may be separately determined on the basis of: ``(1) Types of coverage.
Reasonable classifications of employees based on such classifications as hours of work per week, retirement status, coverage by a collective bargaining agreement.
Employees within separate lines of business, within the meaning of section 414(r).
Other Definitions for Purposes of this Section.-- ``(1) Employee.--The term `employee' means any individual employed by an Employer, including-- ``(A) an individual who is employee within the meaning of section 401(c)(1); and ``(B) former employees.
Types of coverage.--The types of coverage are-- ``(A) self-only coverage; and ``(B) coverage other than self-only coverage.
Preventative Health Care.--By allowing medical expenses payable from a medical care savings benefit to be those permitted under section 213(d) of the Internal Revenue Code, participating employees are encouraged to use this benefit to promote good health, to use preventative medical and health procedures, and to seek appropriate consultative and second opinions.
Nonduplication of Benefits.--Policies issued as a part of a medical care savings benefit shall not be required to duplicate expenses that may be proper expenses covered by the medical care savings benefit.
Additionally, the Qualified Higher Deductible Plan may provide that the deductible specified in the insurance policy may be increased by the amount of any benefits payable by any other health benefits program or plan.''.
MEDICAL CARE SAVINGS ACCOUNT.
In General.--Chapter 1 (relating to normal taxes and surcharge) is amended by adding after section 408 the following new section: ``SEC.
MEDICAL CARE SAVINGS ACCOUNTS.
Medical Care Savings Accounts.--For purposes of this section, the term `medical care savings account' (which may also be referred to as a `Medical IRA') means a trust created or organized in the United States for the exclusive benefit of an individual, the individual's dependents (as defined in section 152) or beneficiaries, but only if the written instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(1) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in subsection (d)), insurance company (as defined in section 816), or such other person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which such other person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust funds will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The interest of an individual in the balance of the account is nonforfeitable.
The assets of the trust will not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.-- ``(1) Exemption from tax.--Any medical care savings account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be a medical care savings account by reason of paragraph (2) or (3): Provided, however, That earnings on such account shall be taxable.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such account is subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Loss of exemption of account where employee engages in prohibited transaction.-- ``(A) In general.--If, during any taxable year of the individual for whose benefit any medical care savings account is established, that individual, dependent, or his beneficiary engages in any transaction prohibited by section 4975 with respect to such account, such account ceases to be a medical care savings account as of the first day of such taxable year.
For purposes of this paragraph the individual for whose benefit any account was established is treated as the creator of such account.
Account treated as distributing all its assets.--In any case in which any account ceases to be a medical savings account by reason of subparagraph (A) as of the first day of any taxable year, section 511 shall apply as if there were a distribution on such first day in an amount equal to the fair market value (on such first day) of all assets in the account (on such first day).
Effect of pledging account as security.--If, during any taxable year of the individual for whose benefit a medical care savings account is established, that individual uses the account or any portion thereof as security for a loan, the portion so used is treated as distributed to that individual.
Commingling medical care savings account amounts in certain common trust funds and common investment funds.--Any common trust fund or common investment fund of individual medical care savings account assets which is exempt from taxation under this subtitle does not cease to be exempt on account of the participation or inclusion of assets of a trust exempt from taxation under section 501(a) which is described in section 401(a).
Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of a medical savings account shall be included in gross income by the distributee.
Distributions for medical expenses.--Distributions from a medical care savings account shall not be taxable to the distributee, for amounts paid directly or indirectly for medical expenses as defined in section 213(d).
10 percent additional tax for early withdrawals.-- Distributions described in paragraph 1 and not described in paragraph 2 shall be subject to an additional 10 percent tax for distributions made prior to age 59\1/2\ of the distributee.
Rollover contribution.--An amount is described in this paragraph as a rollover contribution which shall not be included in the gross income of the distributee if it meets the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B).
In general.--Paragraph (1) does not apply to any amount paid or distributed out of a medical care savings account to the individual for whose benefit the account is maintained if the entire amount received is paid into a medical care savings account for the benefit of such individual not later than the sixtieth day after the day on which he receives the payment or distribution.
Limitation.--This paragraph does not apply to any amount described in paragraph (A) received by an individual from a medical savings account if at any time during the one-year period ending on the day of such receipt such individual received any other amount described in that subparagraph from a medical care savings account which was not includible in his gross income because of the application of this paragraph.
Denial of rollover treatment for inherited accounts, etc.-- ``(i) In general.--In the case of an inherited medical savings account-- ``(I) this paragraph shall not apply to any amount received by an individual from such an account (and no amount transferred from such account to another medical care savings account shall be excluded from gross income by reason of such transfer), and ``(II) such inherited account shall not be treated as a medical care savings account for purposes of determining whether any other amount is a rollover contribution.
Inherited medical care savings account.-- ``(I) the individual for whose benefit the account is maintained acquired such account by reason of the death of another individual, and ``(II) such individual was not the surviving spouse of such other individual.
Bank.--For purposes of subsection (a)(2), the term `bank' means-- ``(1) a bank (as defined in section 581), ``(2) an insured credit union (within the meaning of section 101(6) of the Federal Credit Union Act), and ``(3) a corporation which, under the laws of the State of its incorporation, is subject to supervision and examination by the Commissioner of Banking or other officer of such State in charge of the administration of the banking laws of such State.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to years beginning after December 31, 1993.
OVERALL EFFECT ON TAX DEDUCTIBILITY.
This Act is not intended to change the Code's current tax treatment of employer-provided coverage under accident and health plans.