This Act may be cited as the ``Market Incentives for Biobased Products Act of 2007''.
Congress finds the following: (1) There is significant potential for replacing petroleum- based products with products made using farm-grown biomass.
The biobased industry provides value-added opportunities for farmers and environmentally friendly options for consumers.
The Federal Government can play an important role in the promotion of the biobased industry through procurement of biobased products.
A labeling program for biobased products would provide consumers with basic, reliable information about these products and raise awareness of their environmental benefits.
By developing the market for biobased products, the Federal Government also encourages increased investment and employment opportunities in rural America.
By reducing the use of petroleum and increasing reliance on farm-grown raw materials, the Nation will decrease its needs for imported petroleum.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO FEDERAL PROCUREMENT AND LABELING OF BIOBASED PRODUCTS.
Procurement Guideline Considerations.--Section 9002(e)(2)(B) of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8102(e)(2)(B)) is amended by striking ``life cycle costs'' and inserting ``information on life cycle costs if such information is appropriate and available''.
Labeling Requirements and Revised Deadline.--Section 9002(h) of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8102(h)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking ``Within one year after the date of enactment of this Act'' and inserting ``Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Market Incentives for Biobased Products Act of 2007,''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``Criteria shall be issued for finished products and intermediate ingredients and feedstocks.
''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively, and inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Consultation.--In developing the eligibility criteria for the labeling program under this section, the Secretary shall consult with other Federal agencies and with non- governmental groups with an interest in biobased products including small and large producers of biobased materials and products, industry, trade organizations, academia, consumer organizations, and environmental organizations.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 9002(k) of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8102(k)) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.-- ``(A) Federal procurement.--There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2013 to implement the provisions of this section other than subsection (h).
Labeling.--There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2013 to implement subsection (h) of this section.''.
Funding for testing of biobased products.--Paragraph (2)(A) of such section is amended by striking ``$1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2007'' and inserting ``$2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2013''.
Report Requirements.-- (1) Report by agencies to administrator for federal procurement policy.--Subsection (f) of section 9002 of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8102) is amended-- (A) by striking ``The Office of'' and inserting ``(1) The Administrator for''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) To assist the Administrator for Federal Procurement Policy in preparing the report to Congress required under paragraph (1), each procuring agency each year shall submit to the Administrator a report covering the following: ``(A) Actions taken to implement subsections (c), (d), and (g) of this section.
The results of the annual review and monitoring program established under subsection (g)(2)(C).
The number of contracts entered into by the agency during the year covered by the report that include the procurement of biobased products.
A list of the biobased products procured by the agency during the year covered by the report.''.
Report by secretary to congress on implementation of section.--Section 9002 of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 8102) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Report by Secretary to Congress on Implementation of Section.--Not later than six months after the date of the enactment of the Market Incentives for Biobased Products Act of 2007, and each year thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the implementation of this section.
The report shall include the following: ``(1) A comprehensive management plan defining tasks, milestones, and funding allocations for fully implementing this section.
A list of items designated under subsection (e)(1)(A) whose procurement will carry out the objectives of this section, with associated cost and performance data.
Information on the current status of implementation of the procurement preference under this section, including the procurement program of each Federal agency under subsection (g), and the voluntary labeling program under subsection (h).