This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Arson Deterrence and Fire Containment Act of 1993''.
MODULAR AIRBORNE FIRE FIGHTING SYSTEM.
There are authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for the modernization or replacement of the Modular Airborne Fire Fighting System used by the United States Forest Service.
IMPROVEMENT OF FIRE FIGHTING RESPONSE TIME.
The Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture, in consultation with local fire chiefs, and other fire and arson experts, shall prepare of study of additional means of improving airborne fire fighting response time, including whether there are any legal impediments that (such as private contracting requirements) which materially delay fire fighting response reaction time.
The Forest Service shall report the results of such study to Congress not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASED CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR ARSONISTS.
Malicious Use of Fire or Explosive.-- (1) Federal property.--Subsection (f) of section 844 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(f)''; and (B) by striking ``shall be imprisoned for not more than ten years'' and all that follows through the end of the subsection and inserting the following: ``shall, except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
If a circumstance exists that is listed below, the punishment for an offense under this subsection shall be as follows: ``(A) If the damage caused by the offense exceeds $1,000,000, the offender shall be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for not less than 5 nor more than 20 years.
If the life of any person (other than the offender) is placed in jeopardy as a result of the offense, or the damage caused by the offense exceeds $10,000,000, the offender shall be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for not less than 8 nor more than 30 years.
If personal injury results to any person (other than the offender) or the damage caused by the offense exceeds $25,000,000, the offender shall be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for not less than 10 nor more than 40 years.
If the death of any person results the offender shall-- ``(i) be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for any term of years greater than 25 (or imprisonment for life); and ``(ii) also be subject to the death penalty as provided in section 34 of this title.''.
Interstate commerce.--Subsection (i) of section 844 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(i)''; and (B) by striking ``shall be imprisoned for not more than ten years'' and all that follows through the end of the subsection and inserting the following: ``shall, except as provided in paragraph (2) of this subsection, be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
If a circumstance exists that is listed below, the punishment for an offense under this subsection shall be as follows: ``(A) If the damage caused by the offense exceeds $1,000,000, the offender shall be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for not less than 5 nor more than 20 years.
If the life of any person (other than the offender) is placed in jeopardy as a result of the offense, or the damage caused by the offense exceeds $10,000,000, the offender shall be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for not less than 8 nor more than 30 years.
If personal injury results to any person (other than the offender) or the damage caused by the offense exceeds $25,000,000, the offender shall be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for not less than 10 nor more than 40 years.
If the death of any person results the offender shall-- ``(i) be subject to a fine under this title and imprisoned for any term of years greater than 25 (or imprisonment for life); and ``(ii) also be subject to the death penalty as provided in section 34 of this title.''.
Reckless or Negligent Use of Fire or Explosive.--Section 844 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k)(1) Whoever recklessly engages in conduct that would be prohibited by subsection (f) or (i) of this section if such conduct were engaged in maliciously, and as a result a dwelling (other than that of the offender) is destroyed or a person (other than the offender) is injured, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
If the court does not sentence a person convicted under this section to imprisonment, the court shall as a minimum sentence such person to probation with a condition that such person perform not less than 400 nor more than 2000 hours of community service.
In any juvenile proceeding, a juvenile who has been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent for conduct which if committed by an adult would be a violation of this subsection shall be required to spend at least one week in an residential institution for the confinement of juvenile delinquents and to perform not less than 400 nor more than 2000 hours of community service.
Whoever negligently engages in conduct that would be prohibited by subsection (f) or (i) of this section if such conduct were engaged in maliciously shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than one month, or both.
If the court does not sentence a person convicted under this section to imprisonment, the court shall as a minimum sentence such person to probation with a condition that such person perform not less than 100 nor more than 1000 hours of community service.
In any juvenile proceeding, a juvenile who has been adjudicated a juvenile delinquent for conduct which if committed by an adult would be a violation of this subsection shall be required to spend at least two days in an residential institution for the confinement of juvenile delinquents and to perform not less than 100 nor more than 1000 hours of community service.''.
ELIMINATION OF FIRE HAZARDS.
The Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture, in consultation with local fire chiefs, and other fire and arson experts, shall prepare a study of whether there are any Federal legal impediments that prevent homeowners, local governments, and other interested parties from clearing highly flammable fire hazards, including brush weeds that may provide fuel for dangerous fires.
The Forest Service shall report the results of such study to Congress not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
DEFENSE CONVERSION FOR STRENGTHENING PRIVATE FIRE FIGHTING CAPABILITIES.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Federal Aviation Administration, shall report to Congress on-- (1) how more use could be made of excess military cargo, other planes available to the Forest Service, and private fire fighting contractors; and (2) how to reform Federal aviation regulations to allow full effective use of such planes for fire fighting purposes.
INSURING FIRE FIGHTING WATER SUPPLY AND BACKUP POWER.
The Forest Service in the Department of Agriculture, in consultation with local fire chiefs, and other fire and arson experts, shall prepare a study of the potential feasibility of building additional roads and backup power supplies for assuring water pressure and water availability in national forest areas to increase fire fighting effectiveness.
The Forest Service shall report the results of such study to Congress not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Agriculture shall reduce by 5 percent the below-cost direct loans of the Farmers Home Administration for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998.