This Act may be cited as the ``State and Local Brownfields Revitalization Act of 2000''.
In this Act: (1) Brownfield site.--The term ``brownfield site'' means a parcel of real property, the expansion, redevelopment, or reuse of which is complicated by the presence or potential presence of a hazardous substance.
Hazardous substance.--The term ``hazardous substance'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601).
Remediate.--The term ``remediate'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall implement a program to provide assistance to State, regional, and local governments in the remediation and restoration of brownfield sites in cases in which the remediation and restoration would contribute to the quality, conservation, and sustainable use of waterways and watershed ecosystems in the United States.
Forms of Assistance.--Assistance provided under the program under subsection (a) may be in the form of-- (1) site characterization and planning; (2) site design and construction; (3) environmental restoration; and (4) preparation for site development.
Considerations; Consultation.--In determining whether to provide assistance for a project to remediate a brownfield site under subsection (a), the Secretary shall-- (1) take into consideration-- (A) the manner and extent to which the project would improve public health and safety; (B) the manner and extent to which the project would-- (i) encourage sustainable economic and environmental redevelopment in an area serviced by existing infrastructure; or (ii) enable the creation of or addition to parks, greenways, or other recreational property; and (C) any other expected beneficial results of the project; and (2) consult with appropriate Federal, State, regional, and local officials.
Public Ownership Requirement.--The Secretary shall provide assistance for a project under this section only if the project site (including any facilities on the site) is publicly owned.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Federal share.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Federal share of the cost of any project under this section shall not exceed 65 percent.
Agreement.--As a condition of receiving assistance for a project under this section, a non- Federal interest shall enter into a binding agreement with the Secretary that establishes the percentages of the costs of the project that are to be paid by-- (i) the Secretary; and (ii) the non-Federal interest.
Credit toward non-Federal share.--In determining the non-Federal share of the cost of a project under this section, the Secretary shall provide credit to the non-Federal interest for-- (A) the value of land, easements, rights-of-way, and relocations (including direct costs associated with obtaining permits necessary for completing the site characterizations or remediation work), not to exceed 35 percent of total project costs; (B) any site characterization and site remediation services and other in-kind work that is carried out on or subsequent to, or within the period that is 5 years before, the date on which the non-Federal interest enters into a cost sharing agreement with the Secretary under paragraph (1)(B); and (C) grants awarded, and the value of work performed on behalf of the non-Federal interest, by State and local agencies, as determined by the Secretary.
Operation and maintenance.--The non-Federal interest shall pay 100 percent of costs of operation and maintenance of a remediated site.
Limitation on federal expenditures.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall award not more than $3,250,000 for a project at any brownfield site.
Exception.--If the Secretary determines that a project, due to the size or the level of contamination of the brownfield site, requires additional funds, the Secretary may provide to the project funding in the amount of the lesser of-- (i) $5,000,000; or (ii) an amount not to exceed 65 percent of the costs of the project.
Applicability of Laws.--Nothing in this section waives, limits, or otherwise affects the applicability of any provision of Federal or State law that would otherwise apply to a project to be carried out with assistance provided under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.