Short Title.--This act may be cited as the Cooperative Units of Research in Infectious Disease (CURID) of 1994.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) despite the development of modern technology for water purification, food preparation, sterilization and disinfection coupled with the discovery of antibiotics and a limited number of highly effective vaccines, the advent of AIDS, the re- emergence of tuberculosis, the emergence of newly infectious agents and a significant increase in food and water borne diseases in recent years pose new threats to the health and well-being of all citizens; (2) the era of molecular biology and intensive research efforts in AIDS have produced powerful technology for the rapid and sensitive detection of new infectious agents which have resulted in the development of new concepts of infectious diseases; (3) advances in the scientific understanding of the functions of the human body's defense mechanisms and the critical roles of both the patient and the infecting agent's genetic characteristics are rapidly leading to the belief that a number of chronic diseases of humans presently of unknown etiology may be caused by infectious agents; (4) chronic illnesses like lung, arthritis and related diseases are increasing at alarming rates and, according to 1994 National Centers for Disease Control and Prevention data, the incidence of arthritis alone is estimated to increase by 57 percent and affect 54.9 million people in the United States by the year 2020; (5) the economic losses associated with these disabling diseases will continue to cost our society billions of dollars annually if the Federal Government does not invest in essential research initiatives designed to build upon our ability to detect new infectious agents and fully investigate new concepts of the etiology of chronic diseases; (6) determining and demonstrating causality of diseases like chronic lung disease, rheumatoid arthritis and rheumatic diseases by an infectious agent could lead to early and accurate diagnosis and treatment of the disease which would dramatically reduce medical costs and morbidity and mortality; and (7) addressing the potential role of infectious agents in chronic diseases necessitates a different research approach than currently exists and sustained funding of collaborative research groups.
SPECIFIC PROVISIONS; ESTABLISHMENT OF COOPERATIVE UNITS OF RESEARCH IN INFECTIOUS DISEASES.
In General.--Infectious Disease Research and Clinical Units of Excellence will be established jointly by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases of the National Institutes of Health and the National Center for Infectious Diseases of the National Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Purpose.--These cooperative units will be dedicated to finding the cause, prevention and cure of chronic inflammatory diseases of suspected infectious etiology and committed to giving priority to diseases like arthritis and chronic lung disease which hold the most promise for beneficial research results.
Establishment of Units.--The establishment of the Infectious Disease Research and Clinical Units of Excellence shall be based upon past research performance of researchers working on specific microorganisms.
The units will be responsible for-- (A) evaluation of patient specimens for the presence of infectious agents; (B) characterization of the immune response to these infectious agents; and (C) characterization of the genetic background of patients.
Personnel to staff these units will be selected based upon the proven track record of individuals who-- (A) have demonstrated the capability of using molecular diagnostic techniques for detection of fastitious infectious agents; and (B) possess proven clinical experience.
The units will provide laboratory support for a network of Clinical Units for patient enrollment and patient management.
National Center for Infectious Diseases of the National Centers for Disease Control and Prevention will provide the epidemiological and investigative skills for a network of Clinical Units.
The initial period of grant funding for the units will be up to ten but no less than five years.
Coordination of Research Program and Development of Strategic Research Plan.--The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases shall be the lead agency.
The Director of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases shall be responsible for the establishment of no more than 10 research and clinical units at any given time.
The designation of research and clinical units shall be carried out in consultation with the Director of the National Center for Infectious Diseases as well as expert extramural scientists.
The directors of the research and clinical units will be responsible for the development of the research plan.
There are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 2006.
At the end of this 10 year period, the effectiveness of this research approach will be evaluated and the need for future funding, if any, will be determined by the National Advisory Councils of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and the National Center for Infectious Diseases.
The National Advisory Councils shall submit a report of its findings and recommendations to the appropriate authorizing committees of the House and the Senate.