This Act may be cited as the ``Improved Immigration Law Enforcement Act of 1993''.
INCREASED PERSONNEL LEVELS OF THE BORDER PATROL.
The number of full-time positions in the Border Patrol of the Department of Justice for fiscal year 1994 shall be increased to 6,600.
INCREASED FUNDING FOR THE BORDER PATROL.
In addition to funds otherwise available for such purposes, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney General $50,000,000 for the fiscal year 1993, which amount shall be available only for equipment, support services, and initial training for the Border Patrol.
Funds appropriated pursuant to this section are authorized to remain available until expended.
INSERVICE TRAINING FOR THE BORDER PATROL.
Requirement.--Section 103 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1103) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) The Attorney General shall continue to provide for such programs of inservice training for full-time and part-time personnel of the Border Patrol in contact with the public as will familiarize the personnel with the rights and varied cultural backgrounds of aliens and citizens in order to ensure and safeguard the constitutional and civil rights, personal safety, and human dignity of all individuals, aliens as well as citizens, within the jurisdiction of the United States with whom they have contact in their work.
The Attorney General shall provide that the annual report of the Service include a description of steps taken to carry out paragraph (1).''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Attorney General $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 to carry out the inservice training described in section 103(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
The funds appropriated pursuant to this subsection are authorized to remain available until expended.
In order to provide support for the increased personnel levels of the border patrol authorized in section 2, the number of full-time support positions for investigation, detention and deportation, intelligence, information and records, legal proceedings, and management and administration in the Immigration and Naturalization Service shall be increased by 580 positions above the number of equivalent positions as of September 30, 1992.
STRENGTHENED ENFORCEMENT OF WAGE AND HOUR LAWS.
In General.--The number of full-time positions in the Wage and Hour Division with the Employment Standards Administration of the Department of Labor for the fiscal year 1994 shall be increased by 250 positions above the number of equivalent positions available to the Wage and Hour Division as of September 30, 1992.
Assignment.--Individuals employed to fill the additional positions described in subsection (a) shall be assigned to investigate violations of wage and hour laws in areas where the Attorney General has notified the Secretary of Labor that there are high concentrations of undocumented aliens.
STRENGTHENED ENFORCEMENT OF THE EMPLOYER SANCTIONS PROVISIONS.
In General.--The number of full-time positions in the Investigations Division within the Immigration and Naturalization Service of the Department of Justice for the fiscal year 1994 shall be increased by 250 positions above the number of equivalent positions available to such Division as of September 30, 1992.
Assignment.--Individuals employed to fill the additional positions described in subsection (a) shall be assigned to investigate violations of the employer sanctions provisions contained in section 274A of the Immigration and Nationality Act, including investigating reports of violations received from officers of the Employment Standards Administration of the Department of Labor.
INCREASED NUMBER OF ASSISTANT UNITED STATES ATTORNEYS.
In General.--The number of Assistant United States Attorneys that may be employed by the Department of Justice for the fiscal year 1994 shall be increased by 21 above the number of Assistant United States Attorneys that could be employed as of September 30, 1992.
Assignment.--Individuals employed to fill the additional positions described in subsection (a) shall be specially trained to be used for the prosecution of persons who bring into the United States or harbor illegal aliens, fraud, and other criminal statutes involving illegal aliens.
ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN ALIEN SMUGGLING.
Subsection 274(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years (or 20 years in the case of an offense described in paragraph (3))'', and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) For purposes of paragraph (1), an offense described in this paragraph if-- ``(A) the offense involves 5 or more aliens; ``(B) the offense involves other criminal activity; ``(C) one or more of the aliens referred to in paragraph (1) were under the age of 18 at the time of the offense and the offense was committed either for the purpose of illegal adoption or for the purpose of sexual or commercial exploitation; or ``(D) the offense involves the dangerous, inhumane treatment, or death of, or serious bodily injury to, an alien referred to in paragraph (1).''.
CHANGES IN CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR BRINGING IN ALIENS.
Section 274 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(2), by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``, except that a person who commits an offense under subparagraph (B)(ii) shall be fined in accordance with that title, or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both'', and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) For purposes of this section, the mere employment of an individual (including the usual and normal practices incident to employment) by itself shall not be deemed to constitute harboring.''.
NEGOTIATIONS WITH MEXICO AND CANADA.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the Attorney General, jointly with the Secretary of State, should initiate discussions with Mexico and Canada to establish formal bilateral programs with those countries to prevent and to prosecute the smuggling of undocumented aliens into the United States; (2) not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall report to the Congress the progress made in establishing such programs; and (3) in any such program established under this Act, major emphasis should be placed on deterring and prosecuting persons involved in the organized and continued smuggling of undocumented aliens.