This Act may be cited as the ``Amtrak Route Closure and Realignment Act of 1995''.
Establishment.--There is established an independent commission to be known as the ``Total Realignment of Amtrak Commission'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of eleven members as follows: (1) Three individuals appointed by the President, including-- (A) the Secretary of Transportation; (B) one representative of a rail labor union; and (C) one representative of a rail management.
Four individuals who collectively have expertise in rail finance, economic analysis, legal issues, and other relevant areas, to be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, in consultation with the Minority Leader.
Four individuals who collectively have expertise in rail finance, economic analysis, legal issues, and other relevant areas, to be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Minority Leader.
Appointments under this subsection shall be made within 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Individuals appointed under paragraphs (2) and (3) shall not be employees of the Department of Transportation or representatives of a rail labor union or rail management.
Chairman.--Within 10 days after the 15-day period described in subsection (b), or the appointment of the last member of the Commission under such subsection, whichever occurs first, a majority of the members of the Commission may elect a chairman from among its membership.
If a chairman is not elected within such 10-day period, the President shall select a chairman for the Commission from among its membership.
Meetings.--(1) Each meeting of the Commission shall be open to the public.
All the proceedings, information, and deliberations of the Commission shall be open or available, upon request, to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, and to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
Pay and Travel Expenses.--(1)(A) Each member, other than the Chairman, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
The Chairman shall be paid for each day referred to in subparagraph (A) at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), officers and employees of the Federal Government shall not be paid under this paragraph for service on the Commission.
Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director of Staff.--The Commission shall appoint a Director, who shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of not more than 5 additional employees.
The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission to the extent otherwise permitted by law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Experts or Consultants.--The Commission may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 30 days after transmitting a report under section 3(e).
Economic Performance Rankings.--The Commission shall examine economic data for Amtrak's system and develop system-wide performance rankings of all routes based on long-term economic loss.
Identification of Candidate Routes for Closure or Realignment.--(1) The Commission shall identify routes which are candidates for closure or realignment, based on the performance rankings developed under subsection (a) and on the following principles: (A) The system which remains after closure and realignment of routes shall not be required to be a national, interconnected system.
Federal operating subsidies for Amtrak shall be assumed to decline over the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of a joint resolution under section 4, possibly to the point of zero Federal operating subsidy.
The rail labor protection costs of Amtrak shall be calculated both-- (i) at the level required under rail labor laws as in effect when the Commission is identifying routes under this subsection; and (ii) at the level which would be required if amendments to rail labor laws were enacted that-- (I) limit to a maximum of 6 months any wage continuation or severance benefit for an employee of Amtrak whose employment is terminated as a result of a discontinuance of intercity rail passenger service; and (II) permit Amtrak to require any employee whose position is eliminated as a result of such a discontinuance to transfer to another part of Amtrak's system.
The Commission shall specifically examine ridership forecasts and other assumptions supporting continued service on the Northeast Corridor, particularly with respect to the continuation of the electrification of the Northeast Corridor between New Haven, Connecticut, and Boston, Massachusetts.
Consideration of Quality of Life Factors.--(1) Each route identified under subsection (b) as a candidate for closure or realignment shall be reviewed to determine whether there are important social, environmental, or other quality of life factors which should be considered in determining whether to close or realign the route.
The commission shall also consider the effect on airport congestion and the availability of alternative modes of transportation, especially in rural areas, before recommending any closure or realignment.
The Commission shall hold public hearings to obtain testimony from State and local officials, and other interested parties, with respect to factors described in paragraph (1).
Optional Uses for Abandoned Rail Lines.--The Commission shall also examine optional uses for abandoned rail lines.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall, within 120 days after the election or selection of its chairman under section 2(c), transmit to the Congress and the President a report on its activities under this Act, including recommendations developed under this section for the closure and realignment of routes in Amtrak's passenger rail system.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF COMMISSION RECOMMENDATIONS.
Terms of the Resolution.--For purposes of this section, the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution which is introduced within the 10-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission transmits its recommendations to the Congress under section 3(e), and-- (1) which does not have a preamble; (2) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress approves the recommendations of the Total Realignment of Amtrak Commission as submitted on ______'', the blank space being filled in with the appropriate date; and (3) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint resolution approving the recommendations of the Total Realignment of Amtrak Commission.''.
Referral.--A resolution described in subsection (a) that is introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives.
A resolution described in subsection (a) introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
Discharge.--If the committee to which a resolution described in subsection (a) is referred has not reported such resolution (or an identical resolution) by the end of the 20-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission transmits the report to the Congress under section 3(e), such committee shall be, at the end of such period, discharged from further consideration of such resolution, and such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.--(1) On or after the third day after the date on which the committee to which such a resolution is referred has reported, or has been discharged (under subsection (c)) from further consideration of, such a resolution, it is in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution.
A Member may make the motion only on the day after the calendar day on which the Member announces to the House concerned the Member's intention to make the motion.
All points of order against the resolution (and against consideration of the resolution) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the respective House shall immediately proceed to consideration of the joint resolution without intervening motion, order, or other business, and the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 2 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
An amendment to the resolution is not in order.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a resolution described in subsection (a) and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the resolution shall occur.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution described in subsection (a) shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by Other House.--(1) If, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House described in subsection (a), that House receives from the other House a resolution described in subsection (a), then the following procedures shall apply: (A) The resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House receiving it except in the case of final passage as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii).
With respect to a resolution described in subsection (a) of the House receiving the resolution-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no resolution had been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the other House.
Upon disposition of the resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the resolution that originated in the receiving House.
Rules of the Senate and House.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution described in subsection (a), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
There are authorized to be appropriated not to exceed $2,500,000 for carrying out this Act.