This Act may be cited as the ``Holocaust Victim Insurance Relief Act of 1998''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) During World War II, 6,000,000 victims of the Holocaust lost their lives and property.
In addition to the many atrocities that befell the victims of the Nazi regime, many of the insurance claims that rightfully should have been paid to the victims and their families were not.
In many instances, insurance company records are the only proof of the existence of these insurance policies belonging to Holocaust victims.
Many Holocaust survivors and their descendants have been fighting for 50 years to persuade insurance companies to settle unpaid claims.
Holocaust survivors and families of victims have asked that insurance companies disclose any information they possess that could show proof of insurance policies held by Holocaust victims and survivors.
Insurance companies doing business in the United States have a responsibility to ensure that any involvement they or their related companies may have had with insurance policies of Holocaust victims are disclosed to the Federal Government and to ensure the rapid resolution of these questions, eliminating the further victimization of these policyholders and their families.
The international Jewish community is negotiating with responsible insurance companies to establish an international commission to resolve the issue of outstanding insurance claims.
ESTABLISHMENT OF HOLOCAUST INSURANCE REGISTRY.
The Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of State, and Secretary of Commerce shall jointly establish and maintain a central registry containing records and information relating to insurance policies of victims, living and deceased, of the Holocaust.
The registry shall be known as the Holocaust Insurance Registry and shall be accessible to the public.
FULL DISCLOSURE BY INSURANCE FIRMS.
Any insurer currently doing business in the United States that sold life, property, liability, health, annuity, dowry, educational, or casualty insurance policies, directly or through a related company, to persons in Europe, which were in effect between 1920 and 1945, whether the sale occurred before or after the insurer and the related company became related, shall, within 180 days following the date of the enactment of this Act, file or cause to be filed the following information with the Departments of the Treasury, State, or Commerce to be entered into the Holocaust Insurance Registry: (1) The number of such insurance policies.
The holder, beneficiary, and current status of such policies.
A comparison of the names of holders and beneficiaries of such policies and the names of the victims of the Holocaust.
The names of victims of the Holocaust shall be provided by the Department of State and may additionally be obtained from the Yad Vashem repository in Israel.
CERTIFICATION BY INSURANCE COMPANIES.
Each insurer subject to section 4 shall certify under penalty of perjury to any of the following: (1) The proceeds of the policies described in section 4 have been paid to the designated beneficiaries or their heirs where that person or persons, after diligent search, could be located and identified.
The proceeds of the policies where the beneficiaries or heirs could not, after diligent search, be located or identified, have been distributed to Holocaust survivors or to qualified charitable nonprofit organizations for the purpose of assisting Holocaust survivors.
A court of law has certified in a legal proceeding resolving the rights of unpaid policyholders, their heirs, and beneficiaries, a plan for the distribution of the proceeds.
The proceeds have not been distributed and the amount of those proceeds.
An insurer currently doing business in the United States that did not sell any insurance policies in Europe prior to 1945, shall not be subject to this section if a related company, whether or not authorized and currently doing business in the United States, has made a filing under this section.
PENALTIES FOR FAILURE TO DISCLOSE INFORMATION.
In General.--Any insurer that knowingly files information required by this Act that is false shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $5,000 for each violation, which penalty is hereby appropriated to the Departments of Treasury, State, and Commerce to be used to aid in the resolution of Holocaust insurance claims.
Suspension.--Any insurance company that fails to comply with the requirements of this Act by the 210th day after the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be suspended from practicing in the insurance business until the time that the insurer complies with this Act.
Regulation.--The Secretary of the Treasury, Secretary of State, and Secretary of Commerce shall jointly adopt regulations to implement this Act.
It is the sense of Congress that outstanding claims under insurance policies held by Holocaust victims and survivors be resolved at the earliest possible time.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Holocaust victim'' means any person who was persecuted during the period of 1929 to 1945, inclusive, by Nazi Germany, its allies, or sympathizers.
The term ``related company'' means any parent, subsidiary, reinsurer, successor in interest, managing general agent, or affiliate company of the insurer.
The term ``proceeds'' means the face value or other payout value of insurance policies and annuities plus reasonable interest to date of payment without diminution for wartime or immediate postwar currency devaluation.