Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces is the element of the Armed Forces of the United States that has the capability quickly to augment the active duty forces of the Armed Forces successfully in times of crisis.
The Selected Reserve has been assigned increasingly critical levels of responsibility for carrying out the worldwide military missions of the Armed Forces since the end of the Cold War.
Members of the Selected Reserve have served proudly as mobilized forces in numerous theaters from Europe to the Pacific and South America, indeed, around the world.
The active duty forces of the Armed Forces cannot successfully perform all of the national security missions of the Armed Forces without augmentation by the Selected Reserve.
The high and increasing tempo of activity of the Selected Reserve causes turbulence in the relationships of members of the Selected Reserve with their families, employers, and reserve units.
The turbulence often results from lengthy, sometimes year-long, absences of the members of the Selected Reserve from their families and their civilian jobs in the performance of military duties necessary for the execution of essential missions.
Family turbulence includes the difficulties associated with vacillation between coverage of members' families for health care under civilian health benefits plans and coverage under the military health benefits options.
Up to 200,000 members of the Selected Reserve, including, in particular, self-employed members, do not have adequate health benefits.
It is the sense of Congress that steps should be taken to ensure that every member of the Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces and the member's family have health care benefits that are adequate-- (1) to ease the transition of the member from civilian life to full-time military life during a mobilization of reserve forces; (2) to minimize the adverse effects of a mobilization on the member's ability to provide for the member's family to have ready access to adequate health care; and (3) to improve readiness and retention in the Selected Reserve.
STUDY OF HEALTH CARE BENEFITS COVERAGE FOR MEMBERS OF THE SELECTED RESERVE.
Requirement for Study.--The Secretary of Defense shall enter into a contract with a federally funded research and development center to carry out a study of the needs of members of the Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces and their families for health care benefits.
Report.--(1) Not later than March 1, 2002, the Secretary shall submit a report on the results of the study to Congress.
The report shall include the following matters: (A) Descriptions, and an analysis, of how members of the Selected Reserve and their dependents currently obtain coverage for health care benefits, together with statistics on enrollments in health care benefits plans.
The percentage of members of the Selected Reserve, and dependents of such members, who are not covered by any health insurance or other health benefits plan, together with the reasons for the lack of coverage.
Descriptions of the disruptions in health benefits coverage that a mobilization of members of the Selected Reserve causes for the members and their families.
At least three recommended options for cost-effectively preventing or reducing the disruptions by means of extending health care benefits under the Defense Health Program or the Federal Employees Health Benefits program to all members of the Selected Reserve and their families, together with an estimate of the costs of individual coverage and family coverage under each option.
A profile of the health status of members of the Selected Reserve and their dependents, together with a discussion of how that profile would affect the cost of providing adequate health benefits coverage for that population of beneficiaries.
An analysis of the likely effects that providing enhanced health benefits coverage to members of the Selected Reserve and their families would have on recruitment and retention for, and the readiness of, the Selected Reserve.
In formulating the options to recommend under paragraph (2)(D), the Secretary shall consider an expansion of the TRICARE program or the Federal Employees Health Benefits program to cover the members of the Selected Reserve and their families.