This Act may be cited as the ``Parents Television Empowerment Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The average American child watches 8,000 murders and 100,000 acts of violence on television before finishing elementary school.
Many of the poorest and potentially most vulnerable groups in our society are the heaviest viewers of television.
Television violence is often presented without context or judgment as to its acceptability.
Most of the violence on television is presented during times when children are likely to be viewing.
The 1972 Surgeon General's Report, Television and Growing Up: The Impact of Televised Violence, found that there was a significant and consistent correlation between television viewing and aggressive behavior and a direct, causal link between exposure to televised violence and subsequent aggressive behavior on the part of the viewer.
The 1982 National Institute of Mental Health report, Television and Behavior: Ten Years of Scientific Progress and Implications for the Eighties, found that ``violence on television does lead to aggressive behavior by children and teenagers who watch the programs,'' and that some viewers learn to be passive victims.
Numerous other studies establish a causal connection between watching violence on television and increasingly violent behavior of children.
There has been a proliferation of television talk shows that, in a race for ratings, air ever more outrageous programs dealing with rape, incest, and other sensitive topics in a manner that seeks to sensationalize and shock rather than educate and inform.
Although the impact on the hundreds of thousands of children who view these programs has yet to be fully documented, the programs have raised strong concerns among psychologists.
Title VII of the Communications Act of 1934 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
COMPILATION AND PUBLICATION OF COMPLAINTS CONCERNING VIOLENT PROGRAMMING.
Establishment of Facility for the Collection of Comments and Complaints.--The Commission shall, within 6 months after the date of enactment of this section, establish a toll-free number for the collection of comments, suggestions, and complaints from the public concerning the transmission by broadcast stations or cable systems of programming containing depictions of violence and other patently offensive material.
The Commission shall take such steps as may be necessary to publicize such number and the Commission's functions under this section.
Publication of Data Concerning Complaints.--The Commission shall publish in the Federal Register, on a quarterly basis, a summary of the comments, suggestions, and complaints received pursuant to subsection (a) during the preceding period.
Such summary shall include-- ``(1) a breakdown of the complaints by broadcast or cable network and broadcast station, and by program name, date, and time; ``(2) an identification, with respect to the 50 programs for which the highest number of complaints were received, of the production company, the principal advertisers supporting network distribution, the broadcast or cable network and broadcast station, and the program name, date, and time; and ``(3) a statement of observed trends in such complaints as compared with complaints received during prior periods.
Availability of Records.--The Commission shall transcribe the comments, suggestions, and complaints received pursuant to this section and shall-- ``(1) transmit to each licensee any comments, suggestions, or complaints made with respect to its station; and ``(2) make the transcribed comments, suggestions, and complaints available for public inspection.
The Commission shall omit from any records transmitted or made available under this subsection the name and address of any caller requesting confidentiality.
Report to Congress.--The Commission shall include in each annual report to Congress under section 4(k) an analysis of the complaints received pursuant to this section.
Such analysis shall include-- ``(1) an evaluation of whether, consistent with its obligations to serve the public interest and meet the educational and informational need of children, the broadcasting industry has effectively responded to the comments, suggestions, and complaints received pursuant to this section regarding video programming containing depictions of violence and other patently offensive material; and ``(2) such recommendations as the Commission considers appropriate to secure more conscientious fulfillment of those obligations with regard to such programming.