This Act may be cited as the ``Military Success in Iraq And Diplomatic Surge for National and Political Reconciliation in Iraq Act of 2007''.
The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--MILITARY SUCCESS IN IRAQ ACT OF 2007 Sec.
Repeal of public law 107-243.
Withdrawal of united states armed forces and contractor security forces from iraq.
TITLE II--DIPLOMATIC SURGE FOR JUSTICE, PEACE, AND SUCCESS IN IRAQ ACT OF 2007 Sec.
TITLE I--MILITARY SUCCESS IN IRAQ ACT OF 2007 SEC.
Congress makes the following declarations of policy: (1) The authorization for use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 50 United States Code 1541 note) is the sole basis of authority under which the President of the United States launched the invasion of Iraq in 2003.
Congress authorized the President to use military force against Iraq to achieve the following two objectives: (A) To defend the national security of the United States-- (i) by disarming Iraq of any weapons of mass destruction that could threaten the security of the United States and international peace in the Persian Gulf region; (ii) by changing the Iraqi regime so that Saddam Hussein and his Baathist party no longer posed a threat to the people of Iraq or its neighbors; (iii) by bringing to justice any members of al Qaeda bearing responsibility for the attacks on the United States, its citizens, and interests, including the attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001, known or found to be in Iraq; and (iv) by ensuring that the regime of Saddam Hussein would not provide weapons of mass destruction to international terrorists, including al Qaeda.
To enforce all relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions regarding Iraq.
Whenever military force is authorized pursuant to an Act of Congress, such authorization of military force automatically expires upon the achievement of the objectives stated in the Act of Congress.
Congress has the ultimate authority to determine when and whether the objectives stated in an Act of Congress which authorizes the use of military force have been achieved.
REPEAL OF PUBLIC LAW 107-243.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the objectives of the authorization for use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 50 United States Code 1541 note) have been achieved; and (2) the authorization of military force contained in Public Law 107-243 has expired.
Repeal of Public Law 107-243.--The Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 50 United States Code 1541 note) is hereby repealed.
WITHDRAWAL OF UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES AND CONTRACTOR SECURITY FORCES FROM IRAQ.
Withdrawal of Armed Forces and Contractor Security Forces From Iraq.--Not later than October 1, 2007, or 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever shall occur first, all units and members of the Armed Forces deployed to Iraq and all security forces under contract or subcontract with the United States Government and working in Iraq shall be withdrawn from Iraq.
Prohibition on Use of Funds To Continue Deployment of Armed Forces to Iraq.-- (1) Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), funds appropriated or otherwise made available under any provision of law may not be obligated or expended to deploy or continue to deploy members or units of the Armed Forces to Iraq.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) does not apply to the use of funds to provide for the safe and orderly withdrawal of the Armed Forces and contractor security forces from Iraq pursuant to subsection (c).
Exception.--Subsections (a) and (b) do not apply if a Joint Resolution which provides specific statutory authorization within the meaning of section 5(b) of the War Powers Resolution (50 United States Code 1544(b)) for the deployment or continued deployment of units and members of the Armed Forces and contractor security forces to Iraq is enacted into law during the time period described in subsection (a).
Armed Forces Defined.--In this section, the term ``Armed Forces'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a)(4) of title 10, United States Code.
TITLE II--DIPLOMATIC SURGE FOR JUSTICE, PEACE, AND SUCCESS IN IRAQ ACT OF 2007 SEC.
It shall be the policy of the United States to pursue regional and international initiatives and steps to assist the Government of Iraq to achieve certain security, political, and economic milestones so as to marginalize extremists and terrorists, promote United States values and interests, and improve the global image of the United States.
To implement the policy set forth in section 201, the President shall take the following actions: (1) Not later than ten days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the United States, working with the Government of Iraq, shall launch a comprehensive diplomatic initiative to deal with the problems of Iraq and of the region.
The goals of the diplomatic initiative as it relates to regional players shall be to-- (A) support the unity and territorial integrity of Iraq, with the assistance of bona fide international peacekeeping force if necessary; (B) stop destabilizing interventions and actions by Iraq's neighbors; (C) secure Iraq's borders, including the use of joint patrols with neighboring countries; (D) prevent the expansion of the instability and conflict beyond Iraq's borders; (E) promote economic assistance, commerce, trade, political support, and, if possible, military assistance for the Government of Iraq from nonneighboring Muslim countries; (F) energize countries to support national political reconciliation in Iraq; (G) validate Iraq's legitimacy by resuming diplomatic relations, where appropriate, and reestablishing embassies in Baghdad; (H) assist Iraq to establish active working embassies in key capitals in the region (for example, in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia); (I) help Iraq reach a mutually acceptable agreement on Kirkuk; and (J) assist the Government of Iraq achieve certain security, political, and economic milestones, including better performance on issues such as national reconciliation, equitable distribution of oil revenues, and the dismantling of militias.
As a complement to the diplomatic initiative, the President shall appoint a Special Envoy for National and Political Reconciliation in Iraq (``SENPRI)'') whose exclusive commission shall be to undertake the peaceful reconciliation of the major stakeholders in Iraq, particularly the Sunnis, Shias, and Kurds.
The SENPRI shall meet with such persons, organizations, and entities, and make such recommendations, as he deems necessary and expedient for bringing about national and political reconciliation in Iraq.
As a further complement to the diplomatic initiative, the United States and the Government of Iraq shall support the holding of a conference or meeting in Baghdad of the Organization of the Islamic Conference or the Arab League to assist the Government of Iraq to promote national reconciliation in Iraq and to reestablish the diplomatic presence in Iraq of the Organization of the Islamic Conference and the Arab League.
As an instrument of the diplomatic initiative, an Iraq International Support Group shall be organized.
The Iraq International Support Group shall consist of Iraq and all the countries bordering Iraq, including Iran and Syria, the key regional countries, including Egypt and the Gulf States, the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, the European Union, and such other industrialized countries that might contribute to resolving political, diplomatic, and security problems affecting Iraq.
The diplomatic initiative and the work of the Iraq International Support Group shall be carried out with urgency, and shall be conducted by and organized at the level of foreign minister or above, and the United States efforts shall be led by the President or the Secretary of State and shall be both bilateral and multilateral.
The Iraq International Support Group shall enlist the participation of the office of the United Nations Secretary General in its work.
The Secretary General should designate a Special Envoy as the representative of the Secretary General.
The Iraq International Support Group, as part of the diplomatic initiative, shall develop specific approaches to neighboring countries that take into account the differing interests, perspectives, and potential contributions of each such country.
Diplomatic efforts within the Iraq International Support Group shall seek to persuade Iran that it should take specific steps to improve the situation in Iraq, including the following: (A) Iran should stem the flow of equipment, technology, and training to any group resorting to violence in Iraq.
Iran should affirm its support for the territorial integrity of Iraq as a unified state, as well as its respect for the sovereignty of Iraq and its government.
Iran should use its influence, especially over Shia groups in Iraq, to encourage national reconciliation.
Iran should help in the economic reconstruction of Iraq.
The United States and the Iraq International Support Group shall encourage Syria to take specific steps to improve the situation in Iraq, including the following: (A) Syria should control its border with Iraq to the maximum extent possible and work together with Iraqis on joint patrols on the border to stem the flow of funding, insurgents, and terrorists in and out of Iraq.
Syria should establish hotlines to exchange information with the Iraqis.
Syria should increase its political and economic cooperation with Iraq.
Nothing in this title shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise restrict the use of funds available to any department or agency of the United States to carry out social and economic reconstruction activities in Iraq.
The President shall submit to Congress every 30 days a report on the status of diplomatic efforts described in section 202.