This Act may be cited as the ``Joint Forces Command Act of 1998''.
UNIFIED COMMAND FOR JOINT FORCES.
In General.--Chapter 6 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Joint forces command ``(a) Establishment.--With the advice and assistance of the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, the President, through the Secretary of Defense, shall establish under section 161 of this title a unified combatant command for joint forces (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `joint forces command').
The principal functions of the command are-- ``(1) to integrate elements of the different armed forces into joint forces, to prepare those forces to be provided to the commanders of other combatant commands to carry out assigned missions, and to provide those forces as required by those commanders; and ``(2) to design, develop, and carry out a process of joint experimentation to assist in determining the future capabilities, organization, and operational concepts of the joint military force.
Assignment of Forces.--(1) Unless otherwise directed by the Secretary of Defense, all active and reserve forces stationed in the continental United States other than those specified in paragraph (2) shall be assigned to the joint forces command.
Special operations forces covered by section 167(b) of this title and forces assigned to a functional combatant command shall not be assigned to the joint forces command.
Grade of Commander; Selection.--(1) The commander of the joint forces command shall hold the grade of general or, in the case of an officer in the Navy, admiral, while serving in that position, without vacating his permanent grade.
The commander of such command shall be appointed to that grade by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, for service in that position.
The Secretary of Defense may recommend an officer to the President for appointment as commander of the joint forces command only after seeking a recommendation from the Secretary of each military department for that recommendation.
In the case of the Secretary of the Navy, the Secretary of Defense shall seek a recommendation of both a Navy officer and a Marine Corps officer.
Authority and Responsibilities of Combatant Commander.--(1) In addition to the authority prescribed in section 164(c) of this title, the commander of the joint forces command shall be responsible for, and shall have the authority to conduct, all joint force activities related to the responsibilities specified in paragraphs (2) and (3) for forces assigned to that command in consultation with the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and other activities as directed by the Secretary of Defense.
In carrying out the function specified in subsection (a)(1), the commander of the joint forces command shall be responsible for, and shall have the authority to conduct, the following functions relating to joint forces: ``(A) Planning, conducting, and assessing the joint training of assigned forces, including joint task force command and staff.
Developing joint doctrine, operational concepts, and joint tactics, techniques, and procedures.
Preparing and submitting to the Secretary of Defense program recommendations and budget proposals for forces assigned to the joint forces command.
Conducting `red team' vulnerability assessments against fielded and developmental systems to determine whether these systems are effective in countermeasure environments.
Integrating training facilities and areas of the separate armed forces to assure consistency in the application of joint doctrine, tactics, techniques, and procedures.
Conducting specialized joint courses of instruction for commissioned and noncommissioned officers.
Assisting in the development of joint training and analytical simulation systems.
Assessing the interoperability of equipment and forces and making recommendations to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff for the reduction of unnecessary redundancy across equipment, forces, and training and experimentation facilities and programs in the continental United States.
Recommending plans to the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff to synchronize the fielding of advanced technologies across the armed forces to enable the development and execution of joint operational concepts.
Submitting, reviewing, and making recommendations to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on mission needs statements and operational requirements documents for major warfighting platforms, munitions, and enabling capabilities in the areas of-- ``(i) command, control, communications, and computers; ``(ii) intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance; ``(iii) logistics; ``(iv) force protection; and ``(v) other areas designated by the Secretary of Defense.
Ensuring the joint readiness of forces assigned to the joint forces command, in accordance with guidance from the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff.
Monitoring the joint preparedness of joint forces deployed from bases in the continental United States and assigned to the commander of a unified combatant command other than the joint forces command.
Integrating the capabilities of forces of the different armed forces to achieve the joint warfighting capabilities required by the commanders of the unified combatant commands.
Providing trained and ready joint forces in support of the mission requirements of the commanders of the unified combatant commands.
In carrying out the function specified in subsection (a)(2), the commander of the joint forces command shall be responsible for, and shall have the authority to conduct, the following functions relating to joint experimentation: ``(A) Developing a process of joint experimentation comprised of simulations, wargames, vulnerability assessments, experiments, and exercises conducted in virtual and actual field environments.
Developing equipment required by the joint force in the conduct of joint experimentation, to include the identification and use of surrogate or real technologies, platforms, and systems.
Establishing joint battle laboratories and coordinating with battle laboratories of the different armed forces to investigate advanced technologies, changes in organizational structures, or new joint operational concepts.
Establishing or coordinating for the development of joint training centers, to include urban warfare training centers.
Establishing a Joint Concepts Development Center focused on meeting future operational challenges.
Developing scenarios and measures of effectiveness for experimentation activities.
Assessing the effectiveness of organizational structures, operational concepts, and technologies, platforms, and systems employed in joint experimentation activities.
Acquiring material, supplies, and services required for the conduct of joint experimentation.
Exercising authority, direction, and control over the expenditure of funds for the conduct of joint experimentation activities of forces assigned to the joint forces command.
Integrating and testing in joint experiments those systems and concepts which emerge from service or agency experimentation activities.
Developing and recommending to the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff requirements for future joint warfighting capabilities.
Advising the Secretary of Defense and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in establishing priorities for joint requirements and acquisition programs as they relate to joint warfighting capabilities.
Joint Experimentation Force.--The commander of the joint forces command shall establish with assigned forces from each of the armed forces a joint experimentation force to carry out the commander's joint experimentation responsibilities.
Annual Report on Joint Experimentation.--(1) The commander of the joint forces command shall submit to the Secretary of Defense an annual report describing the conduct of joint experimentation activities by the command during the preceding year.
Each such report shall include the number of such activities and, for each such activity, the following: ``(A) A description of the forces involved.
The operational challenges addressed.
Each such report shall include the commander's comments on the effect of each activity on the transformation process, to include recommendations on the development or procurement of advanced technologies, systems, or platforms, and recommendations for changes in force structure, operational concepts, joint doctrine, and resource allocation.
The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress the annual report of the commander of the joint forces command under paragraph (1), together with the comments of the Secretary and the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff on the report.
The Secretary shall submit the report each year in conjunction with the submission of the President's budget for the next fiscal year.
Budget.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall establish a separate major force program category for joint experimentation activities.
This program category shall be administered by the commander of the joint forces command, who shall have planning, programming, budgeting, and execution authority.
In addition to the activities of a combatant command for which funding may be requested under section 166(b) of this title, the budget proposal of the joint forces command shall include requests for funding for the following: ``(A) Research and development of equipment required by the joint force in the conduct of joint experimentation.
Procurement of material, supplies, and services required for the conduct of joint experimentation.
Operations and maintenance expenditures associated with the conduct of joint experimentation activities.
Operation of joint battle laboratories and joint concept development centers.
Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense, the commander of the joint forces command, in carrying out his responsibilities under subsection (d), shall have authority to exercise the functions of the head of an agency under chapter 137 of this title.
Budget Support for Joint Force Activities.--(1) Before the budget proposal for the joint forces command for any fiscal year is submitted to the Secretary of Defense, the commander of the joint forces command shall consult with the Secretaries of the military departments concerning funding for joint force experimentation.
If the Secretary of a military department does not concur in the recommended level of funding with respect to such experimentation that is under the jurisdiction of the Secretary, the commander shall include with the budget proposal submitted to the Secretary of Defense the views of the Secretary of the military department concerning such funding.
Before the budget proposal for a military department for any fiscal year is submitted to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of that military department shall consult with the commander of the joint forces command concerning funding for participation in joint experimentation in the military personnel, operations and maintenance, procurement, or research and development account in that military department.
If the commander of the joint forces command does not concur in the recommended level of funding with respect to joint experimentation activities, the Secretary shall include with the budget proposal submitted to the Secretary of Defense the views of the commander of joint forces command.
Staff for Commander, Joint Forces Command.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall provide sufficient staff for the commander of the joint forces command to carry out his duties and responsibilities, including particularly his duties relating to the following functions: ``(A) Developing equipment and acquiring material, supplies, and services required for the process of joint experimentation.
Designing, conducting, and assessing joint experimentation activities.
Operating joint battle laboratories and concept development centers.
Managing assigned resources from the major force program category for joint experimentation activities of the Future-Years Defense Plan of the Department as required to be created pursuant to subsection (g).
The commander of the joint forces command shall appoint an acquisition executive with appropriate authority to conduct all required contracting actions and reviews associated with research and development and procurement programs.
The staff of the joint forces command shall include an inspector general who shall conduct internal audits and inspections of purchasing and contracting actions through the joint forces command and such other inspector general functions as may be assigned.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations for the activities of the joint forces command.
Those regulations shall include authorization for the commander of the command to provide operational security of joint forces while under that commander's combatant command authority during joint activities conducted in the continental United States.
Continental United States.--In this section, the term `continental United States' means the 48 contiguous States and the District of Columbia.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``169.
Effective Date.--The joint forces command required to be established by section 169 of title 10, United States Code, as added by section 2, shall be established not later than October 1, 1999.
Implementation Plan.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress an implementation plan for the joint forces command.
The plan shall be submitted in conjunction with submission of the President's budget for fiscal year 2000.
Initial Budgeting.--The Secretary of Defense shall request funding for the implementation of joint forces command in the President's budget for fiscal year 2000.
Funding for a major force program category for joint experimentation shall be included in the President's budget beginning with fiscal year 2001.