This Act may be cited as the ``Aeronautics Competitiveness Act of 2007''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE NATIONAL AERONAUTICS AND SPACE ADMINISTRATION FOR AERONAUTICS.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the National Aeronautics and Space Administration for Science, Aeronautics, and Exploration and available for Aeronautics Research amounts as follows: (1) For fiscal year 2009, $1,089,000,000.
For fiscal year 2010, $1,198,000,000.
For fiscal year 2011, $1,250,000,000.
Supplement Not Supplant.--The amounts authorized to be appropriated and available for a fiscal year under subsection (a) for the purposes specified in that subsection are in addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated and make available for such fiscal year for that purpose.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON PRIORITIES IN AERONAUTICS RESEARCH.
Advisory Committee Required.--The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall establish an advisory committee of experts from the private sector to provide advice and consultation to the Administrator in priorities in aeronautics research conducted by the Administration.
Members.--The members of the advisory committee established under subsection (a) shall include representatives of commercial aviation groups, general aviation groups, aviation labor groups, aeronautics research and development agencies, aircraft and systems manufacturers, academia, and aircraft and air traffic control suppliers.
DEVELOPMENT OF AERONAUTICS TECHNOLOGIES TO DEMONSTRATION LEVEL.
In General.--The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall carry out activities to develop particular aeronautics technologies, including technologies for the Next Generation Air Transportation System, to a level of readiness that will permit the demonstration of such technologies, or a system or subsystem model or prototype incorporating such technologies, in an appropriate environment.
Consultation.--The Administrator shall carry out activities under this section in consultation with the advisory committee established under section 3.
Expansion of Number of NASA Aeronautics Scholarships.--Section 431 of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration Authorization Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 16741) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c): ``(c) Maximum Number of Scholarships.--The maximum number of scholarships awarded under this section that are in force at any one time may not exceed seven scholarships.''.
Fellowships for Graduate Research in Aviation or Aeronautics.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall carry out a program to provide fellowships for students enrolled in institutions of higher education in graduate programs in aviation or aeronautics for the conduct by such students of research in aviation or aeronautics.
Maximum number of fellowships.--The maximum number of fellowships awarded under the program that are in force at any one time may not exceed seven fellowships.
Other program requirements.--The Administrator shall prescribe such requirements for the program as the Administrator considers appropriate, including qualifications for the award of fellowships under the program and the amount and duration of fellowships awarded under the program.
PAYMENTS TO CONTRACTORS FOR COSTS OF EDUCATION AND PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT OF AERONAUTICS WORKFORCES.
In General.--Chapter 139 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2372 the following new section: ``Sec.
Education and professional development of aeronautics workforces: payments to contractors ``(a) Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations governing the payment, by the Department of Defense, of expenses incurred by contractors for costs of education and professional development of their aeronautics workforce.
Costs Allowable as Indirect Expenses.--The regulations prescribed pursuant to subsection (a) shall provide that costs of education and professional development of the aeronautics workforce shall be allowable as indirect expenses on covered contracts to the extent that those costs are allocable, reasonable, and not otherwise unallowable by law or under the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `aeronautics workforce' means personnel employed as engineers or scientists engaged in the development and manufacture of aeronautics technologies.
The term `covered contract' has the meaning given that term in section 23724(l) of this title.
(A) The term `education and professional development', in the case of an aeronautics workforce, means each of the following: ``(i) The acquisition by personnel of the workforce of general knowledge of science and engineering.
The development among personnel of the workforce of powers of reasoning and judgement.
The participation of personnel of the workforce in technical conferences and professional society technical committees relating to aeronautics.
The participation of personnel of the workforce in government advisory boards or commissions on aeronautics for which participation the government provides no compensation.
The term does not include the acquisition by personnel of an aeronautics workforce of vocational or practical skills for an immediate and specific job task or purpose.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 139 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2372 the following new item: ``2372a.
Education and professional development of aeronautics workforces: payments to contractors.