This Act may be cited as the ``Green Communities Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Landscaping adds to the economic value and sales appeal of commercial real estate and increases office occupancy rates.
Greening can change people's perceptions of their neighborhoods, reduce violence and crime, and increase neighborhood stability.
Planting new trees, improving streetscapes, and cleaning vacant lots increases property values.
People will stay longer and shop more in shopping districts that are well landscaped.
Improvements to neighborhood parks increase the value of single-family homes in the surrounding community.
Homes adjacent to vacant lots that are greened have a much higher property value than homes adjacent to vacant lots that have not been greened.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) promote investment in greening projects and programs as effective economic development tools; (2) connect urban economic development initiatives with environmental initiatives; (3) improve quality of life for city residents; and (4) encourage public-private partnerships.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Community greening initiatives.--The term ``community greening initiatives'' means programs increasing economic development through environmental improvements.
Eligible nonprofit organization.--The term ``eligible nonprofit organization'' means a nonprofit organization that receives a grant under section 4.
Eligible program partner.--The term ``eligible program partner'' means a municipality that receives a grant under section 3.
Green roof.--The term ``green roof'' means a roof consisting of vegetation and soil or a growing medium planted over a waterproofing membrane.
Green stormwater infrastructure.--The term ``green stormwater infrastructure'' means systems and practices that use or mimic natural processes to infiltrate, evapotranspirate, or reuse stormwater on the site where it occurs rather than transporting the water to a stream or treatment facility.
Nonprofit organization.--The term ``nonprofit organization'' means an organization that is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
Urban forestry.--The term ``urban forestry'' means an integrated citywide or neighborhood-wide approach to the planting, care, and management of trees in the city or the neighborhood in order to ensure environmental and social benefits for residents.
INITIATIVES FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT AND GREENING.
Grant Authority.--To the extent funds are available, the Secretary, through the Economic Development Administration, shall make grants to municipalities for promoting community greening initiatives.
Selection of Eligible Program Partners.--The Secretary, in consultation with the eligible nonprofit organizations, shall select 80 municipalities to receive grants under this section.
The Secretary shall ensure that the municipalities meet-- (1) the criteria described by section 209(b) of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3149(b)); or (2) the circumstances described by section 209(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 3149(c)).
Community Greening Initiatives.--An eligible program partner, with technical assistance and training from an eligible nonprofit organization as provided under section 4(b), shall develop and plan a community greening initiative.
Such initiatives may include-- (1) revitalizing municipal parks and public spaces; (2) landscaping community gateways and key corridors; (3) tree plantings and urban forestry projects; (4) comprehensive planning for open space preservation; (5) education, training, and volunteer management concerning community green initiatives; (6) green roof construction; (7) green stormwater infrastructure; or (8) vacant lot management.
Implementing Initiatives.-- (1) Completion of developing and planning.--The Secretary may make a grant under this section only to an eligible program partner that has successfully developed and planned a community greening initiative under subsection (c), as determined by the Secretary.
Use of funds.--Grants under this section shall be used by an eligible program partner to implement the community greening initiative developed under subsection (c).
An eligible program partner may not receive a grant under this section for a community greening initiative that takes more than 2 years to complete.
Grant amount.--The Secretary may not award a grant under this section in an amount that is more than $2,000,000.
Matching funds.--An eligible program partner receiving a grant under this section shall provide, either directly or through private contributions, non-Federal matching funds equal to not less than 50 percent of the amount of the grant.
Such matching funds shall be used for implementing a community greening initiative.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after an eligible program partner implements a community greening initiative, the eligible nonprofit organization that assisted the eligible program partner under subsection (c) shall submit to the Secretary a report assessing the implementation of the initiative.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AND TRAINING BY ELIGIBLE NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS.
Selection of Eligible Nonprofit Organizations.--To the extent funds are available, the Secretary shall make grants to, or enter into contracts with, 5 nonprofit organizations to provide technical assistance and training to eligible program partners.
The Secretary shall select nonprofit organizations that have experience with-- (1) planning and implementing projects concerning urban open space, landscape management, and community greening initiatives; (2) land and water conservation; (3) working on the community level; (4) forming partnerships or regional consortiums; (5) urban ecology; and (6) other activities the Secretary considers appropriate.
Technical Training and Assistance.--In accordance with section 3(c), eligible nonprofit organizations shall provide eligible program partners with technical assistance and training for the following activities: (1) Developing, planning, implementing, and assessing community greening initiatives.
Developing and implementing training and workshops for municipal agencies and local partners.
Evaluating the community greening initiative.
Period.--A grant or agreement under this section shall be for a period of 5 years.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 90 days after the end of each fiscal year for which amounts are made available for grants under this section, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the technical assistance and training provided under this section.
Each report shall describe the actions taken by the Secretary to ensure that technical assistance and training is responsive to the needs of eligible program partners.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act-- (1) $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010, 2013, and 2014; and (2) $90,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2011 and 2012.
Reservation of Funds.-- (1) Eligible nonprofit organizations.-- (A) Not less than 85 percent of the amounts made available to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2010, 2013, and 2014 shall be made available for technical assistance and training by eligible nonprofit organizations under section 4.
Not less than 28 percent of the amounts made available to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2011 and 2012 shall be made available for technical assistance and training by eligible nonprofit organizations under section 4.
Eligible program partners.--Not less than 66 percent of the amounts made available to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2011 and 2012 shall be made available for the planning, developing, and implementing of community greening initiatives by eligible program partners under section 3.
Availability of Appropriations.--Funds made available under this Act shall remain available until expended.