This Act may be cited as the ``NIST Grants for Energy Efficiency, New Job Opportunities, and Business Solutions Act of 2010'' or the ``NIST GREEN JOBS Act of 2010''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Over its 20-year existence, the Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program has proven its value to manufacturers as demonstrated by the resulting impact on jobs and the economies of all 50 States and the Nation as a whole.
The Hollings Manufacturing Extension Partnership Program has helped thousands of companies reinvest in themselves through process improvement and business growth initiatives leading to more sales, new markets, and the adoption of technology to deliver new products and services.
Manufacturing is an increasingly important part of the construction sector as the industry moves to the use of more components and factory built sub-assemblies.
Construction practices must become more efficient and precise if the United States is to construct and renovate its building stock to reduce related carbon emissions to levels that are consistent with combating global warming.
Many companies involved in construction are small, without access to innovative manufacturing techniques, and could benefit from the type of training and business analysis activities that the Manufacturing Extension Partnership routinely provides to the Nation's manufacturers and their supply chains.
Broadening the competitiveness grant program under section 25(f) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k(f)) could help develop and diffuse knowledge necessary to capture a large portion of the estimated $100 billion dollars or more in energy savings if buildings in the United States met the level and quality of energy efficiency now found in buildings in certain other countries.
It is therefore in the national interest to expand the capabilities of the Manufacturing Extension Partnership to be supportive of the construction and green energy industries.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF STANDARDS AND TECHNOLOGY COMPETITIVE GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 25(f)(3) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k(f)(3)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``to develop'' in the first sentence and inserting ``to add capabilities to the MEP program, including the development of''; and (2) by striking the last sentence and inserting ``These themes-- ``(A) shall be related to projects designed to increase the viability both of traditional manufacturing sectors and other sectors, such as construction, that increasingly rely on manufacturing through the use of manufactured components and manufacturing techniques, including supply chain integration and quality management; ``(B) shall be related to projects related to the transfer of technology based on the technological needs of manufacturers and available technologies from institutions of higher education, laboratories, and other technology producing entities; and ``(C) may extend beyond these traditional areas to include projects related to construction industry modernization.''.
Selection.--Section 25(f)(5) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k(f)(5)) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) Selection.--Awards under this section shall be peer reviewed and competitively awarded.
The Director shall endeavor to select at least one proposal in each of the 9 statistical divisions of the United States (as designated by the Bureau of the Census).
The Director shall select proposals to receive awards that will-- ``(A) create jobs or train newly hired employees; ``(B) promote technology transfer and commercialization of environmentally focused materials, products, and processes; ``(C) increase energy efficiency; and ``(D) improve the competitiveness of industries in the region in which the Center or Centers are located.''.
Other Modifications.--Section 25(f) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k(f)) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Duration.--Awards under this section shall last no longer than 3 years.
Eligible participants.--In addition to manufacturing firms eligible to participate in the Centers program, awards under this subsection may be used by the Centers to assist small or medium-sized construction firms.
Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to any amounts otherwise authorized or appropriated to carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce $7,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2011 through 2014 to carry out this subsection.