This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Education Development Initiative for the 21st Century Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to provide rural school students in the United States with increased learning opportunities.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) While there are rural education initiatives identified at the State and local level, no Federal education policy focuses on the specific needs of rural school districts and schools, especially those that serve poor students.
The National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) reports that 46 percent of our Nation's public schools serve rural areas.
A critical problem for rural school districts involves the hiring and retention of qualified administrators and certified teachers (especially in science and mathematics).
Consequently, teachers in rural schools are almost twice as likely to provide instruction in 3 or more subjects than teachers in urban schools.
Rural schools also face other tough challenges, such as shrinking local tax bases, high transportation costs, aging buildings, limited course offerings, and limited resources.
Data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) consistently shows large gaps between the achievement of students in high-poverty schools and those in other schools.
High-poverty schools will face special challenges in preparing their students to reach high standards of performance on State and national assessments.
In this Act: (1) Elementary school; local educational agency; secondary school; state educational agency.--The terms ``elementary school'', ``local educational agency'', ``secondary school'', and ``State educational agency'' have the meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Eligible local educational agency.--The term ``eligible local educational agency'' means a local educational agency that serves-- (A) a school age population 15 percent or more of whom are from families with incomes below the poverty line; and (B)(i) a rural locality; or (ii) a school age population of 800 or fewer students.
Metropolitan area.--The term ``metropolitan area'' includes the area defined as such by the Bureau of the Census.
Poverty line.--The term ``poverty line'' means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2))) applicable to a family of the size involved.
Rural locality.--The term ``rural locality'' means a locality that is not within a metropolitan area.
School age population.--The term ``school age population'' means the number of students aged 5 through 17.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Reservation.--From amounts appropriated under section 9 for a fiscal year the Secretary shall reserve 0.5 percent to make awards to elementary or secondary schools operated or supported by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to carry out the purpose of this Act.
Grants to States.-- (1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under section 9 that are not reserved under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to State educational agencies that have applications approved under section 7 to enable the State educational agencies to award grants to eligible local educational agencies for local authorized activities described in subsection (c).
Formula.-- (A) In general.--Each State educational agency shall receive a grant under this section in an amount that bears the same relation to the amount of funds appropriated under section 9 that are not reserved under subsection (a) for a fiscal year as the school age population served by eligible local educational agencies in the State bears to the school age population served by eligible local educational agencies in all States.
Data.--In determining the school age population under subparagraph (A) the Secretary shall use the most recent data available from the Bureau of the Census.
Direct awards to local educational agencies.--If a State educational agency elects not to participate in the program under this Act or does not have an application approved under section 7, the Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, the amount the State educational agency is eligible to receive under paragraph (2) directly to eligible local educational agencies in the State.
Matching requirement.--Each eligible local educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall contribute resources with respect to the local authorized activities to be assisted, in cash or in kind, from non-Federal sources, in an amount equal to the Federal funds awarded under the grant.
Local Authorized Activities.--Grant funds awarded to local educational agencies under this Act shall be used for-- (1) educational technology, including software and hardware; (2) professional development; (3) technical assistance; (4) teacher recruitment and retention; (5) parental involvement activities; or (6) academic enrichment programs or other education programs.
Relation to Other Federal Funding.--Funds received under this Act by a State educational agency or an eligible local educational agency shall not be taken into consideration in determining the eligibility for, or amount of, any other Federal funding awarded to the agency.
STATE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
Award Basis.--A State educational agency shall award grants to eligible local educational agencies according to a formula developed by the State educational agency and approved by the Secretary.
First Year.--For the first year that a State educational agency receives a grant under this Act, the State educational agency-- (1) shall use not less than 99 percent of the grant funds to award grants to eligible local educational agencies in the State; and (2) may use not more than 1 percent for State activities and administrative costs related to the program.
Succeeding Years.--For the second and each succeeding year that a State educational agency receives a grant under this Act, the State educational agency-- (1) shall use not less than 99.5 percent of the grant funds to award grants to eligible local educational agencies in the State; and (2) may use not more than 0.5 percent of the grant funds for State activities and administrative costs related to the program.
Each State educational agency, or local educational agency eligible for a grant under section 5(b)(3), that desires a grant under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
State Reports.-- (1) Contents.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
The report shall describe-- (A) the method the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies under this Act; (B) how eligible local educational agencies used funds provided under this Act; (C) how the State educational agency provided technical assistance for an eligible local educational agency that did not meet the goals and objectives described in subsection (c)(3); and (D) how the State educational agency took action against an eligible local educational agency if the local educational agency failed, for 2 consecutive years, to meet the goals and objectives described in subsection (c)(3).
Availability.--The Secretary shall make the annual State reports received under paragraph (1) available for dissemination to Congress, interested parties (including educators, parents, students, and advocacy and civil rights organizations), and the public.
Local Educational Agency Reports.--Each eligible local educational agency that receives a grant under section 5(b)(3) shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
The report shall describe how the local educational agency used funds provided under this Act and how the local educational agency coordinated funds received under this Act with other Federal, State, and local funds.
Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress an annual report.
The report shall describe-- (1) the methods the State educational agencies used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies under this Act; (2) how eligible local educational agencies used funds provided under this Act; and (3) the progress made by State educational agencies and eligible local educational agencies receiving assistance under this Act in meeting specific, annual, measurable performance goals and objectives established by such agencies for activities assisted under this Act.
Accountability.--The Secretary, at the end of the third year that a State educational agency participates in the program assisted under this Act, shall permit only those State educational agencies that met their performance goals and objectives, for two consecutive years, to continue to participate in the program.
Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study regarding the impact of assistance provided under this Act on student achievement.
The Controller General shall report the results of the study to Congress.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $300,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.