This Act may be cited as the ``National Community Garden Grant Program Act of 1993''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) in communities across the United States there are thousands of acres of vacant lots, the number of which is rapidly increasing; (2) these vacant lots contribute to the deterioration of neighborhoods and engender feelings of hopelessness among residents and community leaders; and (3) a National Community Garden Grant Program will aid in the prevention and elimination of urban blight by beautifying neighborhoods, developing communities and community leadership, and increasing nutritional awareness and gardening skills.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to create a National Community Garden Grant Program, which will be a national partnership of the Secretary of Agriculture, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Administrator of General Services, citizens, private organizations, and representatives of State and local agencies from all parts of the United States, for the promotion of community gardens.
As used in this Act (unless the context otherwise requires): (1) Community garden program.--The term ``community garden program'' means a gardening program that incorporates 1 or more of the following elements: (A) Methods of gardening that promote improved nutrition and nutrition education.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
NATIONAL COMMUNITY GARDEN GRANT PROGRAM.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible applicants to conduct community garden programs in accordance with this Act.
Eligible applicants.--For purposes of paragraph (1), an eligible applicant for a grant under this Act is a unit of general local government or a nonprofit organization that is, or is capable of, carrying out a community garden program in accordance with this Act.
Maximum amount and number.--The Secretary shall award up to 100 grants, each of which may not exceed $20,000.
Federal, state, and local contributions.-- (A) In general.--The Federal share attributable to this section of the cost of carrying out a program for which a grant is made under this section shall be 25 percent.
Calculation.--In providing for the remaining share of the cost of carrying out such a program, each grantee under this section-- (i) shall provide for such share through a payment in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including facilities, equipment, or services; and (ii) may provide for such share through State sources, local sources, or Federal sources (other than funds made available under this section).
Distribution.--The Secretary shall award grants in a manner that reflects the geographical diversity of the United States, to the maximum extent practicable.
Set-aside.--The Secretary shall allocate at least 20 percent of the grant funds made available under this section to grantees located in communities with populations not exceeding 50,000 inhabitants.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in conjunction with the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, shall develop selection criteria and application procedures consistent with the purposes of this Act.
Factors.--In selecting grantees, at a minimum, the Secretary shall consider the following criteria: (A) The extent to which the applicant will maximize the use of public-private partnerships and available surplus property.
The extent to which the applicant will target minority, underserved, and high-risk populations.
The likelihood of the applicant developing a sustainable community gardening program.
Certification of eligibility.--The Secretary shall certify the eligibility of each grantee.
Other funds.--Funds from other sources may be used by a grantee in conjunction with funds made available under this Act.
This Act shall not affect any guidelines governing the use of other funds.
In General.--The Secretary shall establish a database to compile information submitted under subsection (b) and information related to the effectiveness of the National Community Garden Grant Program in each participating community.
Federal Funds.--Grantees shall furnish the Secretary with information regarding the amount of Federal funds received by each grantee, including funds from the Secretary, the Administrator of General Services, and the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
A grantee under this Act may use surplus property obtained from the Administrator of General Services and the Secretary of Defense to carry out a community garden program.
PROFITS FROM COMMUNITY GARDEN PROJECTS.
If a grantee derives a profit from the sale of a product produced by a community garden program that receives funds under this Act, the grantee shall use the profits only to further carry out such program.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998.