This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Energy Bank Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) energy conservation is a cornerstone of national energy security policy; (2) the Federal Government is the largest consumer of energy in the economy of the United States; (3) many opportunities exist for significant energy cost savings within the Federal Government; and (4) to achieve the energy savings required by Executive Order, the Federal Government must make significant investments in energy savings systems and products, including energy management control systems.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to promote energy conservation investments in Federal facilities.
In this Act: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' means-- (A) an Executive agency (as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code, except that the term also includes the United States Postal Service); (B) Congress and any other entity in the legislative branch; and (C) a court and any other entity in the judicial branch.
Bank.--The term ``Bank'' means the Federal Energy Bank established by section 4.
Energy efficiency project.--The term ``energy efficiency project'' means a project that assists an agency in meeting or exceeding the energy efficiency requirements of-- (A) part 3 of title V of the National Energy Conservation Policy Act (42 United States Code 8251 et sequentes); (B) subtitle F of title I of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 and the amendments made by that subtitle (106 United States Statutes at Large 2843); and (C) applicable Executive orders, including Executive Order Nos.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
Total utility payments.--The term ``total utility payments'' means payments made to supply electricity, natural gas, and any other form of energy to provide the heating, ventilation, air conditioning, lighting, and other energy needs of an agency facility.
In General.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Federal Energy Bank'', consisting of-- (1) such amounts as are appropriated to the Bank under section 8; (2) such amounts as are transferred to the Bank under subsection (b); (3) such amounts as are repaid to the Bank under section 5(b)(4); and (4) any interest earned on investment of amounts in the Bank under subsection (c).
Transfers to Bank.-- (1) In general.--At the beginning of each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004, each agency shall transfer to the Secretary of the Treasury, for deposit in the Bank, an amount equal to 5 percent of the total utility payments paid by the agency in the preceding fiscal year.
Utilities paid for as part of rental payments.--The Secretary shall by regulation establish a formula by which the appropriate portion of a rental payment that covers the cost of utilities shall be considered to be a utility payment for the purposes of paragraph (1).
Investment of Funds.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of funds in the Bank as is not, in the Secretary's judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
LOANS FROM THE BANK.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Bank to the Secretary such amounts as are appropriated to carry out the loan program under subsection (b).
Loan Program.-- (1) In general.--In accordance with section 6, the Secretary shall establish a program to loan amounts from the Bank to any agency that submits an application satisfactory to the Secretary in order to finance an energy efficiency project.
Performance contracting funding.--To the extent practicable, an agency shall not submit a project for which performance contracting funding is available.
Purposes of loan.-- (A) In general.--A loan under this section may be made to pay the costs of-- (i) an energy efficiency project; or (ii) development and administration of a performance contract.
Limitation.--An agency may use not more than 15 percent of the amount of a loan under subparagraph (A)(i) to pay the costs of administration and proposal development (including data collection and energy surveys).
Repayments.-- (A) In general.--An agency shall repay to the Bank the principal amount of the energy efficiency project loan plus interest at a rate determined by the President, in consultation with the Secretary and the Secretary of the Treasury.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirement of subparagraph (A) if the Secretary determines that payment of interest by an agency is not required to sustain the needs of the Bank in making energy efficiency project loans.
Agency energy budgets.--Until a loan is repaid, an agency budget submitted to Congress for a fiscal year shall not be reduced by the value of energy savings accrued as a result of the energy conservation measure implemented with funds from the Bank.
Availability of funds.--An agency shall not rescind or reprogram funds made available by this Act.
Funds loaned to an agency shall be retained by the agency until expended, without regard to fiscal year limitation.
In General.--The Secretary shall establish criteria for the selection of energy efficiency projects to be awarded loans in accordance with subsection (b).
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary may make loans only for energy efficiency projects that-- (1) are technically feasible; (2) are determined to be cost-effective using life cycle cost methods established by the Secretary by regulation; (3) include a measurement and management component to-- (A) commission energy savings for new Federal facilities; and (B) monitor and improve energy efficiency management at existing Federal facilities; and (4) have a project payback period of 3 years or less.
Reports to the Secretary.--Not later than 1 year after the installation of an energy efficiency project that has a total cost of more than $1,000,000, and each year thereafter, an agency shall submit to the Secretary a report that-- (1) states whether the project meets or fails to meet the energy savings projections for the project; and (2) for each project that fails to meet the savings projections, states the reasons for the failure and describes proposed remedies.
Audits.--The Secretary may audit any energy efficiency project financed with funding from the Bank to assess the project's performance.
Reports to Congress.--At the end of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the operations of the Bank, including a statement of the total receipts into the Bank, and the total expenditures from the Bank to each agency.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.