LAND TRANSFER AND CONVEYANCE, NAVAL SECURITY GROUP ACTIVITY, WINTER HARBOR, MAINE.
Transfer of Jurisdiction of Schoodic Point Property Authorized.--(1) The Secretary of the Navy may transfer, without consideration, to the Secretary of the Interior administrative jurisdiction of a parcel of real property, including any improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, consisting of approximately 26 acres as generally depicted as Tract 15-116 on the map entitled ``Acadia National Park Schoodic Point Area'', numbered 123/80,418 and dated May 2001.
The map shall be on file and available for inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
The transfer authorized by this subsection shall occur, if at all, concurrently with the reversion of administrative jurisdiction of a parcel of real property consisting of approximately 71 acres, as depicted as Tract 15-115 on the map referred to in paragraph (1), from the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of the Interior as authorized by Public Law 80-260 (61 United States Statutes at Large 519) and to be executed on or about June 30, 2002.
Conveyance of Corea and Winter Harbor Properties Authorized.-- The Secretary of the Navy may convey, without consideration, to the State of Maine, any political subdivision of the State of Maine, or any tax-supported agency in the State of Maine, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to any of the parcels of real property, including any improvements thereon and appurtenances thereto, consisting of approximately 485 acres and comprising the former facilities of the Naval Security Group Activity, Winter Harbor, Maine, located in Hancock County, Maine, except for the real property described in subsection (a)(1).
Transfer of Personal Property.--The Secretary of the Navy shall transfer, without consideration, to the Secretary of the Interior in the case of the real property transferred under subsection (a), or to any recipient of such real property in the case of real property conveyed under subsection (b), any or all personal property associated with such real property so transferred or conveyed, including-- (1) the ambulances and any fire trucks or other firefighting equipment; and (2) any personal property required to continue the maintenance of the infrastructure of such real property, including the generators and an uninterrupted power supply in building 154 at the Corea site.
Maintenance of Property Pending Conveyance.--The Secretary of the Navy shall maintain any real property, including any improvements thereon, appurtenances thereto, and supporting infrastructure, to be conveyed under subsection (b) in accordance with the protection and maintenance standards specified in section 101-47.4913 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations, until the earlier of-- (1) the date of the conveyance of such real property under subsection (b); or (2) September 30, 2003.
Interim Lease.--(1) Until such time as any parcel of real property to be conveyed under subsection (b) is conveyed by deed under that subsection, the Secretary of the Navy may lease such parcel to any person or entity determined by the Secretary to be an appropriate lessee of such parcel.
The amount of rent for a lease under paragraph (1) shall be the amount determined by the Secretary to be appropriate, and may be an amount less than the fair market value of the lease.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall credit any amount received for a lease of real property under paragraph (1) to the appropriation or account providing funds for the operation and maintenance of such property or for the procurement of utility services for such property.
Amounts so credited shall be merged with funds in the appropriation or account to which credited, and shall be available for the same purposes, and subject to the same conditions and limitations, as the funds with which merged.
Reimbursement for Environmental and Other Assessments.--(1) The Secretary of the Navy may require each recipient of real property conveyed under subsection (b) to reimburse the Secretary for the costs incurred by the Secretary for any environmental assessment, study, or analysis carried out by the Secretary with respect to such property before completing the conveyance under that subsection.
The amount of any reimbursement required under paragraph (1) shall be determined by the Secretary, but may not exceed the cost of the assessment, study, or analysis for which reimbursement is required.
Section 2695(c) of title 10, United States Code, shall apply to any amount received by the Secretary under this subsection.
Description of Property.--The exact acreage and legal description of the real property transferred under subsection (a), and each parcel of real property conveyed under subsection (b), shall be determined by a survey satisfactory to the Secretary of the Navy.
The cost of any survey under the preceding sentence for real property conveyed under subsection (b) shall be borne by the recipient of the real property.
Additional Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary of the Navy may require such additional terms and conditions in connection with any conveyance under subsection (b), and any lease under subsection (e), as the Secretary considers appropriate to protect the interests of the United States.
TRANSFER OF FUNDS TO DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR.
The Secretary of Defense shall transfer to the Secretary of the Interior amounts as follows: (1) $5,000,000 for purposes of capital investments for the development of a research and education center at Acadia National Park, Maine.
$1,400,000 for purposes of operation and maintenance activities at Acadia National Park, Maine.
Grant Assistance for Town of Winter Harbor.--(1) The Secretary of the Navy shall, by grant, provide financial assistance to the Town of Winter Harbor, Maine (in this subsection referred to as the ``Town''), in each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004, for the purpose of reimbursing the Town for costs incurred in making improvements to the water and sewer systems of the Town for the benefit of the Naval Security Group Activity, Winter Harbor, Maine, located in Hancock County, Maine.
The amount of the grant under paragraph (1) in fiscal year 2002 shall be $68,000.
The amount of the grant under paragraph (1) in each of fiscal years 2003 and 2004 shall be the amount, not to exceed $68,000, jointly determined by the Secretary and the Town to be appropriate to reimburse the Town as described in that paragraph in the applicable fiscal year.
Grant Assistance for School Administrative District.--(1) The Secretary shall, by grant, provide financial assistance to the School Administrative District (SAD) operating Sumner High School, Sullivan, Maine.
The purpose of the grant is to offset the loss of impact aid under title VIII of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 that the local educational agency experienced for fiscal years 2000 and 2001 as a result of the closure of the Naval Security Group Activity, Winter Harbor, Maine.
The amount of the grant under paragraph (1) shall be $86,000.
Transfers of Funds to Department of Interior.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 2002, $6,400,000 for purposes of the transfers of funds required by section 2.
Grants.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of the Navy for purposes of the grants required by section 3, amounts as follows: (1) For fiscal year 2002, $154,000.
For each of fiscal years 2003 and 2004, such amounts as may be necessary.
Supplement Not Supplant.--The amounts authorized to be appropriated by this section for the Department of Defense, or for the Department of the Navy, for a fiscal year are in addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated for such Department for such fiscal year under any other provision of law.
Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated by this section for a fiscal year shall remain available until expended, without fiscal year limitation.