This Act may be cited as the ``America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership Act of 1996''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the city of Waterloo, Iowa, and northeast Iowa, possess many important elements of the nationally significant story of American agriculture, including Native American agriculture, agricultural mechanization, seed hybridization, farm cooperative movements, rural electrification, farm-to-market systems, rural-to-urban migration, veterinary practice, food processing and preservation, national farm organizations, international hunger relief, and the development of national and international agribusiness; (2) these resources offer outstanding and unique opportunities to acknowledge and appreciate the development of American agriculture; (3) the National Park Service has determined that-- (A) the story of American agriculture is nationally significant; (B) northeast Iowa is an ideal place to tell the story; and (C) the story could be divided into 4 principal topics for interpretation consisting of-- (i) the amazing science of agriculture; (ii) agriculture as a way of life; (iii) organizing for survival; and (iv) crops from field to table; (4) the responsibility for interpreting, retaining, enhancing, and promoting the resources, values, and amenities of Waterloo, Iowa, and northeast Iowa resides with volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, and the State; and (5) despite the efforts by volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, and the State, the cultural and historical resources of the area have not realized full potential and may be lost without assistance from the Federal Government.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to interpret, retain, enhance, and promote the unique and significant contributions to national and international agriculture of certain natural, historical, and cultural resources within Waterloo, Iowa, and northeast Iowa; (2) to provide a partnership management framework to assist volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, and the State in developing and implementing Plan policies and programs that will assist in the interpretation, retention, enhancement, and promotion of the cultural, natural, and recreational resources of northeast Iowa; (3) to allow for local, State, and Federal contributions through limited grants and technical assistance to create America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership through cooperative agreements among volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, the State, and residents of the area; and (4) to provide for an economically self-sustaining Partnership for the educational and inspirational benefit of current and future generations concerning the story of American agriculture.
In this Act: (1) Activity.--The term ``activity'' means an activity described in section 4(b).
Management entity.--The term ``management entity'' means the management entity established under section 5(a).
Partnership.--The term ``Partnership'' means the America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership established under section 4(a).
Plan.--The term ``Plan'' means the Partnership Management Plan established under section 6(a).
Political subdivision.--The term ``political subdivision'' means a political subdivision of the State (including a county, city, or town), any part of which is located in or adjacent to the area in which the activities of the Partnership are carried out.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Iowa.
AMERICA'S AGRICULTURAL HERITAGE PARTNERSHIP.
Establishment.--On publication by the Secretary in the Federal Register of notice that a Plan has been approved by the Secretary, there is established in the State the America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership to carry out this Act.
Activities.--The Partnership shall carry out such activities as the Partnership determines are necesary to carry out this Act, except that the activities shall be carried out only in the counties of northeast Iowa that are generally depicted in Alternatives 2 and 3 of the Special Resource Study, Cedar Valley, Iowa, of the National Park Service conducted during 1995.
Participation.-- (1) In general.--Nothing in this Act requires any owner of private property located in an area in which the Partnership's activities are carried out, or resident in the area, to participate in or be associated with the Partnership or the Partnership's activities.
Removal of property.--On providing written notice to the Secretary, an owner of private property may remove the property from participation in, or association with, the Partnership or the Partnership's activities.
Grants, Technical Assistance, and Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) Grants and technical assistance.--The Secretary may provide the Federal share specified in section 9(b) of the cost of making grants and providing technical assistance to the Partnership to carry out this Act.
Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with a private entity, the State, a political subdivision of the State, a Federal agency, the Partnership, or the management entity to carry out this Act.
Establishment.--Subject to the approval of the Secretary, there is established a management entity for the Partnership that shall be based on Management Option 5 of the Special Resource Study, Cedar Valley, Iowa, of the National Park Service conducted during 1995.
Plan.--Subject to subsection (a), the structure and operation of the management entity shall be established in the Plan.
Composition.--The management entity may include individuals affiliated with-- (1) the American Association of Museums; (2) the American Farm Bureau; (3) the American Farmland Trust; (4) the Effigy Mounds National Monument and the Herbert Hoover National Historic Site; (5) the Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship; (6) the Iowa Department of Corrections; (7) the Iowa Department of Cultural Affairs; (8) the Iowa Department of Economic Development; (9) the National Trust for Historic Preservation; (10) the Smithsonian Institution; (11) the State Historic Preservation Office of the State; (12) the United States Department of Agriculture; (13) the United States Department of Transportation; and (14) the America's Agricultural/Industrial Heritage Landscape, Inc. SEC.
Preparation.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Partnership shall submit a Partnership Management Plan to the Secretary for approval.
Assistance.--The Secretary may provide the Federal share specified in section 9(b) of the cost of providing technical assistance to the Partnership for the preparation of the Plan.
In General.--Nothing in this Act-- (1) modifies, enlarges, or diminishes the authority of a Federal, State, or local government agency to regulate any use of private property; (2) requires any private property owner to permit public access (or Federal, State, or local government access) to private property; (3) modifies or affects any provision of Federal, State, or local law with regard to public access to or use of private property; or (4) creates any liability, or has any effect on any liability (under any other law), of any private property owner with respect to any person injured on private property.
Land Use.--Nothing in this Act-- (1) grants a power of zoning, land use, or condemnation to the Partnership, the management entity, the Secretary, or any other Federal, State, or local government agency; or (2) modifies any authority of a Federal, State, or local government agency to regulate land use.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER AUTHORITY.
In General.--Nothing in this Act imposes any environmental, occupational, safety, or other rule, regulation, standard, or permit process that is different from those that would be applicable had the Partnership or management entity not been established.
Water and Water Rights.--Nothing in this Act authorizes or implies the reservation or appropriation of water or water rights.
Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this Act diminishes the authority of the State in the management of fish and wildlife, including the regulation of fishing and hunting.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; FEDERAL SHARE.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $400,000 for each fiscal year.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of providing grants and technical assistance under this Act shall be 50 percent.