This Act may be cited as the ``Vanishing Wildlife Stamp Act of 2000''.
SPECIAL POSTAGE STAMPS RELATING TO VANISHING WILDLIFE PROTECTION.
In General.--Chapter 4 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 414 the following: ``Sec.
Special postage stamps relating to funding vanishing wildlife protection programs ``(a) In order to afford the public a convenient way to invest in vanishing wildlife protection programs, the Postal Service shall establish a special rate of postage for first-class mail under this section.
The rate of postage established under this section-- ``(1) shall be no more than 25 percent higher than the rate that would otherwise apply; ``(2) may be established without regard to any procedures under chapter 36 of title 39, United States Code, and notwithstanding any other provision of law; and ``(3) shall be offered as an alternative to the regular first class rate of postage.
The use of the rate of postage established under this section shall be voluntary on the part of postal patrons.
(1) Amounts becoming available from public investment in wildlife protection programs shall be paid by the Postal Service to the Department of Interior Multilateral Species Conservation Fund.
Payments under this section shall be made under such arrangements as the Postal Service shall, by mutual agreement with the Department of Interior, establish in order to carry out the purposes of this section, except that under those arrangements, payments to the Department of Interior shall be made at least twice a year.
For purposes of this section, the term `amounts becoming available from public investment in vanishing wildlife protection programs' means-- ``(A) the total amount of revenues received by the Postal Service that it would not have received but for the enactment of this section; reduced by ``(B) an amount sufficient to cover reasonable costs incurred by the Postal Service in carrying out this section, including costs attributable to the printing, sale, and distribution of stamps under this section, as determined by the Postal Service under regulations that it shall prescribe.
It is the sense of Congress that nothing in this section should-- ``(1) directly or indirectly cause a net decrease in total funds received by the Department of Interior or any other agency of the Government (or any component or program thereof) below the level that would otherwise have been received but for the enactment of this section; or ``(2) affect regular first-class rates of postage or any other regular rates of postage.
Special postage stamps under this section shall be made available to the public beginning on such date as the Postal Service shall by regulation prescribe, but not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this section.
The Postmaster General shall include in each report rendered under section 2402 with respect to any period during any portion of which this section is in effect, information concerning the operation of this section, except that, at a minimum, each report shall include-- ``(1) the total amount described in subsection (d)(2)(A) which was received by the Postal Service during the period covered by such report; and ``(2) of the amount under paragraph (1), how much (in the aggregate and by category) was required for the purposes described in subsection (d)(2)(B).
This section shall cease to be effective at the end of the 2- year period beginning on the date on which special postage stamps under this section are first made available to the public.''.
Report by the Comptroller General of the United States.--Not later than 3 months (but no earlier than 6 months) before the end of the 2-year period referred to in section 414a(h) of title 39, United States Code (as amended by subsection (a)), the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the Congress a report on the operation of such section.
Such report shall include-- (1) an evaluation of the effectiveness and the appropriateness of the authority provided by such section as a means of fund-raising; and (2) a description of the monetary and other resources required of the Postal Service in carrying out such section.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Table of sections.--The table of sections for chapter 4 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 414 and inserting the following: ``414.
Special postage stamps relating to breast cancer.
Special postage stamps relating to funding vanishing wildlife protection programs.''.
Section heading.--The heading for section 414 of title 39, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Special postage stamps relating to breast cancer''.