This Act may be cited as the ``Ohio River Corridor Study Commission Act of 1993''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the amenities and resources of the Ohio River, which flows through 6 States from its headwaters in Pennsylvania to its confluence with the Mississippi River and comprises a chain of commercial, industrial, historical, archaeological, natural, recreational, scenic, wildlife, urban, rural, cultural, and economic areas, are of major significance and importance to the United States; (2) the national interest is served by-- (A) preserving, protecting, and improving the amenities and resources of the Ohio River for the benefit of the people of the United States; and (B) improving the coordination between all levels of government in the Ohio River Corridor; (3) efforts to preserve, protect, and improve the amenities and resources of the Ohio River are inadequate despite efforts by the States through which the Ohio River flows, political subdivisions of the States, and volunteer associations and private businesses in the States; (4) Federal agency programs are insufficient to coordinate State and local planning and regulatory authorities to provide for resource management and economic development in a manner that is consistent with the protection and public use of the amenities and resources of the Corridor; and (5) the Federal Government should assist in the coordination, preservation, and interpretation activities of public and private entities with respect to the significant amenities and resources associated with the Ohio River.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to focus attention on the unique and nationally significant resources of the Ohio River Corridor; (2) to provide a means and stimulus for coordinating the preservation, protection, improvement, enjoyment, and utilization of the resources of the Ohio River Corridor; and (3) to establish a national entity to gather, assess, and disseminate information on the historic, economic, natural, recreational, scenic, and cultural opportunities in the Ohio River Corridor.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Ohio River Corridor Study Commission established under section 4.
Ohio river corridor; corridor.--The terms ``Ohio River Corridor'' and ``Corridor'' mean the Ohio River from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, to Cairo, Illinois, and an area extending from the edge of the river to the landward boundary of each county along the designated length of the river.
Ohio river state.--The term ``Ohio River State'' means each of the States of Illinois, Kentucky, Indiana, Ohio, West Virginia, and Pennsylvania.
OHIO RIVER STUDY COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Ohio River Corridor Study Commission.
Duties of the Commission.-- (1) Study.--The Commission shall study and make recommendations regarding-- (A) the feasibility of establishing an Ohio River National Heritage Corridor for the Ohio River Corridor; and (B) the preservation, protection, improvement, enjoyment, and utilization of the historic, economic, natural, recreational, scenic, and cultural resources of the Corridor consistent with this Act.
Information collection; consultation.--As part of the study conducted under paragraph (1), the Commission shall-- (A) assess the preservation, protection, improvement, enjoyment, and utilization potential of the historic, economic, natural, recreational, scenic, and cultural resources of the Corridor; (B) collect information dealing with ongoing activities, management plans, and opportunities regarding historic, economic, natural, recreational, scenic, and cultural resources in the Corridor; (C) make such information available to Federal agencies, States, and political subdivisions of States, tribal governments, educational institutions, volunteer associations, and private businesses to assist such entities in undertaking activities to preserve, protect, improve, or utilize the historic, economic, natural, recreational, scenic, or cultural resources of the Corridor; (D) consult with the Ohio River Valley Water Sanitation Commission and the Ohio River Basin Commission, and cooperate with the commissions and such associations in the performance of its duties; (E) provide a forum for the consideration of resource issues relating to the Corridor; (F) seek and encourage the participation of affected State and local governments, interested citizens, public officials, groups, agencies, educational institutions, and others in the preservation, protection, improvement, enjoyment, and utilization of the resources of the Corridor; (G) recommend methods and means for educating the general population about the national importance and value of the Ohio River as a natural resource and national treasure; and (H) make the Commission accessible to such groups, agencies, and citizens by holding at least one well- publicized public hearing in each State within the Corridor.
Report.--The Commission shall prepare a report that-- (A) specifies the results of the study conducted under paragraph (1); and (B) contains-- (i) a description of the Ohio River Corridor and the proposed boundaries of an Ohio River National Heritage Corridor (if so recommended) showing the corridor and such zones as may be appropriate; (ii) an inventory and assessment of the historic, economic, natural, recreational, scenic, and cultural resources of the Corridor; (iii) specific preservation and interpretation goals; (iv) proposed management strategies whereby the funds, data, personnel, and authorities of public and private entities may be combined and coordinated in furtherance of the purposes of this Act; and (v) such recommendations as the Commission may deem appropriate with respect to clauses (i) through (iv) and with respect to public access to and interpretation of the natural and cultural resources of the river and related outdoor recreation opportunities.
Organization of the Commission.-- (1) Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members including-- (A) the Director of the National Park Service (or a designee of the Director); (B) the Secretary of Transportation (or a designee of the Secretary); (C) the Secretary of Commerce (or a designee of the Secretary); (D) the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (or a designee of the Director); (E) the Chief of Engineers of the Army Corps of Engineers (or a designee of the Chief); and (F) one member from each Ohio River State appointed by the Governor of such State.
Ex officio members.--Members designated by clauses (A) through (E) of paragraph (1) shall serve ex officio.
Initial appointments.--Members of the Commission appointed under clause (F) of paragraph (1) shall be first appointed not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment is made.
Terms.--Members of the Commission appointed under clause (F) of paragraph (1) shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
Reimbursement of expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including a per diem allowance in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Government service are allowed travel expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.-- (A) In general.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Proxy.--A member of the Commission may vote by means of a signed proxy exercised by another member of the Commission, but any member so voting shall not be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum.
Chairperson.--As the first item of business at the first meeting of the Commission, the members of the Commission shall elect a chairperson of the Commission from among the members appointed under subsection (c)(1)(F).
Meetings.-- (A) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the members of the Commission are first appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Subsequent meetings.--After the initial meeting, the Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson or a majority of the members.
Interim rules.--The Director of the National Park Service (or a designee of the Director) shall select the date of the first meeting and shall serve as chairperson until the election of the chairperson under paragraph (9).
Technical committee.--With the advice and consent of the Commission members, the chairperson may appoint a technical committee with representation from various interest groups, professional agencies, or advocacy groups within the Ohio River States with each State having at least one member.
Waiver.--The provisions of section 14(b) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
are waived with respect to the Commission.
Staff; Experts and Consultants; Personnel of Federal Agencies.-- (1) Lead agency.--The National Park Service shall, if personnel are available, staff and advise the Commission.
Staff.--The Commission, if National Park Service personnel are not available, with advice from the Director of the National Park Service (or a designee of the Director), may appoint and fix the pay of such staff as the Commission considers appropriate, subject to-- (A) the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service; and (B) the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and consultants.--The Commission, with advice from the Director of the National Park Service (or a designee of the Director), may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Personnel of states and political subdivisions.--The Commission may-- (A) accept the services of personnel detailed from an Ohio River State or a political subdivision of an Ohio River State; and (B) reimburse such State or such subdivision for such services.
Personnel of federal agencies.--At the request of the Commission, with the advice of the Director of the National Park Service (or a designee of the Director), the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Powers of the Commission.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate to carry out this Act.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if so authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative support services.--The Administrator of General Service shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Submission of Reports.-- (1) Interim report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Governor of each Ohio River State a report describing the progress of the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission under subsection (b).
Final report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President of the Senate, and the Governor of each Ohio River State the report required by subsection (b)(3).
Termination of Commission.--Notwithstanding section 14(a)(2) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), the Commission shall cease to exist 90 days after submitting the report required by subsection (b)(3).
CONSENT TO NEGOTIATE PROPOSED COMPACTS.
The consent and approval of Congress are hereby given to each Ohio River State to enter into an interstate agreement or compact with 1 or more of any other Ohio River State in furtherance of this Act or the study referred to in section 4(b)(1).
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary to be available until expended during the 3 years in which the Commission is in existence.