This Act may be cited as the ``Voting Opportunity Through Technology and Education Act of 2001''.
VOLUNTARY ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS FOR POLLING PLACES AND VOTING EQUIPMENT.
Revision and Expansion of Current Voting System Standards.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Office of Election Administration of the Federal Election Commission (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Office'') shall develop and publish revisions to the most recent version of voting system standards issued by the Office, and shall expand the scope of such standards to include voluntary standards to promote for all individuals, including the elderly and individuals with disabilities, the accessibility of polling places and the effective use of voting systems and voting equipment which provide the opportunity for casting a secure and secret ballot.
Future updates.--The Office shall update the revised and expanded standards under paragraph (1) at such intervals as the Office considers appropriate.
Consultation.--In developing the revised and expanded standards under subsection (a), the Office shall consult with officials of the Federal Government and State and local governments with expertise in assessing the accessibility of facilities and voting systems for the elderly and individuals with disabilities, and with appropriate organizations with expertise in developing accessibility standards for the elderly and individuals with disabilities.
Posting on Internet.--The Office shall post the revised and expanded standards under this section on the Internet, and shall take such other measures to disseminate the standards to the public as the Office considers appropriate.
REQUIRING OFFICE OF ELECTION ADMINISTRATION TO SERVE AS CLEARINGHOUSE OF INFORMATION ON ACCESSIBILITY OF VOTING SYSTEMS.
Section 311(a)(10) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 438(a)(10)) is amended by striking ``Federal elections.''
and inserting the following: ``Federal elections (including information regarding the accessibility of voting systems, voting equipment, and polling places for the elderly and individuals with disabilities), and provide information on methods to improve the administration of Federal elections upon request to a State or unit of local government.''.
GRANT PROGRAM FOR ACTIVITIES TO PROMOTE ACCESSIBILITY IN VOTING.
In General.--After the issuance of the revised voting system standards by the Office of Election Administration of the Commission pursuant to section 2, the Federal Election Commission shall make grants to eligible States-- (1) to bring voting systems, voting equipment, polling places, and voter registration facilities in the State into compliance with such revised standards; and (2) to carry out other activities to promote the accessibility of voting systems, voting equipment, polling places, and voter registration facilities for the elderly and individuals with disabilities.
Eligibility.-- (1) In general.--A State is eligible to receive a grant under this section if it submits to the Commission (at such time and in such form as the Commission may require) an application containing-- (A) a description of the activities the State will carry out with the funds provided under the grant; (B) assurances that the State will carry out such activities in a manner consistent with the revised voting system standards issued pursuant to section 2; and (C) such other information and assurances as the Commission may require.
Use of funds for educational activities.--At the option of the State, a State may use funds provided under a grant made under this section to educate poll workers, election officials, and voters on the availability and use of voting technology and equipment which is designed to be fully accessible to the elderly and individuals with disabilities.
Report.--At such time as the Commission may require, each State receiving a grant under this section shall submit a report to the Commission which describes the activities carried out with the funds provided under the grant and contains such other information as the Commission may require.
Action Through Office of Election Administration.--The Commission shall carry out its duties under this section through its Office of Election Administration.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005-- (1) $200,000,000 for grants under this section; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for the administrative expenses of carrying out this section, including expenses relating to the hiring of additional personnel.
REVISIONS TO VOTING ACCESSIBILITY FOR THE ELDERLY AND HANDICAPPED ACT.
Statement of Purpose.--Section 2 of the Voting Accessibility for the Elderly and Handicapped Act (42 United States Code 1973ee) is amended by striking ``to promote the fundamental right'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``to ensure that no citizen is denied the right to vote because the citizen is elderly or has a disability.''.
Restoration of Reporting Requirements.-- (1) In general.--Section 3(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 1973ee-1(c)) is amended by striking paragraph (3).
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to years beginning with 2002.