This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Health Innovation Demonstration Act of 1993''.
RURAL HEALTH EXTENSION NETWORKS.
Title XVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300u et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
RURAL HEALTH EXTENSION NETWORKS.
Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Health Resources and Services Administration, may award competitive grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to facilitate the development of networks among rural and urban health care providers to preserve and share health care resources and enhance the quality and availability of health care in rural areas.
Such networks may be statewide or regionalized in focus.
Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a) an entity shall-- ``(1)(A) be a rural health extension network that meets the requirements of subsection (c); or ``(B) be an Area Health Education Center Program; ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require; and ``(3) meets such other requirements as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Networks.--For purposes of subsection (b)(1), a rural health extension network shall be an association or consortium of three or more rural health care providers, and may include one or more urban health care provider, for the purposes of applying for a grant under this section and using amounts received under such grant to provide the services described in subsection (d).
Services.-- ``(1) In general.--An entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use amounts received under such grant to-- ``(A) provide education and community decisionmaking support for health care providers in the rural areas served by the network; ``(B) utilize existing health care provider education programs, including but not limited to, the program for area health education centers under section 781, to provide educational services to health care providers and trainees including, but not limited to, physicians, nurses and nursing students in the areas served by the network; ``(C) make appropriately trained facilitators available to health care providers located in the areas served by the network to assist such providers in developing cooperative approaches to health care in such area; ``(D) facilitate linkage building through the organization of discussion and planning groups and the dissemination of information concerning the health care resources where available, within the area served by the network; ``(E) support telecommunications and consultative projects to link rural hospitals and other health care providers, and urban or tertiary hospitals in the areas served by the network; or ``(F) carry out any other activity determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Education.--In carrying out activities under paragraph (1)(B), an entity shall support the development of an information and resource sharing system, including elements targeted towards high risk populations and focusing on health promotion, to facilitate the ability of rural health care providers to have access to needed health care information.
Such activities may include the provision of training to enable individuals to serve as coordinators of health education programs in rural areas.
Collection and dissemination of data.--The chief executive officer of a State shall designate a State agency that shall be responsible for collecting and regularly disseminating information concerning the activities of the rural health extension networks in that State.
Matching Requirement.--An entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities), non-Federal contributions towards the costs of the operations of the network in an amount equal to the amount of the grant.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1997.
Definition.--As used in this section and section 1710, the term `rural health care providers' means health care professionals and hospitals located in rural areas.
The Secretary shall ensure that for purposes of this definition, rural areas shall include any area that meets any applicable Federal or State definition of rural area.
Relation to Other Laws.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of the antitrust laws, it shall not be considered a violation of the antitrust laws for entities to develop and operate networks in accordance with this section.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `antitrust laws' means-- ``(A) the Act entitled `An Act to protect trade and commerce against unlawful restraints and monopolies', approved July 2, 1890, commonly known as the `Sherman Act' (26 United States Statutes at Large 209; chapter 647; 15 United States Code 1 et sequentes); ``(B) the Federal Trade Commission Act, approved September 26, 1914 (38 United States Statutes at Large 717; chapter 311; 15 United States Code 41 et sequentes); ``(C) the Act entitled `An Act to supplement existing laws against unlawful restraints and monopolies, and for other purposes', approved October 15, 1914, commonly known as the `Clayton Act' (38 United States Statutes at Large 730; chapter 323; 15 United States Code 12 et sequentes; 18 United States Code 402, 660, 3285, 3691; 29 United States Code 52, 53); ``(D) the Act of June 19, 1936, commonly known as the Robinson-Patman Antidiscrimination Act (15 United States Code 13 et sequentes); and ``(E) any State antitrust laws that would prohibit the activities described in paragraph (1).''.
RURAL MANAGED CARE COOPERATIVES.
Title XVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300u et seq.)
as amended by section 2 is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
RURAL MANAGED CARE COOPERATIVES.
Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Health Resources and Services Administration, may award competitive grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to develop and administer cooperatives in rural areas that will establish an effective case management and reimbursement system designed to support the economic viability of essential public or private health services, facilities, health care systems and health care resources in such rural areas.
Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a) an entity shall-- ``(1) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including a description of the cooperative that the entity intends to develop and operate using grant funds; and ``(2) meet such other requirements as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Cooperatives.-- ``(1) In general.--Amounts provided under a grant awarded under subsection (a) shall be used to establish and operate a cooperative made up of all types of health care providers, hospitals, primary access hospitals, other alternate rural health care facilities, physicians, rural health clinics, rural nurse practitioners and physician assistant practitioners, public health departments and others located in, but not restricted to, the rural areas to be served by the cooperative.
Board of directors.--A cooperative established under paragraph (1) shall be administered by a board of directors elected by the members of the cooperative, a majority of whom shall represent rural providers from the local community and include representatives from the local community.
Such members shall serve at the pleasure of such members.
Executive director.--The members of a cooperative established under paragraph (1) shall elect an executive director who shall serve as the chief operating officer of the cooperative.
The executive director shall be responsible for conducting the day the day operation of the cooperative including-- ``(A) maintaining an accounting system for the cooperative; ``(B) maintaining the business records of the cooperative; ``(C) negotiating contracts with provider members of the cooperative; and ``(D) coordinating the membership and programs of the cooperative.
Reimbursements.-- ``(A) Negotiations.--A cooperative established under paragraph (1) shall facilitate negotiations among member health care providers and third party payors concerning the rates at which such providers will be reimbursed for services provided to individuals for which such payors may be liable.
Agreements.--Agreements reached under subparagraph (A) shall be binding on the members of the cooperative.
Employers.--Employer entities may become members of a cooperative established under paragraph (a) in order to provide, through a member third party payor, health insurance coverage for its employees.
Deductibles shall only be charged to employees covered under such insurance if such employees receive health care services from a provider that is not a member of the cooperative if similar services would have been available from a member provider.
Malpractice insurance.--A cooperative established under subsection (a) shall be responsible for identifying and implementing an affordable malpractice insurance program that shall include a requirement that such cooperative assume responsibility for the payment of a portion of the malpractice insurance premium of providers members.
Managed care and practice standards.--A cooperative established under paragraph (1) shall establish joint case management and patient care practice standards programs that health care providers that are members of such cooperative must meet to be eligible to participate in agreements entered into under paragraph (4).
Such standards shall be developed by such provider members and shall be subject to the approval of a majority of the board of directors.
Such programs shall include cost and quality of care guidelines including a requirement that such providers make available preadmission screening, selective case management services, joint patient care practice standards development and compliance and joint utilization review.
Confidentiality.-- ``(A) In general.--Patients records, records of peer review, utilization review, and quality assurance proceedings conducted by the cooperative should be considered confidential and protected from release outside of the cooperative.
The provider members of the cooperative shall be indemnified by the cooperative for the good faith participation by such members in such the required activities.
Quality data.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, quality data obtained by a hospital or other member of a cooperative in the normal course of the operations of the hospital or member shall be immune from discovery regardless of whether such data is used for purposes other than peer review or is disclosed to other members of the cooperative involved.
Linkages.--A cooperative shall create linkages among member health care providers, employers, and payors for the joint consultation and formulation of the types, rates, costs, and quality of health care provided in rural areas served by the cooperative.
Matching Requirement.--An entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities), non-Federal contributions towards the costs of the operations of the network in an amount equal to the amount of the grant.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $15,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1997.
Relation to Other Laws.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any provision of the antitrust laws, it shall not be considered a violation of the antitrust laws for entities to develop and operate cooperatives in accordance with this section.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `antitrust laws' means-- ``(A) the Act entitled `An Act to protect trade and commerce against unlawful restraints and monopolies', approved July 2, 1890, commonly known as the `Sherman Act' (26 United States Statutes at Large 209; chapter 647; 15 United States Code 1 et sequentes); ``(B) the Federal Trade Commission Act, approved September 26, 1914 (38 United States Statutes at Large 717; chapter 311; 15 United States Code 41 et sequentes); ``(C) the Act entitled `An Act to supplement existing laws against unlawful restraints and monopolies, and for other purposes', approved October 15, 1914, commonly known as the `Clayton Act' (38 United States Statutes at Large 730; chapter 323; 15 United States Code 12 et sequentes; 18 United States Code 402, 660, 3285, 3691; 29 United States Code 52, 53); ``(D) the Act of June 19, 1936, commonly known as the Robinson-Patman Antidiscrimination Act (15 United States Code 13 et sequentes); and ``(E) any State antitrust laws that would prohibit the activities described in paragraph (1).''.
RURAL MENTAL HEALTH OUTREACH GRANTS.
Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290cc-11 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
RURAL MENTAL HEALTH OUTREACH GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretary may award competitive grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to develop and implement a plan for mental health outreach programs in rural areas.
Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a) an entity shall-- ``(1) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including a description of the activities that the entity intends to undertake using grant funds; and ``(2) meet such other requirements as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to applications that place emphasis on mental health services for the elderly or children.
Priority shall also be given to applications that involve relationships between the applicant and rural managed care cooperatives.
Matching Requirement.--An entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities), non-Federal contributions toward the costs of the operations of the network in an amount equal to the amount of the grant.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1997.''.
AREA HEALTH EDUCATION CENTERS.
Section 746(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 293j(a)) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) Stipends.-- ``(A) The Secretary make award grants under this section to rural communities to enable such communities to provide stipends to physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and other health professional trainees to encourage such individuals to provide health care services in such rural communities.
In addition, the Secretary may award grants under this section to rural communities to enable such communities to provide stipends to physicians, nurses, nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and other health professionals that are practicing in rural areas to retain such individuals in such areas.
A community that receives a grant under subparagraph (A) shall make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities), non-Federal contributions toward the costs of the operations of the network in an amount equal to the amount of the grant.''.
Reauthorization.--Section 746(i)(1)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 293j(i)(1)(A)) is amended by striking out ``$25,000,000'' and all that follows through ``1995'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$25,000,000 for fiscal year 1993, and $42,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1997''.