This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Disaster Assistance Act of 1999''.
DISASTER ASSISTANCE TO REOPEN SMALL BUSINESS CONCERNS AND AGRICULTURAL ENTERPRISES.
Section 7 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by inserting before the undesignated paragraph that begins with ``No loan under this subsection,'' the following: ``(4) In accordance with subsection (o), the Administration may make grants and loans under this subsection.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(o) Disaster Assistance Programs To Reopen Small Business Concerns and Agricultural Enterprises.-- ``(1) Grant program.-- ``(A) In general.--In accordance with this subsection and subsection (b) (to the extent that subsection (b) is not inconsistent with this subsection), the Administration may make grants to small business concerns and agricultural enterprises following a natural or other disaster to assist such concerns and enterprises in reopening for business.
Eligibility.--A small business concern or agricultural enterprise may receive a grant under this paragraph only if it-- ``(i) was a viable business concern (as determined by the Administration) at the time of the disaster; and ``(ii) is likely to be a viable business concern (as determined by the Administration) after receiving assistance under this subsection.
Maximum.--The Administration may make no grant under this paragraph that exceeds $30,000.
Timing.--In making grants under this paragraph, the Administration shall disburse grant funds as soon as is practicable after a disaster.
Loan program.-- ``(A) In general.--In accordance with this subsection and subsection (b) (to the extent that subsection (b) is not inconsistent with this subsection), the Administration may make loans to small business concerns following a natural or other disaster to assist such concerns in reopening and remaining open for business.
Direct and guaranteed loans permissible.--The Administration may make loans under this paragraph either directly or in cooperation with banks or other lending institutions through agreements to participate on an immediate or deferred (guaranteed) basis.
Repayment.-- ``(i) One-year deferral.--The Administration may not require the borrower with respect to a loan made under this paragraph to repay any principal of the loan, or any interest on such principal, before the date that is 1 year after the date on which the proceeds of the loan are disbursed.
Application of repaid amounts.--The Administration shall apply all amounts repaid with respect to a loan made under this paragraph-- ``(I) to the principal of the loan; and ``(II) to the extent that such amounts are sufficient, to the interest on such principal.
Limitation on eligibility.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, the Administration may not make assistance available under this subsection to any person, concern, or enterprise that is in default of any outstanding-- ``(A) Federal obligation; ``(B) child support obligation; or ``(C) judgment of a Federal of State court.
Use of proceeds.--As a condition of receiving a grant or loan under this subsection, the Administration shall require the recipient to-- ``(A) agree to use the proceeds of such grant or loan only to repair or replace items and structures that were lost or damaged as a result of a disaster; and ``(B) agree not to use any of the proceeds of such grant or loan for relocation, unless the recipient is directed by a government agency to relocate for safety, health, or mitigation purposes.
Flood insurance.--As a condition of receiving a grant or loan under this subsection, the Administration shall require each recipient that operates in a location that the Administration determines is prone to flooding-- ``(A) to obtain flood insurance, or to ensure that such insurance is obtained, for the maximum insurable value of the concern's structure (whether owned or leased) and the contents of such structure; and ``(B) to maintain such flood insurance for the period of time that the concern continues to operate in such a location.
Agricultural enterprises.-- ``(A) Defined.--In this subsection, the term `agricultural enterprise' means-- ``(i) an agricultural enterprise within the meaning of the term under section 3(a); and ``(ii) a farm not larger than a family farm within the meaning of such term under section 321 of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 1961).
Consultation requirement.--Before issuing regulations to implement paragraph (1), the Administration shall consult with the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to the effect of such regulations on agricultural enterprises.''.
Section 4(f)(1) (15 United States Code 633(f)(1)) of the Small Business Act is amended by striking ``section 462(b) of the Social Security Act'' and inserting ``section 459 of the Social Security Act''.
The amendments made by section 2 shall apply to any major disaster declared after September 1, 1999.