This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Health Preservation and Tobacco Advertising Compliance Act''.
DISALLOWANCE OF TAX DEDUCTIONS FOR CERTAIN ADVERTISING, PROMOTION, AND MARKETING EXPENSES RELATING TO TOBACCO PRODUCT USE.
In General.--Part IX of subchapter B of chapter 1 of subtitle A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items not deductible) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN TOBACCO ADVERTISING, PROMOTION, AND MARKETING EXPENSES.
In General.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any taxable year for any expenditure relating to advertising, promoting, or marketing tobacco products if such advertising, promoting, or marketing, or such expenditure is prohibited under the following subsections.
Prohibition of Certain Advertising.-- ``(1) Prohibition on outdoor advertising.-- ``(A) In general.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may use any form of outdoor tobacco product advertising, including billboards, posters, or placards.
Stadia and arenas.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, a manufacturer, distributor, or retailer shall not advertise tobacco products in any arena or stadium where athletic, musical, artistic, or other social or cultural events or activities occur.
Prohibition on use of human images and cartoons.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may use a human image or a cartoon character or cartoon-type character in its advertising, labeling, or promotional material with respect to a tobacco product.
Prohibition on advertising on the internet.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may use the Internet to advertise tobacco products unless such an advertisement is inaccessible in or from the United States.
Prohibition on point of sale advertising.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, no manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may use point of sale advertising of tobacco products.
Adult only stores and tobacco outlets.-- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to point of sale advertising at adult only stores and tobacco outlets.
Permissible advertising.-- ``(i) In general.--Each manufacturer of tobacco products may display not more than 2 separate point of sale advertisements in or at each location at which tobacco products are offered for sale.
Retailers.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may enter into any arrangement with a retailer to limit the ability of the retailer to display any form of permissible point of sale advertisement or promotional material originating with another manufacturer, distributor, or retailer.
Limitations.-- ``(i) In general.--A point of sale advertisement permitted under this paragraph shall be comprised of a display area that is not larger than 576 square inches (either individually or in the aggregate) and shall consist only of black letters on a white background or other recognized typographical marks.
Such advertisement shall not be attached to nor located within 2 feet of any fixture on which candy is displayed for sale.
Audio and video formats.--Audio and video advertisements otherwise permitted under this section may be distributed to individuals who are 18 years of age or older at point of sale but may not be played or viewed at such point of sale.
Display fixtures.--Display fixtures in the form of signs consisting of brand name and price and not larger than 2 inches in height are permitted.
Additional Restrictions.-- ``(1) Restriction on product names.--A manufacturer shall not use a trade or brand name of a nontobacco product as the trade or brand name for a cigarette or smokeless tobacco product, except for a tobacco product whose trade or brand name was on both a tobacco product and a nontobacco product that were sold in the United States on January 1, 1998.
Advertising limit actions.-- ``(A) In general.--A manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may in accordance with this section, disseminate or cause to be disseminated advertising or labeling which bears a tobacco product brand name (alone or on conjunction with any other word) or any other indicia of tobacco product identification only in newspapers, in magazines, in periodicals or other publications (whether periodic or limited distribution), on billboards, posters and placards in accordance with subsection (b)(1), in nonpoint of sale promotional material (including direct mail), in point- of-sale promotional material, and in audio or video formats delivered at a point-of-sale.
Limitation.--A manufacturer, distributor, or retailer that intends to disseminate, or to cause to be disseminated, advertising or labeling for a tobacco product in a medium that is not described in subparagraph (A) shall notify the Secretary of Health and Human Services not less than 30 days prior to the date on which such medium is to be used.
Such notice shall describe the medium and discuss the extent to which the advertising or labeling may be seen by individuals who are under 18 years of age.
Action by secretary.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which the Secretary receives a notice under subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall make a determination with respect to the action to be taken concerning such notice.
Restriction on placement in entertainment media.--No payment shall be made by any manufacturer, distributor, or retailer for the placement of any tobacco product or tobacco product package or advertisement-- ``(A) as a prop in any television program or motion picture produced for viewing by the general public; or ``(B) in a video or on a video game machine.
Restrictions on glamorization of tobacco products.-- No direct or indirect payment shall be made, or consideration given, by any manufacturer, distributor, or retailer to any entity for the purpose of promoting the image or use of a tobacco product through print, film or broadcast media that appeals to individuals under 18 years of age or through a live performance by an entertainment artist that appeals to such individuals.
Format and Content Requirements for Labeling and Advertising.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), each manufacturer, distributor, or retailer advertising or causing to be advertised, disseminating or causing to be disseminated, any labeling or advertising for a tobacco product shall use only black text on a white background.
Certain advertising excepted.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to advertising-- ``(i) in any facility where vending machines and self-service displays are located if the advertising involved-- ``(I) is not visible from outside of the facility; and ``(II) is affixed to a wall or fixture in the facility; ``(ii) that appears in any publication (whether periodic or limited distribution) that is an adult publication.
Adult publication.--For purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii), the term `adult publication' means a newspaper, magazine, periodical, or other publication-- ``(i) whose readers under 18 years of age constitute 15 percent or less of the total readership as measured by competent and reliable survey evidence; and ``(ii) that is read by fewer than 2,000,000 individuals who are under 18 years of age as measured by competent and reliable survey evidence.
Audio or video formats.--Each manufacturer, distributor or retailer advertising or causing to be advertised any advertising for a tobacco product in an audio or video format shall comply with the following: ``(A) With respect to an audio format, the advertising shall be limited to words only with no music or sound effects.
With respect to a video format, the advertising shall be limited to static black text only on a white background.
Any audio with the video advertising shall be limited to words only with no music or sound effects.
Ban on Nontobacco Items and Services, Contests and Games of Chance, and Sponsorship of Events.-- ``(1) Ban on all non-tobacco merchandise.--No manufacturer, importer, distributor, or retailer shall market, license, distribute, sell or cause to be marketed, licensed, distributed or sold any item (other than tobacco products) or service, which bears the brand name (alone or in conjunction with any other word), logo, symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia of product identification similar or identifiable to those used for any brand of tobacco products.
Gifts, contests, and lotteries.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer shall offer or cause to be offered to any person purchasing tobacco products any gift or item (other than a tobacco product) in consideration of the purchase of such products, or to any person in consideration of furnishing evidence, such as credits, proofs-of-purchase, or coupons, of such a purchase.
Sponsorship.-- ``(A) In general.--No manufacturer, distributor, or retailer shall sponsor or cause to be sponsored any athletic, musical, artistic or other social or cultural event, or any entry or team in any event, in which the brand name (alone or in conjunction with any other word), logo, motto, selling message, recognizable color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia of product identification similar or identical to those used for tobacco products is used.
Use of corporate name.--A manufacturer, distributor, or retailer may sponsor or cause to be sponsored any athletic, musical, artistic, or other social or cultural event in the name of the corporation which manufactures the tobacco product if-- ``(i) both the corporate name and the corporation were registered and in use in the United States prior to January 1, 1995; and ``(ii) the corporate name does not include any brand name (alone or in conjunction with any other word), logo, symbol, motto, selling message, recognizable color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia or product identification identical or similar to, or identifiable with, those used for any brand of tobacco products.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--Any term used in this section which is also used in section 5702 shall have the same meaning given such term by section 5702.
Brand.--The term `brand' means a variety of a tobacco product distinguished by the tobacco used, tar content, nicotine content, flavoring used, size, filtration, or packaging.
Distributor.--The term `distributor' means any person who furthers the distribution of tobacco products, whether domestic or imported, at any point from the original place of manufacture to the person who sells or distributes the product to individuals for personal consumption.
Such term shall not include common carriers.
Package.--The term `package' means a pack, box, carton, or container of any kind in which tobacco products are offered for sale, sold, or otherwise distributed to consumers.
Point of sale.--The term `point of sale' means any location at which an individual can purchase or otherwise obtain tobacco products for personal consumption.
Point of sale advertising.--The term `point of sale advertising' means all printed or graphical materials bearing the brand name (alone or in conjunction with any other word), logo, motto, selling message, recognizable color or pattern of colors, or any other indicia of product identification similar or identical to those used for tobacco products, which, when used for its intended purpose, can reasonably be anticipated to be seen by customers at a location at which tobacco products are offered for sale.
Retailer.--The term `retailer' means any person who sells tobacco products to individuals for personal consumption, or who operates a facility where vending machines or self- service displays are located.
Video.--The term `video' means an audiovisual work produced for viewing by the general public, such as a television program, a motion picture, a music video, and the audiovisual display of a video game.
Video game.--The term `video game' means any electronic amusement device that utilizes a computer, microprocessor, or similar electronic circuitry and its own cathode ray tube, or is designed to be used with a television set or a monitor, that interacts with the user of the device.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for such part IX is amended by adding after the item relating to section 280H the following: ``Sec.
Disallowance of deduction for certain tobacco advertising, promotion, and marketing expenses.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.