INCREASED PERSONNEL FOR INVESTIGATING AND COMBATING ALIEN SMUGGLING.
The Attorney General in each of the fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006 shall increase the number of positions for full-time, active duty investigators or other enforcement personnel within the Immigration and Naturalization Service who are assigned to combating alien smuggling by not less than 50 positions above the number of such positions for which funds were allotted for the preceding fiscal year.
INCREASING CRIMINAL SENTENCES AND FINES FOR ALIEN SMUGGLING.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), pursuant to its authority under section 994(p) of title 28, United States Code, the United States Sentencing Commission shall promulgate sentencing guidelines or amend existing sentencing guidelines for smuggling, transporting, harboring, or inducing aliens under sections 274(a)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324(a)(1)(A)) so as to-- (1) double the minimum term of imprisonment under that section for offenses involving the smuggling, transporting, harboring, or inducing of-- (A) 1 to 5 aliens from 10 months to 20 months; (B) 6 to 24 aliens from 18 months to 36 months; (C) 25 to 100 aliens from 27 months to 54 months; and (D) 101 aliens or more from 37 months to 74 months; (2) increase the minimum level of fines for each of the offenses described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of paragraph (1) to the greater of the current minimum level or twice the amount the defendant received or expected to receive as compensation for the illegal activity; and (3) increase by at least two offense levels above the applicable enhancement in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act the sentencing enhancements for intentionally or recklessly creating a substantial risk of serious bodily injury or causing bodily injury, serious injury, permanent or life threatening injury, or death.
Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to an offense that-- (1) was committed other than for profit; or (2) involved the smuggling, transporting, or harboring only of the defendant's spouse or child (or both the defendant's spouse and child).
ELIMINATION OF PENALTY ON PERSONS RENDERING EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Section 274(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324(a)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(C) In no case may any penalty for a violation of subparagraph (A) be imposed on any person based on actions taken by the person to render emergency assistance to an alien found physically present in the United States in life threatening circumstances.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply to offenses committed after the termination of such 90-day period.
AMENDMENTS TO SENTENCING GUIDELINES REGARDING THE EFFECT OF PROSECUTORIAL POLICIES.
In the exercise of its authority under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, the United States Sentencing Commission shall amend the Federal sentencing guidelines to include the following: ``Sec.
Plea bargaining and other prosecutorial policies ``Plea bargaining and other prosecutorial policies, and differences in those policies among different districts, are not a ground for imposing a sentence outside the applicable guidelines range.''.
ENHANCED PENALTIES FOR PERSONS COMMITTING OFFENSES WHILE ARMED.
In General.--Section 924(c)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) by inserting after ``device)'' the following: ``or any violation of section 274(a)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act''; and (B) by striking ``or drug trafficking crime--'' and inserting ``, drug trafficking crime, or violation of section 274(a)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act--''; and (2) in subparagraph (D)(ii), by striking ``or drug trafficking crime'' and inserting ``, drug trafficking crime, or violation of section 274(a)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply to offenses committed after the termination of such 90-day period.
In General.--In addition to funds otherwise available for such purpose, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Immigration and Naturalization Service of the Department of Justice such sums as may be necessary to carry out section 1 and to cover the operating expenses of the Service and the Department in conducting undercover investigations of alien smuggling activities and in prosecuting violations of section 274(a)(1)(A) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (relating to alien smuggling), resulting from the increase in personnel under section 1.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.
In sections 1 and 6, the term ``alien smuggling'' means any act prohibited by paragraph (1) or (2) of section 274(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324(a)).