This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Cost Containment Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The intolerably high number of Americans without adequate health insurance has resulted in major part from the high cost of health insurance premiums.
By eliminating the full tax deductibility of most medical expenses, the Federal Government has effectively increased the cost of health insurance.
This same misguided policy has increased the cost of regular maintenance of one's own health through regular physician visits.
This policy of the Federal Government, therefore, has both discouraged the purchase of health insurance and exposed taxpayers to greater expense because individuals are more likely to develop chronic illnesses and more likely to go without insurance to pay for critical care.
Excessive, wasteful, and abusive litigation in medical care liability suits throughout the United States has also significantly contributed to the high cost of health care in America.
The enormous sums and valuable time that hospitals and physicians lose because of needless litigation amount to a huge tax on health care for all Americans.
Even more expensive is the huge and thoroughly unnecessary cost of so-called ``defensive medicine''.
Because of the ubiquitous threat of lawsuits, doctors and other health care providers all too often prescribe unnecessary tests, studies, and procedures simply to protect themselves--not their patients.
Reforming the abuses of our civil litigation system in medical cases is therefore an essential step in controlling health care costs.
Noneconomic damages in medical cases should be eliminated.
Payment of huge money damages for conceptually elusive measure of loss such as ``pain and suffering'' and ``inconvenience'' has proven to be unworkable.
Our society simply cannot afford it.
Money damages should be limited to repayment of actual monetary losses such as medical expenses, out-of-pocket costs, lost future earnings, and other traditional measures of actual damages.
Punitive damages in medical care liability suits are meant to punish malefactors rather than provide a windfall to attorneys and random litigants.
The existence of this potential windfall (always unrelated to the actual damages suffered in any case) creates a perverse incentive for even more litigation against ``deep pockets'' doctors, hospitals, and health care providers.
Punitive damages should, therefore, be paid over to community hospitals to offset the cost of indigent care.
This will end one of the most significant incentives for abusive and unnecessary litigation that drives up medical costs.
Even more importantly, it will reduce the cost of health care for the poor and taxpayers alike.
Medical care liability suits should be decided on their merits.
But in recent years, the vast majority of medical care liability suits have been decided without a single day of trial, when parties realize that they cannot afford the lawyers' costs and other expenses of obtaining their day in court.
This has led all too often to economic blackmail, in which innocent parties--hospitals, physicians, nurses, other health care workers--are forced to settle for large amounts even though they should, in fact, be held harmless by our legal system.
Patients with meritorious medical malpractice cases find their recoveries substantially reduced by attorneys' fees.
Health care providers victimized by groundless litigation must often pay enormous fees simply to prove they are blameless.
To redress this inequity, the loser in a medical case should pay the costs and attorneys' fees of the winner.
This will end another perverse incentive in the present system for unnecessary litigation that drives up health care costs.
By reducing the cost of health care and by making health insurance more affordable, millions more Americans will be able to obtain needed health coverage.
This, in turn, will increase the size of insurance risk pools, further reducing the cost of necessary insurance for all Americans.
RESTORATION OF THE FULL DEDUCTIBILITY OF MEDICAL EXPENSES.
Section 213(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the treatment of medical and dental expenses) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Allowance of Deduction.--There shall be allowed as a deduction the expenses paid during the taxable year, not compensated for by insurance or otherwise, for medical care of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's spouse, or a dependent (as defined in section 152).''.
ATTORNEYS' FEES IN MEDICAL CARE LIABILITY SUITS.
Awarding Attorneys' Fees and Other Costs to Prevailing Party.-- The nonprevailing party in a medical care liability suit shall pay to the prevailing party in such suit its litigation expenses under the action (including attorneys' fees and fees paid to expert witnesses, but not including court fees, filing fees, or other expenses paid directly to the court).
The amount to be paid for such litigation expenses shall not exceed the litigation expenses of the nonprevailing party in such medical care liability suit.
If the nonprevailing party receives attorney services under a contingent fee agreement, the amount of the attorneys' fees paid under this subsection shall not exceed the reasonable value of those services, determined without regard to the contingent nature of the fee arrangement.
Definition of Prevailing Party.--The term `prevailing party' means a party to a medical care liability suit who obtains a favorable final judgment (other than by settlement) on all or a portion of the claims asserted in the action.
ELIMINATION OF NONECONOMIC DAMAGES IN MEDICAL CARE LIABILITY SUITS.
Scope of Prohibition.--Noneconomic damages may not be imposed in a medical care liability suit.
Compensatory damages may be awarded as in any other type of action.
Definition of Noneconomic Damages.--The term `noneconomic damages' means damages for pain, suffering, inconvenience, or any other nonpecuniary loss, but does not include punitive damages.
PUNITIVE DAMAGES TO BE REDIRECTED TO COMMUNITY HOSPITALS TO PAY FOR INDIGENT CARE.
Local Government to Receive Moneys on Behalf of Hospitals.--Any punitive damages imposed in a medical care liability suit shall be paid to the county, parish, or comparable unit of local government in which the action is brought and which has primary responsibility for payment for indigent health services in its jurisdiction.
Use of Moneys.--A county, parish, or comparable unit of local government which receives moneys under subsection (a) shall use it toward payment of its unreimbursed expenses incurred in providing health care to individuals entitled to medical assistance under titles XVIII and XIX of the Social Security Act.
Applicability.--This Act shall apply with respect to any medical care liability suit brought in any State or Federal court, except that this Act shall not apply to a claim or action for damages arising from a vaccine-related injury or death to the extent that title XXI of the Public Health Service Act applies to the action.
Effect on State Law.--This Act supersedes State law only to the extent that State law differs from any provision of law established by or under this Act.
Any issue that is not governed by any provision of law established by or under this Act shall be governed by otherwise applicable State or Federal law.
Federal Court Jurisdiction Not Established on Federal Question Grounds.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to establish any jurisdiction in the district courts of the United States over medical care liability suits on the basis of sections 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code.
Definition of Medical Care Liability Suit.--The term `medical care liability suit' means an action for damages arising out of the provision of (or the failure to provide) health care services.
This Act shall apply with respect to claims accruing or suits brought on or after the first day of January of the calendar year following the date of the enactment of this Act.