Annual Report.--The Director of Central Intelligence shall submit an annual report to the Members of Congress specified in subsection (f) containing the information described in subsection (b).
The first such report shall be submitted not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and subsequent reports shall be submitted annually thereafter.
Each such report shall be submitted in classified form.
Identification of Foreign Entities Transferring Items or Technologies.--Each report shall identify each covered entity which during the preceding 2 years transferred a controlled item to another entity for use in any of the following: (1) A missile project of concern (as determined by the Director of Central Intelligence).
Activities to develop, produce, stockpile, or deliver chemical or biological weapons.
Nuclear activities in countries that do not maintain full scope International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards or equivalent full scope safeguards.
Prohibition of Subsidies for Proliferator Entities.--Subject to subsection (d), the following shall be applicable with respect to each entity identified in the most recent report under subsection (a): (1) The Export-Import Bank of the United States may not issue any guarantee, insurance, or extension of credit, or approve any participation in an extension of credit, that would be used to conduct business with that entity.
The Overseas Private Investment Corporation may not issue any insurance, reinsurance, or guarantee, or provide any financing, that would be used to conduct business with that entity.
No license may be approved for the transfer to that entity of-- (A) any controlled item; (B) any other item for which a validated license is required under section 5, 6(l), or 6(m) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 or for which a validated license is required under that Act pursuant to section 309(c) of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978; (C) any other item on the United States Munitions List; or (D) any other item controlled for export under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954.
The Secretary of Energy may not approve a request under section 57b.
of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 to engage, directly or indirectly, in the production of special nuclear material by that entity.
Removal of Prohibition.--The prohibition under subsection (c) shall cease to apply with respect to an entity if the Director of Central Intelligence submits a certification in writing to the Members of Congress specified in subsection (f) that the entity has ceased to make transfers described in subsection (b) and is unlikely to resume such transfers.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: (1) Controlled item.--(A) The term ``controlled item'' means any of the following items (including technology): (i) Any item on the MTCR Annex.
An item listed for control by the Australia Group.
Any item listed for control by the Nuclear Suppliers Group.
Australia group.--The term ``Australia Group'' means the multilateral regime in which the United States participates that seeks to prevent the proliferation of chemical and biological weapons.
MTCR annex.--The term ``MTCR Annex'' has the meaning given that term in section 74 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2797c).
Nuclear suppliers' group.--The term ``Nuclear Suppliers' Group'' means the multilateral arrangement in which the United States participates whose purpose is to restrict the transfers of items with relevance to the nuclear fuel cycle or nuclear explosive applications.
Covered entity.--The term ``covered entity'' means a foreign person, corporation, business association, partnership, society, trust, or other nongovernmental organization or group or any government entity operating as a business.
Such term includes any successor to any such entity.
Missile project.--(A) The term ``missile project'' means a project or facility for the design, development, or manufacture of a missile.
The term ``missile'' has the meaning given that term in section 74 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2797c).
Specified Members of Congress.--The Members of Congress referred to in this subsection are the following: (1) The chairman and ranking minority party member of the following committees of the House of Representatives: the Committee on International Relations, the Committee on National Security, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and the Committee on Appropriations.
The chairman and ranking minority party member of the following committees of the Senate: the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Armed Services, the Select Committee on Intelligence, the Committee on Appropriations, and the Committee on Governmental Affairs.