This Act may be cited as the ``Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Neotropical migratory bird populations in nations within the range of neotropical migratory birds have continued to decline to the point that the long-term survival of various species in the wild is in jeopardy.
90 North American bird species are listed as endangered species or threatened species under section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and 124 species of migratory birds are currently on the United States Fish and Wildlife Service's List of Migratory Nongame Birds of Management Concern.
The United States, through 4 bilateral treaties, has responsibility of maintaining healthy populations of 778 species of migratory nongame birds and 58 species of migratory game birds that migrate between the Caribbean, Latin America, and North America.
The Government of Mexico presently lists approximately 390 bird species as endangered, threatened, vulnerable, or rare.
Healthy bird populations provide important economic benefits, such as control of detrimental insects on agricultural crops, thus preventing the loss of millions of dollars each year to farming and timber interests.
Neotropical migratory birds travel across many international borders, therefore the conservation of these species requires that safeguards be established at both the beginning and end of the migration routes, as well as at essential stopover areas along the way.
Because the challenges facing the conservation of neotropical migratory birds are so great, resources to date have not been sufficient to cope with continued loss of habitat and the consequent reduction of neotropical migratory bird populations.
To reduce, remove, or otherwise effectively address these threats through the long-term viability of populations of neotropical migratory birds in the wild will require the joint commitment and efforts of nations within the range of neotropical migratory birds and the private sector.
A Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation fund would provide much-needed support for projects aimed at protecting critical habitat for declining migratory bird species, in an innovative way that promotes conservation partnerships and cost sharing through joint Federal and non-Federal support mechanisms.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To perpetuate healthy populations of neotropical migratory birds.
To assist in the conservation and protection of neotropical migratory birds by supporting conservation initiatives in Canada, Latin America, and the Caribbean.
To provide financial resources and to foster international cooperation for those initiatives.
In this Act: (1) Account.--The term ``Account'' means the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Account established by section 9(a).
Conservation.--The term ``conservation'' means the use of methods and procedures necessary to bring a species of neotropical migratory bird to the point at which there are sufficient populations in the wild to ensure the long-term viability of the species, including-- (A) protection and management of neotropical migratory bird populations; (B) maintenance, management, protection, and restoration of neotropical migratory bird habitat; (C) research and monitoring; (D) law enforcement; and (E) community outreach and education.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program to provide financial assistance for projects outside of the United States to promote the conservation of neotropical migratory birds.
Project Applicants.--A project proposal may be submitted by-- (1) an individual, corporation, partnership, trust, association, or other private entity; (2) an officer, employee, agent, department, or instrumentality of the Federal Government, of any State, municipality, or political subdivision of a State, or of any foreign government; (3) a State, municipality, or political subdivision of a State; (4) any other entity subject to the jurisdiction of the United States or of any foreign country; and (5) an international organization (as defined in section 1 of the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 United States Code 288)).
Project Proposals.--To be considered for financial assistance for a project under this Act, an applicant shall submit a project proposal that-- (1) includes-- (A) the name of the individual responsible for the project; (B) a succinct statement of the purposes of the organization that will conduct the project and of the project; (C) a description of the qualifications of individuals conducting the project; and (D) an estimate of the funds and time necessary to complete the project, including sources and amounts of matching funds; (2) demonstrates that the project will enhance the conservation of neotropical migratory bird species in Latin America, the Caribbean, or the United States; (3) includes mechanisms to ensure adequate local public participation in project development and implementation; (4) contains assurances that the project will be implemented in consultation with relevant wildlife management authorities and other appropriate government officials with jurisdiction over the resources addressed by the project; (5) demonstrates sensitivity to local historic and cultural resources and complies with applicable laws; (6) describes how the project will promote sustainable, effective, long-term programs to conserve neotropical migratory birds; (7) provides any other information that the Secretary considers to be necessary for evaluating the proposal; and (8) provides assurances of the financial viability of the applicant and the project by providing financial information to prove the applicant's ability to complete the project.
Project Reporting.--Each recipient of assistance for a project under this Act shall submit to the Secretary such periodic reports as the Secretary considers to be necessary.
Each report shall include all information required by the Secretary for evaluating the progress and outcome of the project.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of each project shall be not greater than 33 percent.
Non-federal share.-- (A) Source.--The non-Federal share required to be paid for a project shall not be derived from any Federal grant program.
Form of payment.--The non-Federal share of the costs of a project carried out with assistance under this Act may be paid in cash or in kind.
Purchase of Land Only From Willing Sellers.--Amounts of financial assistance provided under this Act shall not be used to acquire any land or interest in land except from a willing seller.
DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY.
In carrying out this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) develop guidelines for the solicitation of proposals for projects eligible for financial assistance under section 5; (2) encourage submission of proposals for projects eligible for financial assistance under section 5, particularly proposals from relevant wildlife management authorities; (3) select proposals for financial assistance that satisfy the requirements of section 5, giving priority to proposals that address conservation needs not adequately addressed by existing efforts and that are supported by relevant wildlife management authorities; and (4) generally implement this Act in accordance with its purposes.
In General.--In carrying out this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) support and coordinate existing efforts to conserve neotropical migratory bird species, through-- (A) facilitating meetings among persons involved in such efforts; (B) promoting the exchange of information among such persons; (C) developing and entering into agreements with other Federal agencies, foreign, State, and local governmental agencies, and nongovernmental organizations; and (D) conducting such other activities as the Secretary considers to be appropriate; and (2) coordinate activities and projects under this Act with existing efforts in order to enhance conservation of neotropical migratory bird species.
Advisory Group.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may establish an advisory group in accordance with this subsection to advise the Secretary regarding the implementation of this Act.
Membership.--An advisory group established under this subsection shall consist of individuals who represent public and private organizations that are actively involved in the conservation of neotropical migratory birds.
Public participation.-- (A) Meetings.--An advisory group established under this subsection shall-- (i) ensure that each meeting of the advisory group is open to the public; and (ii) provide, at each meeting of the advisory group, an opportunity for interested persons to present oral or written statements concerning items on the agenda for the meeting.
Notice.--The Secretary shall provide to the public timely notice of each meeting of the advisory group.
Minutes.--The Secretary shall keep and make available to the public minutes of each meeting of the advisory group.
Exemption.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 App.
United States Code) shall not apply to the establishment and activities of an advisory group in accordance with this subsection.
Not later than October 1, 2002, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results and effectiveness of the program carried out under this Act, including recommendations concerning how the Act might be improved and whether the program should be continued in the future.
NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY BIRD CONSERVATION ACCOUNT.
Establishment.--There is established in the Multinational Species Conservation Fund of the Treasury a separate account to be known as the ``Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Account'', which shall consist of amounts deposited into the Account by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b).
Deposits Into the Account.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Account-- (1) all amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations under subsection (d); and (2) other amounts appropriated to the Account.
Use.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may use amounts in the Account, without further Act of appropriation, to carry out this Act.
Administrative expenses.--Of amounts in the Account available for each fiscal year, the Secretary may expend not more than 6 percent to pay the administrative expenses necessary to carry out this Act.
Acceptance and Use of Donations.--The Secretary may accept and use donations to carry out this Act.
Amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Account.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Account to carry out this Act $8,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2002, to remain available until expended.
Nothing in this Act shall place restrictions on commercial or private use of private property in the United States, nor shall there be any taking of private land in the United States under this Act.