This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Regulation Reduction, Reform, and Budget Act of 1993''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET ACT OF 1974.
Federal Regulatory Budget Cost Control System.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by inserting before section 300 the following new center heading ``PART A--GENERAL PROVISIONS'' and by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART B--FEDERAL REGULATORY BUDGET COST CONTROL SEC.
OMB-CBO Initial Report.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, OMB and CBO shall jointly issue a report to the President and each House of Congress that contains the following: ``(1) For the first budget year beginning after the issuance of this report, a projection of the aggregate direct cost to the private sector of complying with all Federal regulations in effect immediately before issuance of the report containing the projection for that budget year of the effect of current-year Federal regulations into the budget year and the outyears based on those regulations.
A calculation of the estimated aggregate direct cost to the private sector of compliance with all Federal regulations as a percentage of the gross domestic product (GDP).
The estimated marginal cost (measured as a reduction in estimated gross domestic product) to the private sector of compliance with all Federal regulations in excess of 5 percent of the gross domestic product.
The effect on the domestic economy of different types of Federal regulation.
The appropriate level of personnel, administrative overhead, and programmatic savings that should be achieved on a fiscal year by fiscal year basis by Federal agencies that issue regulations with direct costs to the private sector through the reduction of such aggregate costs to the private sector by equal percentage increments in the 6 years following the budget year until the aggregate level of such costs does not exceed 5 percent of the estimated gross domestic product for the same fiscal year as the estimated costs that will be incurred.
Recommendations for budgeting, technical, and estimating changes to improve the Federal regulatory budgeting process.
Update Reports.--OMB and CBO shall issue update reports on September 15th of the fifth year beginning after issuance of the initial report and at 5-year intervals thereafter containing all the information required in the initial report, but based upon all Federal regulations in effect immediately before issuance of the most recent update report.
Initial Baseline Report.--Within 30 days after the date of enactment of this section, OMB and CBO shall jointly issue a report to the President and each House of Congress that contains an initial aggregate regulatory baseline for the first budget year that begins at least 120 days after that date of enactment.
That baseline will be a projection of the aggregate direct cost to the private sector of complying with all Federal regulations in effect immediately before issuance of the report containing the projection for that budget year of the effect of current-year Federal regulations into the budget year and the outyears based on those regulations.
In General.--For the first budget year beginning after the date of enactment of this section and for every other fiscal year thereafter, the aggregate regulatory baseline refers to a projection of the aggregate direct cost to the private sector of complying with all Federal regulations in effect immediately before issuance of the report containing the projection for that budget year of the effect of current-year Federal regulations into the budget year and the outyears based on those regulations.
However, in the case of each of the succeeding fiscal years, the baseline shall be adjusted for the estimated growth during that year in the gross domestic product (GDP) ``(b) OMB-CBO Aggregate Regulatory Baseline Reports.--(1) The first budget year for which there shall be an aggregate regulatory baseline shall be the budget year to which the initial OMB-CBO baseline report issued under section 321(c) pertains.
In the case of each budget year after the budget year referred to in paragraph (1), not later than September 15 of the current year, OMB and CBO shall jointly issue a report containing the baseline referred to in subsection (a) for that budget year.
Reconciliation Directives.--In addition to the requirements of section 310, a concurrent resolution on the budget for any fiscal year shall specify-- ``(1) changes in laws and regulations necessary to reduce the aggregate direct cost to the private sector of complying with all Federal regulations by 6.5 percent for the budget year (as measured against the aggregate regulatory baseline for the first budget year to which this part applies) and by equal percentage increments for each of the outyears (until the aggregate level of such costs does not exceed 5 percent of the estimated gross domestic product for the same fiscal year as the estimated costs that will be incurred) for Federal agencies that issue regulations producing direct costs to the private sector; and ``(2) changes in laws necessary to achieve reductions in the level of personnel and administrative overhead and to achieve programmatic savings for the budget year and the outyears for those agencies of the following: ``(A) In the first outyear, one-fourth of the percent of reduction in regulatory authority from the aggregate regulatory base.
In the second outyear, one-third of the percent of reduction in regulatory authority from the aggregate regulatory base.
In the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth years following the budget year, one-half of the percent of reduction in regulatory authority from the aggregate regulatory base.
Section 310(c) shall not apply with respect to directions made under this section.
Allocation of Totals.--(1) The Committees on the Budget of the House or Representatives and the Senate shall each allocate aggregate 2-year regulatory authority among each committee of its House and by major functional category for the first budget year beginning after the date of enactment of this section and for the second, fourth, and sixth years following the budget year and then every other year thereafter.
As soon as practicable after receiving an allocation under paragraph (1), each committee shall subdivide its allocation among its subcommittees or among programs over which it has jurisdiction.
Point of Order.--(1) It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill or resolution, or amendment thereto, which would cause the appropriate allocation made under subsection (b) for a fiscal year of regulatory authority to be exceeded.
Waiver.--The point of order set forth in paragraph (1) may only be waived by the affirmative vote of at least three-fifths of the Members voting, a quorum being present.
Determinations by Budget Committees.--For purposes of this section, the level of regulatory authority for a fiscal year shall be determined by the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be.
Exceeding Allocation Totals.--Whenever any Committee of the House of Representatives exceeds its allocation of aggregate 2-year regulatory authority under subsection (b)(1), any Member of the House of Representatives may offer a bill in the House (which shall be highly privileged, unamendable, and debateable for 30 minutes) which shall only prohibit the issuance of regulations by any agency under the jurisdiction of that committee for the fiscal years covered by that allocation until that committee eliminates its breach.
ANALYSIS OF REGULATORY COSTS BY CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE.
``CBO shall prepare for each bill or resolution of a public character reported by any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate (except the Committee on Appropriations of each House), and submit to such committee-- ``(1) an estimate of the costs which would be incurred by the private sector in carrying out or complying with such bill or resolution in the fiscal year in which it is to become effective and in each of the 4 fiscal years following such fiscal year, together with the basis of each such estimate; and ``(2) a comparison of the estimate of costs described in paragraph (1) with any available estimates of costs made by such committee or by any Federal agency.
``As used in this part: ``(1) The term `CBO' refers to the Director of the Congressional Budget Office.
The term `OMB' refers to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
The term `regulatory authority' or `regulatory cost' means the direct cost to the private sector of complying with Federal regulations.
The term `direct costs' means (recognizing that direct costs are not the only costs associated with Federal regulation) all expenditures occurring as a direct result of complying with Federal regulation, rule, statement, or legislation, except those applying to the military or agency organization, management, and personnel.''.
PRESIDENT'S ANNUAL BUDGET SUBMISSIONS.
Section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(29) a regulatory authority budget analysis of the aggregate direct cost to the private sector of complying with all current and proposed Federal regulations and proposals for complying with section 323 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 for the budget year and the outyears.''
ESTIMATION AND DISCLOSURE OF COSTS OF FEDERAL REGULATION.
Costs to Private Sector of New Federal Regulations.--Chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, popularly known as the ``Regulatory Flexibility Act'', is amended-- (1) in section 603(a) in the second sentence by inserting before the period the following: ``and the monetary costs to small entities, other businesses, and individuals of complying with the proposed rule''; (2) by adding at the end of section 603 the following: ``(d) Each initial regulatory flexibility analysis shall also contain a description of the nature and amount of monetary costs that will be incurred by small entities, other businesses, and individuals in complying with the proposed rule.
''; (3) in section 604(a)-- (A) in paragraph (2) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in paragraph (3) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) a statement of the nature and amount of monetary costs that will be incurred by small entities, other businesses, and individuals in complying with the rule.
''; and (4) in section 607 by inserting before the period the following: ``, except that estimates of monetary costs under sections 603(d) and 604(a)(4) shall only be in the form of a numerical description''.
Agency Reports.--Each agency that prepares an initial regulatory flexibility analysis under chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, shall, at the same time submit to each House of Congress and to CBO and OMB a cost estimate and cost benefit analysis of any new proposed regulations that would have an aggregate direct cost to the private sector of at least $10,000,000 for any fiscal year.