DEVELOPING BEST PRACTICES AND RETENTION STRATEGIES IN NURSING STAFF MANAGEMENT.
Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART H--DEVELOPING BEST PRACTICES AND RETENTION STRATEGIES IN NURSING STAFF MANAGEMENT ``SEC.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to carry out and evaluate demonstrations of models and best practices in nursing care and to develop innovative strategies or approaches for retention of professional nurses.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means-- ``(A) a partnership or coalition containing a health care facility and a baccalaureate, associate degree, or diploma school of nursing or another organization with expertise in outcome and cost- effectiveness measurement; or ``(B) a health care facility demonstrating proficiency (as evidenced by accreditation by an accepted organization) in outcomes and cost- effectiveness measurement.
Health care facility.--The term `health care facility' means a hospital, skilled nursing facility, long-term care facility, home health care agency, federally qualified health center, nurse-managed health center, rural health clinic, public health clinic, or any other entity as designated by the Secretary.
Nurse leadership.--The term `nurse leadership' includes nurse executives, nurse administrators, and nurse managers.
Professional nurse.--The term `professional nurse' means a registered nurse who holds a valid and unrestricted license to practice nursing in a State.
Distribution of Grants.--Grants awarded under this section shall be distributed among eligible entities representing a variety of geographic regions and a range of different types and sizes of health care facilities.
Duration of Grants.--Grants awarded under this section shall be awarded for a period not greater than 2 years (and may be renewable only once).
Allocation.--The Secretary shall determine the amount of a grant awarded under this section for the nursing services of a health care facility based on the number of staffed beds of the facility as follows, and, if the Secretary deems appropriate, these amounts may be adjusted: ``(1) A maximum of $200,000 for a facility with fewer than 100 staffed beds.
A maximum of $400,000 for a facility with fewer than 400 staffed beds.
A maximum of $600,000 for a facility with 400 or more staffed beds.
Priority Criteria.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to-- ``(1) health care facilities that have not previously received grant funds under this section; or ``(2) in the case of a grant renewal, grant recipients who have demonstrated outcome improvements or have been designated as a magnet hospital by the American Nurses Credentialing Center.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use such grant funds to do 1 or more of the following: ``(1) Improve the quality of the health care facility work environment, including improving communication and collaboration among health care professionals.
Initiate or maintain aggressive nurse retention programs, including other initiatives as deemed appropriate by the nurse retention committee at the health care facility.
Reduce rates of nursing sensitive patient outcomes.
Provide high-quality evaluations of the cost- effectiveness and patient outcomes of best practices, to assist health care facility decisionmakers in determining appropriate nurse retention strategies.
Promote continuing nursing education and career development.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--An application submitted under paragraph (1) shall include a description of-- ``(A) the project or projects proposed to be carried out with grant funds; ``(B) the means by which to evaluate the project with respect to its cost-effectiveness and outcomes as they relate to staff turnover, workplace injuries, and patient care outcomes that are sensitive to nursing care; ``(C) the system of patient outcomes measure, which shall be described by the nurse leadership and professional nurses of the health care facility, shall be sensitive to nursing care, shall evaluate the specific needs of the patients served by the health care facility and the educational needs of the nursing staff at such facility to meet the needs of the patients, and shall be allocated by the health care facility sufficient funds to carry out the system; and ``(D) the health care facility's organizational and clinical decisionmaking processes that incorporate the input of the nursing staff, including the development of a nurse retention committee, the inclusion of nurse executive participation in senior level management of the health care facility, and a nurse residency training program for new graduate nurses entering the workforce on a full-time basis, or nurses returning to work at a health care facility on a full-time basis after an absence of not less than 3 years without working in the nursing field.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2007.