S BY OTHER GOVERNMENTS.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 5 years, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a report that evaluates the degree to which the governments of other countries have knowingly failed to-- (1) close the representative offices of persons designated under applicable United Nations Security Council resolutions; (2) expel any North Korean nationals, including diplomats, working on behalf of such persons; (3) prohibit the opening of new branches, subsidiaries, or representative offices of North Korean financial institutions within the jurisdictions of such governments; or (4) expel any representatives of North Korean financial institutions.
Form.--The report required under subsection (a) shall be submitted in unclassified form but may contain a classified annex.
Appropriate Congressional Committees and Leadership Defined.-- In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees and leadership'' means-- (1) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, and the majority and minority leaders of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Financial Services, the Committee on Ways and Means, and the Speaker, the majority leader, and the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
BRIEFING ON MEASURES TO DENY SPECIALIZED FINANCIAL MESSAGING SERVICES TO DESIGNATED NORTH KOREAN FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 180 days thereafter for 5 years, the President shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees a briefing that includes the following information: (1) A list of each person or foreign government the President has identified that directly provides specialized financial messaging services to, or enables or facilitates direct or indirect access to such messaging services for-- (A) any North Korean financial institution (as such term is defined in section 3 of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9202)) designated under an applicable United Nations Security Council resolution; or (B) any other North Korean person, on behalf of such a North Korean financial institution.
A detailed assessment of the status of efforts by the Secretary of the Treasury to work with the relevant authorities in the home jurisdictions of such specialized financial messaging providers to end such provision or access.
Form.--The briefing required under subsection (a) may be classified.
Subtitle B--Sanctions With Respect to Human Rights Abuses by the Government of North Korea SEC.
SANCTIONS FOR FORCED LABOR AND SLAVERY OVERSEAS OF NORTH KOREANS.
Sanctions for Trafficking in Persons.-- (1) In general.--Section 302(b) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9241(b)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) a list of foreign persons that knowingly employ North Korean laborers, as described in section 104(b)(1)(M).''.
Additional determinations; reports.--With respect to any country identified in section 302(b)(2) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9241(b)(2)), as amended by paragraph (1), the report required under section 302(a) of such Act shall-- (A) include a determination whether each person identified in section 302(b)(3) of such Act (as amended by paragraph (1)) who is a national or a citizen of such identified country meets the criteria for sanctions under-- (i) section 111 of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (22 United States Code 7108) (relating to the prevention of trafficking in persons); or (ii) section 104(a) or 104(b)(1) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9214(a)), as amended by section 101 of this Act; (B) be included in the report required under section 110(b) of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000 (22 United States Code 7107(b)) (relating to the annual report on trafficking in persons); and (C) be considered in any determination that the government of such country has made serious and sustained efforts to eliminate severe forms of trafficking in persons, as such term is defined for purposes of the Trafficking Victims Protection Act of 2000.
Sanctions on Foreign Persons That Employ North Korean Labor.-- (1) In general.--Title III of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9241 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 302 the following new sections: ``SEC.
REBUTTABLE PRESUMPTION APPLICABLE TO GOODS MADE WITH NORTH KOREAN LABOR.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), any significant goods, wares, articles, and merchandise mined, produced, or manufactured wholly or in part by the labor of North Korean nationals or citizens shall be deemed to be prohibited under section 307 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1307) and shall not be entitled to entry at any of the ports of the United States.
Exception.--The prohibition described in subsection (a) shall not apply if the Commissioner of United States Reports Customs and Border Protection finds, by clear and convincing evidence, that the goods, wares, articles, or merchandise described in such paragraph were not produced with convict labor, forced labor, or indentured labor under penal sanctions.
SANCTIONS ON FOREIGN PERSONS EMPLOYING NORTH KOREAN LABOR.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the President shall designate any person identified under section 302(b)(3) for the imposition of sanctions under subsection (b).
Imposition of Sanctions.-- ``(1) In general.--The President shall impose the sanctions described in paragraph (2) with respect to any person designated under subsection (a).
Sanctions described.--The sanctions described in this paragraph are sanctions pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) to block and prohibit all transactions in property and interests in property of a person designated under subsection (a), if such property and interests in property are in the United States, come within the United States, or are or come within the possession or control of a United States person.
Exception.-- ``(1) In general.--A person may not be designated under subsection (a) if the President certifies to the appropriate congressional committees that the President has received reliable assurances from such person that-- ``(A) the employment of North Korean laborers does not result in the direct or indirect transfer of convertible currency, luxury goods, or other stores of value to the Government of North Korea; ``(B) all wages and benefits are provided directly to the laborers, and are held, as applicable, in accounts within the jurisdiction in which they reside in locally denominated currency; and ``(C) the laborers are subject to working conditions consistent with international standards.
Recertification.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which the President transmits to the appropriate congressional committees an initial certification under paragraph (1), and every 180 days thereafter, the President shall-- ``(A) transmit a recertification stating that the conditions described in such paragraph continue to be met; or ``(B) if such recertification cannot be transmitted, impose the sanctions described in subsection (b) beginning on the date on which the President determines that such recertification cannot be transmitted.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 302 the following new items: ``Sec.
Rebuttable presumption applicable to goods made with North Korean labor.
Sanctions on foreign persons employing North Korean labor.''.
MODIFICATIONS TO SANCTIONS SUSPENSION AND WAIVER AUTHORITIES.
Exemptions.--Section 208(a) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9228(a)) is amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1)-- (1) by inserting ``201A,'' after ``104,''; and (2) by inserting ``302A, 302B,'' after ``209,''.
Humanitarian Waiver.--Section 208(b) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9228(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``201A,'' after ``104,'' in each place it appears; and (2) by inserting ``302A, 302B,'' after ``209(b),'' in each place it appears.
Waiver.--Section 208(c) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9228(c)) is amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1)-- (1) by inserting ``201A,'' after ``104,''; and (2) by inserting ``302A, 302B,'' after ``209(b),''.
Section 36(b) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 United States Code 2708(b)), is amended-- (1) in paragraph (9), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (10), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(11) the identification or location of any person who, while acting at the direction of or under the control of a foreign government, aids or abets a violation of section 1030 of title 18, United States Code; or ``(12) the disruption of financial mechanisms of any person who has engaged in the conduct described in sections 104(a) or 104(b)(1) of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 2914(a) or (b)(1)).''.
DETERMINATION ON DESIGNATION OF NORTH KOREA AS A STATE SPONSOR OF TERRORISM.
Determination.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a determination whether North Korea meets the criteria for designation as a state sponsor of terrorism.
Form.--The determination required by paragraph (1) shall be submitted in unclassified form but may include a classified annex, if appropriate.
State Sponsor of Terrorism Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``state sponsor of terrorism'' means a country the government of which the Secretary of State has determined, for purposes of section 6(j) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 United States Code 4605(j)) (as in effect pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act), section 620A of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2371), section 40 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2780), or any other provision of law, is a government that has repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.
Subtitle C--General Authorities SEC.
AUTHORITY TO CONSOLIDATE REPORTS.
Any reports required to be submitted to the appropriate congressional committees under this title or any amendment made by this title that are subject to deadlines for submission consisting of similar units of time may be consolidated into a single report that is submitted to appropriate congressional committees pursuant to the earlier of such deadlines.
The consolidated reports must contain all information required under this title or any amendment made by this title, in addition to all other elements mandated by previous law.
Nothing in this title shall be construed to limit-- (1) the authority or obligation of the President to apply the sanctions described in section 104 of the North Korea Sanctions and Policy Enhancement Act of 2016 (22 United States Code 9214), as amended by section 311 of this Act, with regard to persons who meet the criteria for designation under such section, or in any other provision of law; or (2) the authorities of the President pursuant to the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1701 et seq.).
In General.--The President shall, not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, promulgate regulations as necessary for the implementation of this title and the amendments made by this title.
Notification to Congress.--Not fewer than 10 days before the promulgation of a regulation under subsection (a), the President shall notify and provide to the appropriate congressional committees the proposed regulation, specifying the provisions of this title or the amendments made by this title that the regulation is implementing.
No additional funds are authorized to carry out the requirements of this title or of the amendments made by this title.
Such requirements shall be carried out using amounts otherwise authorized.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.