This Act may be cited as the ``Information Technology Partnerships Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) There are more than 200,000 to 400,000 vacancies in various categories of information technology jobs.
From 1996 to 2005, more than 1,300,000 new computer scientists, engineers, and systems analysts will be required in the United States to fill vacant jobs, which equals 136,800 new workers per year.
Systems analysts will experience the largest job growth, accounting for a 103 percent increase in the number of new positions from 1996 (506,000) to 2005 (1,025,000).
The shortage of information technology workers transcends industries, affecting the manufacturing, service, transportation, health care, education, and government sectors.
Within each sector, vacancies exist at all levels from aides and mechanics to programmers and designers.
The information technology worker shortage is having an adverse effect on the viability of businesses in the United States and on the Nation's competitiveness.
Industry surveys report that half of industry executives cite the lack of workers skilled in technology as the number one obstacle to their company's growth.
An additional 20 percent of industry executives identify the lack of information technology workers as a major obstacle to their company's growth.
A major factor affecting the short supply of information technology workers is the mismatch between what universities teach and what industry needs.
It is in the national interest to promote special initiatives which effectively educate and train our domestic workforce to keep pace with these expanding job opportunities.
Institutions of higher education have the capacity and resources to provide a role of oversight and technical assistance to a wide range of local entities, including community-based organizations, participating in a comprehensive education and training program for potential technology workers.
Higher education institutions must be responsive to the digital environment and expand both their outreach efforts and on-campus activities to train and certify individuals to close the information technology worker gap.
PARTNERSHIPS FOR POSTSECONDARY INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION AND EMPLOYMENT ASSISTANCE.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary may make grants under this Act, in accordance with competitive criteria established by the Secretary, to institutions of higher education, in order to establish, oversee the operation of, and provide technical assistance to, projects described in subsection (b).
Projects.--Projects under this Act shall be projects implemented by a community-based organization described in section 4, or by the institution of higher education receiving the grant, to provide postsecondary information technology education and employment procurement assistance to eligible individuals described in section 5.
Restrictions.--An institution of higher education shall be eligible to receive only one grant under this Act, but may, subject to the requirements of this Act, use the grant to enter into contracts with more than one community-based organization.
A community-based organization shall not be eligible to enter into a contract under this Act with more than one institution of higher education.
Period of Grant.--The provision of payments under a grant under this Act shall not exceed 5 fiscal years and shall be subject to the annual approval of the Secretary and subject to the availability of appropriations for each fiscal year involved.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), a community-based organization described in this section is an entity that, at the time the entity enters into a contract with an institution of higher education for a project under this Act, and throughout the duration of that contract-- (1) is-- (A) a governmental agency; or (B) an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code; and (2) is one of the following: (A) A local partnership (as defined in section 4 of the School-to-Work Opportunities Act of 1994) receiving a grant under section 302 of such Act.
An entity organized and operated for religious purposes.
An entity furnishing school-age child care services after school.
A community-based computer center.
An entity furnishing adult education.
Any other entity organized and operated for cultural, literary, or educational purposes.
Limitation.--An entity shall not be considered a community- based organization described in this section unless, at the time the entity enters into a contract with an institution of higher education for a project under this Act, it has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Secretary that-- (1) it has the capacity successfully to recruit eligible individuals described in section 5 for participation in a project described in section 3, consistent with the enrollment requirements in section 6(b)(5); (2) it is providing an educational service, social service, or employment procurement service; and (3) in the case of an entity that independently manages its own finances, it has been in existence 2 years or more.
An eligible individual described in this section is an individual who-- (1) has submitted a satisfactory application to receive postsecondary information technology education and employment procurement assistance through a project under this Act; and (2) has a certificate of graduation from a school providing secondary education, or the recognized equivalent of such a certificate.
Institutions of Higher Education.--An institution of higher education receiving a grant under this Act shall use the funds provided under the grant to carry out the following duties: (1) Final selection of community-based organizations described in section 4 desiring to provide, at one or more sites, in accordance with a contract with the institution of higher education and this Act, postsecondary information technology education and employment procurement assistance to eligible individuals described in section 5.
Entering into a contract with each community-based organization selected under paragraph (1) under which the institution and the organization agree to carry out the duties respectively required of them under this Act with respect to each site described in paragraph (1).
With respect to each site described in paragraph (1)-- (A) provision of such funding for the establishment and initial operation of the site as was specified in the grant application submitted by the institution to the Secretary; (B) approval of final site selection and preparation; (C) initial orientation and training of personnel employed to manage and operate the site; (D) design and certification of the instructional and academic programs, and oversight of the implementation of the programs; (E) oversight of equipment purchases and contracts for equipment maintenance; and (F) selection of an outside contractor for periodic evaluation of the management and operation of the site.
Community-Based Organizations.-- (1) In general.--A community-based organization implementing a project under this Act with an institution of higher education, at one or more sites, shall carry out the duties described in this subsection, with respect to each such site, subject to the oversight and guidance of the institution.
General duties.--The organization-- (A) shall undertake final site selection and preparation; (B) shall recruit and hire a site director; (C) shall carry out any supplementary instructional, academic, or educational activities specified in the contract with the institution of higher education that are not described in paragraph (4); (D) shall assemble an advisory committee composed of individuals residing in the community in which the site is located, as well as industry representatives, who desire to assist the organization in ensuring that the goals of the organization are consistent with the goals and needs of the community population; (E) shall provide to the institution other evidence of volunteer support from individuals residing in the community in which the site is located and industry representatives; (F) shall recruit eligible individuals for enrollment, subject to paragraph (5); (G) shall maintain waiting lists of eligible individuals desiring to enroll in the project's programs; (H) shall provide career counseling to eligible individuals enrolled in the project's programs; and (I) shall provide job and internship information and placement, employer contacts, and other forms of employment procurement assistance to eligible individuals enrolled in the project's programs.
Site requirements.--The organization shall ensure that each site-- (A) has a minimum of 20 fully functioning computers with sufficient capacity to perform all of the computer operations that are the subject of the curriculum specified in paragraph (4); (B) in addition to the space for the computers described in subparagraph (A), has-- (i) a classroom space with the capacity for seating a minimum of 30 students; (ii) a space in which to conduct the required career and employment counseling functions specified in paragraph (2); and (iii) a separate office for the site director; (C) is real property subject to the control of the organization or the institution, through a lease or other legal instrument, for a period of not less than 5 years; (D) is open to enrolled individuals not less than 12 hours per day; and (E) is located within walking distance of public transportation.
Information technology curriculum.-- (A) In general.--The organization shall ensure that each site offers enrollees a curriculum that includes a broad range of course work that will assist them in qualifying for employment in the field of information technology.
Courses leading to certification.--Such curriculum shall include course work leading to a certification of competence in areas of information technology recognized by the National Skill Standards Board established under the National Skill Standards Act of 1994.
Specific courses.--The computer training offered shall include courses in basic computer competence, on-the-job upgrade assistance, and advanced computer competence.
Enrollment requirements.--The organization shall ensure that its enrollment of eligible individuals at each site is consistent with the following: (A) Not less than 50 percent of the eligible individuals shall be, at the time of enrollment, individuals-- (i) to whom a credit was allowed under section 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for the preceding taxable year; (ii) who are recipients of assistance under a State program funded under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act; (iii) who are a member of a household participating in the food stamp program; or (iv) who are considered low-income pursuant to regulations promulgated by the Secretary under this Act.
Not less than 50 percent of the eligible individuals shall be, at the time of enrollment, under 25 years of age.
No prerequisite relating to net worth, income, or assets may be applied to any eligible individual who, at the time of enrollment, is over 50 years of age, except that this requirement shall not be construed to supersede subparagraph (A).
IMPLEMENTATION OF PROJECTS SOLELY BY INSTITUTIONS.
The Secretary may make a grant under this Act to an institution of higher education that desires to implement a project under this Act without the participation of a community-based organization described in section 4, if the institution agrees to carry out all of the duties required of such an organization under this Act, in addition to the duties otherwise required of an institution of higher education.
The Secretary shall, in awarding grants under this Act, give priority to institutions of higher education whose grant application includes an assurance that the institution will contract with one or more community-based organizations in accordance with this Act.
To apply for a grant under this Act for any fiscal year, an institution of higher education shall submit an application to the Secretary in accordance with the procedures established by the Secretary.
The application shall specify the institution's preliminary selections for the community-based organizations (if any) with which the institution proposes to contract, and shall include information with respect to preliminary site selections.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Adult education.--The term ``adult education'' has the meaning given such term in section 312 of the Adult Education Act.
Community-based computer center.--The term ``community- based computer center'' means a computer center-- (A) funded by both the Federal Government and at least one private sector entity; (B) located in a low-income community (as determined by the Secretary); and (C) organized and operated for the purpose of providing families with access to computer resources that otherwise would not be available to them.
Food stamp program.--The term ``food stamp program'' has the meaning given such term in section 3(h) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 1201 of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Library.--The term ``library'' has the meaning given such term in section 213 of the Library Services and Technology Act.
Museum.--The term ``museum'' has the meaning given such term in section 272 of the Museum and Library Services Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.