Findings.--The Congress hereby makes the following findings: (1) Congress has authorized 18 commemorative coin programs in the 9 years since 1984.
There are more meritorious causes, events, and people worthy of commemoration than can be honored with commemorative coinage.
Commemorative coin legislation has increased at a pace beyond that which the numismatic community can reasonably be expected to absorb.
It is in the interests of all Members of Congress that a policy be established to control the flow of commemorative coin legislation.
Declaration.--It is the sense of the Congress that the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate should not report or otherwise clear for consideration by the House of Representatives or the Senate legislation providing for more than 2 commemorative coin programs for any year, unless the committee determines, on the basis of a recommendation by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee, that extraordinary merit exists for an additional commemorative coin program.
REPORTS BY RECIPIENTS OF COMMEMORATIVE COIN SURCHARGES.
Quarterly Financial Report.-- (1) In general.--Each person who receives, after the date of the enactment of this Act, any surcharge derived from the sale of commemorative coins under any Act of Congress shall submit a quarterly financial report to the Director of the United States Mint and the Comptroller General of the United States describing in detail the expenditures made by such person from the proceeds of the surcharge.
Information to be included.--The report under paragraph (1) shall include information on the proportion of the surcharges received during the period covered by the report to the total revenue of such person during such period, expressed as a percentage, and the percentage of total revenue during such period which was spent on administrative expenses (including salaries, travel, overhead, and fund raising).
Due dates.--Quarterly reports under this subsection shall be due at the end of the 30-day period beginning on the last day of any calendar quarter during which any surcharge derived from the sale of commemorative coins is received by any person.
Final Report.--Each person who receives, after the date of the enactment of this Act, any surcharge derived from the sale of commemorative coins under any Act of Congress shall submit a final report on the expenditures made by such person from the proceeds of all surcharges received by such person, including information described in subsection (a)(2), before the end of the 1-year period beginning on the last day on which sales of such coins may be made.
GAO REPORTS TO CONGRESS.
Before the end of the 1-year period beginning on the last day on which sales of commemorative coins may be made under the Act of Congress which authorized such coins, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a financial accounting statement to the Congress on the payment of any surcharges derived from the sale of such coins and the use and expenditure of the proceeds of such surcharges by any recipient (other than a recipient which is an agency or department of the Federal Government) based on the reports filed by such recipient with the Comptroller General in accordance with section 302 and any audit of such recipient which is conducted by the Comptroller General with respect to the use and expenditure of such proceeds.
TITLE IV--BICENTENNIAL OF THE UNITED STATES CAPITOL COMMEMORATIVE COIN ACT SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Bicentennial of the United States Capitol Commemorative Coin Act''.
One-Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 one-dollar coins each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) be composed of 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the one-dollar coins shall, in accordance with section 404, be emblematic of the bicentennial of the United States Capitol.
Each one-dollar coin shall bear a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1994'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5132(a)(1) of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this title only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act.
The design for the coin authorized by this title shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and the Commission of Fine Arts.
One-Dollar Coins.--The one-dollar coins minted under this title may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities, except that not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue the coins minted under this title beginning May 1, 1994.
Termination of Authority.--Coins may not be minted under this title after April 30, 1995.
Contracts.--Any contract to be made by the Secretary involving the promotion, advertising, or marketing of any coins authorized under this title shall be valid only upon approval by the United States Capitol Preservation Commission.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall sell the coins minted under this title at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make any bulk sales of the coins minted under this title at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this title prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sale prices with respect to such prepaid orders shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this title shall include a surcharge of $15 per coin.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this title will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this title unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
Use of Surcharges.--All surcharges that are received by the Secretary from the sale of coins minted under this title shall be deposited in the Capitol Preservation Fund and be available to the United States Capitol Preservation Commission.
Technical Amendment.--Section 8(b)(1) of Public Law 100-673 is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Limitations on reimbursements.--No amount received by the Commission from the Capitol Preservation Fund from the sale of coins minted under this Act may be used to pay representational expenses of the Commission.''.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this title.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this title from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.