This Act may be cited as the ``Infrastructure Growth and Employment Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the national economy has failed for several years to maintain sufficient levels of economic growth; (2) the current inadequate levels of economic activity and job creation are anticipated to persist into the foreseeable future; (3) this prospect will mean continued high rates of business failures and unemployment, increased Federal spending and reduced revenues, thereby deepening the Federal deficit; (4) recovery of the economy and reduction of the Federal deficit depend on the creation of higher levels of employment and economic activity; (5) in recent years all levels of government have neglected to add to or maintain existing public infrastructure essential to economic efficiency and the future prosperity of the country; and (6) economic growth rates and the future efficiency and competitiveness of the national economy will be substantially enhanced by a program of Federal Government assistance to State and local governments to construct and rehabilitate the Nation's economic infrastructure.
Construction.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to any State or local government for the construction (including demolition and other site preparation activities), renovation, repair, or other improvement of local public works projects, including those public works projects of State and local governments for which Federal financial assistance is authorized under provisions of law other than this Act.
To the extent appropriate, the Secretary may coordinate with other Federal agencies in assessing grant request and in providing appropriate levels of support.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of any project for which a grant is made under this section shall be no more than 80 percent of the cost of the project.
Termination of Grants.--No new grants shall be made pursuant to this Act after the expiration of any 3-consecutive-month period during which the national unemployment rate remained below 6 percent for each such month, or after September 30, 1994, whichever first occurs.
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS; PREFERENCES.
Allocation of Funds.--The Secretary shall allocate funds appropriated pursuant to section 8 of this Act as follows: (1) Indian tribes.--Three-quarters of one percent of such funds shall be set aside and shall be expended only for grants for public works projects under this Act to Indian tribes and Alaska Native villages.
None of the remainder of such funds shall be expended for such grants to such tribes and villages.
Others.--After the set-aside required by paragraphs (1), (3) and (4) of this subsection, 60 percent of such funds shall be allocated among the States on the basis of the ratio that the number of unemployed persons in each State bears to the total number of unemployed persons in all the States and 40 percent of such funds shall be allocated among those States with an average unemployment rate for the preceding 6-month period in excess of 6 percent on the basis of the relative severity of unemployment in each such State, except that no State shall be allocated less than three-quarters of one percent or more than twelve and one-half percent of such funds for local public works projects within such State, except that in the case of Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, not less than one-half of one percent in the aggregate shall be granted for such projects in all 4 of such territories.
Set-aside.--Not less than 10 percent of each State's allocations shall be set aside and shall be expended only for grants for public work projects under this Act for local units of general government with populations under 10,000.
Development and administration.--Up to three-quarters of one percent of the total grant award will be available for project development and preparation, and for ongoing project administration.
This allocation will be available for local units of government defined as nonentitlement under the Housing and Urban Development Community Development Block Grant Program.
Such allocation shall not exceed $15,000 for any single grant award.
Preferences.-- (1) Local government projects.--In making grants under this Act, the Secretary shall give priority and preference to public works projects of local governments.
Locally endorsed projects.--In making grants under this Act, the Secretary shall also give priority and preference to any public works project requested by a State or by a special purpose unit of local government which is endorsed by a general purpose local government within such State.
School district projects.--A project requested by a school district shall be accorded the full priority and preference to public works projects of local governments provided in this subsection.
Applied industrial research projects.--A project that creates or adds to an applied research facility at an institution of higher education, and that facility is intended to promote the development of new products and processes, or that the Secretary determines will improve the competitiveness of American industry shall be accorded full priority and preference.
For projects under this section, matching funds requirements shall be waived if the company or companies and school involved commit, in the Secretary's determination, to undertake all future equipment and maintenance expenses.
High Unemployment Rates.-- (1) Priority.--In making grants under this Act, if for the 12 most recent consecutive months, the average national unemployment rate is equal to or exceeds 6 percent, the Secretary shall (A) expedite and give priority to applications submitted by States or local governments having unemployment rates for the 12 most recent consecutive months in excess of the national unemployment rate, and (B) shall give priority thereafter to applications submitted by States or local governments having average unemployment rates for the 12 most recent consecutive months in excess of 6 percent, but less than the national unemployment rate.
Information regarding unemployment rates.--Information regarding unemployment rates may be furnished either by the Federal Government, or by States or local governments, provided the Secretary (A) determines that the unemployment rates furnished by States or local governments are accurate, and (B) shall provide assistance to States or local governments in the calculation of such rates to ensure validity and standardization.
Limitation on applicability.--Paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply to any State which receives a minimum allocation pursuant to paragraph (2) of subsection (a) of this section.
State and Local Prioritization of Applications.--Whenever a State or local government submits applications for grants under this Act for 2 or more projects, such State or local government shall submit as part of such applications its priority for each such project.
Localization of Unemployment Determinations.--The unemployment rate of a local government may, for the purposes of this Act, and upon request of the applicant, be based upon the unemployment rate of any community or neighborhood (defined without regard to political or other subdivisions or boundaries) within the jurisdiction of such local government.
RULES, REGULATIONS, AND PROCEDURES.
In General.--The Secretary shall, not later than 30 days after date of enactment of this Act, prescribe those rules, regulations, and procedures (including application forms) necessary to carry out this Act.
Such rules, regulations, and procedures shall assure that adequate consideration is given to the relative needs of various sections of the country.
The Secretary shall consider among other factors (1) the severity and duration of unemployment in proposed project areas, (2) the income levels and extent of underemployment in proposed project areas, and (3) the extent to which proposed projects will contribute to the reduction of unemployment and future economic growth.
Consideration of Applications.--The Secretary shall make a final determination with respect to each application for a grant submitted to him under this Act not later than the 60th day after the date the Secretary receives such application.
Consideration of Construction Industry Unemployment.--For purposes of this section, in considering the extent of unemployment or underemployment, the Secretary shall consider the amount of unemployment or underemployment in the construction and construction- related industries.
Acquisition of Land.--No part of any grant made under section 3 of this Act shall be used for the acquisition of any interest in real property.
Maintenance Costs.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize the payment of routine scheduled maintenance costs in connection with any projects constructed (in whole or in part) with Federal financial assistance under this Act.
On-Site Labor.--Grants made by the Secretary under this Act shall be made only for projects for which the applicant gives satisfactory assurances, in such manner and form as may be required by the Secretary and in accordance with such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe, that, if funds are available, on-site labor work can begin within 90 days of project approval.
Contracting.-- (1) Contracting out required.--No part of the construction (including demolition and other site preparation activities), renovation, repair, or other improvement of any public works project for which a grant is made under this Act shall be performed directly by any department, agency, or instrumentality of any State or local government.
Competitive bidding.--Construction of each project for which a grant is made under this Act shall be performed by contract awarded by competitive bidding, unless the Secretary shall affirmatively find that, under the circumstances relating to such project, an alternative method is in the public interest.
Lowest responsive bid.--Contracts for the construction of each project for which a grant is made under this Act shall be awarded only on the basis of the lowest responsive bid submitted by a bidder meeting established criteria of responsibility.
Advertising.--No requirement or obligation shall be imposed as a condition precedent to the award of a contract to a bidder for a project for which a grant is made under this Act, or to the Secretary's concurrence in the award of a contract to such bidder, unless such requirement or obligation is otherwise lawful and is specifically set forth in the advertised specifications.
Environmental Safeguards.--All local public works projects carried out with Federal financial assistance under this Act shall comply with all relevant Federal, State, and local environmental laws and regulations.
Buy American.--If a local public works project carried out with Federal financial assistance under this Act would be eligible for Federal financial assistance under provisions of law other than this Act and, under such other provisions of law, would be subject to title III of the Act of March 3, 1933, popularly known as the Buy American Act, or similar requirements, such project shall be subject to such title of such Act of March 3, 1933, or such similar requirements under this Act in the same manner and to the same extent as such project would be subject to such title of such Act of March 3, 1933, or such similar requirements under such other provisions of law.
Minority Participation.--If a local public works project carried out with Federal financial assistance under this Act would be eligible for Federal financial assistance under provisions of law other than this Act and, under such other provisions of law, would be subject to any minority participation requirement, such project shall be subject to such requirement under this Act in the same manner and to the same extent as such project would be subject to such requirement under such other provisions of law.
Applicability of Laws Regarding Individuals With Disabilities.--Sections 504 and 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 shall apply to local public works projects carried out under this Act.
PREVAILING RATE OF WAGES.
If a local public works project carried out with Federal financial assistance under this Act would be eligible for Federal financial assistance under provisions of law other than this Act and, under such other provisions of law, would be subject to the Act of March 3, 1931, known as the Davis-Bacon Act (40 United States Code 276a-276a-5), or similar requirements, such project shall be subject to such Act of March 3, 1931, or such similar requirements under this Act in the same manner and to the same extent as such project would be subject to such Act of March 3, 1931, or such similar requirements under such other provisions of law.
There is authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000,000 to carry out this Act.
Moneys appropriated pursuant to this authorization shall remain available until expended.
Any amounts made available under this Act for fiscal year 1992 shall be deemed to be emergency spending under section 251(b)(2)(D) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
As used in this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Economic Development Administration.
Local government.--The term ``local government'' means any city, county, town, parish, or other political subdivision of a State, and any Indian tribe.
Public works.--The term ``public works'' includes water and sewer lines, streets and roads, water and sewage treatment plants, port facilities, police and fire stations, detention centers, schools, health facilities, and industrial research or development parks, research facilities at institutions of higher education, and other projects the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
State.--The term ``State'' includes the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.