SHORT TITLE; FINDINGS AND PURPOSES; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``America's Affordable Health Care Act of 2008''.
Findings and Purposes.-- (1) Findings.--Congress finds the following: (A) The regulation of the practice of insurance is a State prerogative.
It is in the interests of health care consumers that Congress allows for policies that increase the affordability of health insurance products.
The Federal government provides States and the medical community with public financing to support the medical needs of the uninsured.
There is a correlation between the amount of insurance benefits and the cost of insurance products.
State mandate laws have created barriers to affordable health coverage.
A number of States allow for the creation of insurance products that recognize the increased costs associated with mandate laws.
Consumers throughout the United States are finding it increasingly hard to secure affordable health care coverage which contributes to the national uninsured rate.
Federal insurance product.--Congress further finds that it is in the interests of taxpayers, health care purchasers, and the health care provider community, to allow for a class of federally certified insurance products that can be purchased in the individual market without being subject to State benefit mandate laws.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (A) to promote increased affordability and access to health care coverage for citizens of the United States; (B) to allow consumers the ability to make choices by weighing insurance benefits with the cost of insurance; (C) to provide incentives to health plans and health insurance issuers to offer increasingly affordable insurance policies to all those in the individual market; (D) to provide low-income and uninsured workers with incentives to purchase insurance policies; (E) to provide incentives to companies and States to offer health care solutions for high-risk beneficiaries; (F) to provide for new coverage opportunities to solve the problems of affordability and uninsurance; and (G) to promote the availability of health insurance coverage through high-risk pools for individuals whose health conditions create barriers to such coverage.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; findings and purposes; table of contents.
TITLE I--HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS Sec.
Certification of Health Benefit Plans.
103. Review of implementation.
TITLE II--EXPANSION OF STATE HIGH RISK HEALTH INSURANCE POOLS Sec.
Increasing and expanding funding for State high risk health insurance pools.
Qualified high risk pools best practices guidelines and grant program.
TITLE I--HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS SEC.
CERTIFICATION OF HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
In General.--A health insurance issuer may apply to the Secretary for up to 3 health insurance coverage policies offered in the individual market in any State to be certified as Health Benefit Plans under this title with respect to eligible individuals and the policies so certified may be offered and sold to such individuals without regard to any State or local law respecting mandates for benefits.
Construction.--Except as specifically provided under subsection (a) with respect to health insurance benefits, nothing in this title shall be construed as-- (1) modifying the application of State or local requirements relating to matters not described in subsection (a), such as underwriting, enrollment, and premiums; (2) superseding any provision of State or local law or regulation relating to the business of insurance, including the regulation of insurers and insurance products, underwriting, enrollment, and premiums; (3) preventing a State or local jurisdiction from applying fraud and abuse provisions otherwise applicable with respect to the sale and marketing of health insurance coverage to the sale and marketing of Health Benefit Plans under this title; or (4) exempting a Health Benefits Plan, and the health insurance issuer offering such a plan, from applicable requirements of State law and compliance with applicable provisions of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act.
In General.--The Secretary shall not certify under this title a Health Benefit Plan offered by a health insurance issuer unless-- (1) the Plan includes benefits for items and services within each of the categories of basic services described in subsection (b); and (2) the issuer-- (A) is licensed under State law to offer health insurance coverage in the State involved; and (B) submits to the Secretary such information and assurances as the Secretary may require to assure compliance of the issuer, and Health Benefit Plans offered by the issuer, with the applicable requirements of this title.
Categories of Basic Services.-- (1) In general.--The categories of basic services described in this subsection are as follows: (A) Inpatient hospital services.
Physicians' surgical and medical services.
Treatment of other categories.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a Health Benefit Plan from providing coverage of benefits that are not within a category of basic services described in paragraph (1).
Reciprocal Arrangements.--Health insurance issuers offering Health Benefit Plans may create reciprocal arrangements with other issuers of such plans in order to improve the portability of such plans among eligible individuals.
103. REVIEW OF IMPLEMENTATION.
Review.--The Secretary shall review the implementation of this title and the impact of such implementation on the availability and purchase of health insurance coverage.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on this title and its impact on making health insurance coverage more affordable.
In this title: (1) The term ``eligible individual'' means an individual who is a citizen or national of the United States or an alien lawfully residing permanently in the United States.
The terms ``health insurance coverage'', ``health insurance issuer'', and ``individual market'' have the meanings given such terms in section 2791 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-91).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
TITLE II--EXPANSION OF STATE HIGH RISK HEALTH INSURANCE POOLS SEC.
INCREASING AND EXPANDING FUNDING FOR STATE HIGH RISK HEALTH INSURANCE POOLS.
In General.--Section 2745(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-45(d)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in the heading, by striking ``through 2010'' and inserting ``and 2008''; and (B) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``through 2010'' and inserting ``and 2008''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) as paragraphs (4), (5), and (6), respectively; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Authorization of appropriations for fiscal years 2009 through 2013.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2009 through 2013-- ``(A) $10,000,000 to carry out subsection (a); and ``(B) $100,000,000, of which, subject to paragraph (5)-- ``(i) two-thirds of the amount appropriated shall be made available for allotments under subsection (b)(2); and ``(ii) one-third of the amount appropriated shall be made available for allotments under subsection (c)(3).''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 2745 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-45) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (d)(1)(A)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (1)(A) and (3)(A) of subsection (d)''; (2) in each of paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (b), by striking ``(1)(B)(i) and (2)(A)'' and inserting ``(1)(B)(i), (2)(A), and (3)(B)(i)''; (3) in each of paragraphs (1) and (3) of subsection (c), by striking ``(1)(B)(ii) and (2)(B)'' and inserting ``(1)(B)(ii), (2)(B), and (3)(B)(ii)''; and (4) in subsection (d)-- (A) in each of paragraphs (1)(B) and (2), by striking ``paragraph (4)'' and inserting ``paragraph (5)''; and (B) in paragraph (5), as redesignated by subsection (a)(2), by striking ``paragraph (1)(B) or (2)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)(B), (2), or (3)(B)''.
QUALIFIED HIGH RISK POOLS BEST PRACTICES GUIDELINES AND GRANT PROGRAM.
Section 2745 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-45) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1), by striking ``In the case'' and inserting ``Subject to subsection (f)(1), in the case''; (2) by redesignating subsection (f) and (g) as subsections (g) and (h), respectively; and (3) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f) Qualified High Risk Pools Best Practices Guidelines and Grant Program.-- ``(1) Best practices report requirement.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (b) for a fiscal year beginning more than 60 days after the date of the enactment of the America's Affordable Health Care Act of 2008, a State that has established a qualified high risk pool shall submit to the Secretary, not later than 120 days after the beginning of such fiscal year, evidence-based information on the operation of such pool, as specified by the Secretary for purposes of creating the best practices guidelines described in paragraph (2).
Best practice guidelines.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of the America's Affordable Health Care Act of 2008, the Secretary shall, after providing for notice and comment, recommend and post on the public Internet site of the Department of Health and Human Services a list of best practices with respect to the operation of qualified high risk pools.
The Secretary shall provide for notice to the States and insurers who manage such qualified high risk pools of the proposed development of such practices and shall develop such best practices with input obtained from such States and insurers.
Such best practices should be categorized and applied according to the number of individuals enrolled in the qualified high risk pool involved.
Bonus grants for state qualified high risk pools that follow best practices.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a State that is one of the 50 States or the District of Columbia, that has established a qualified high risk pool, and that is receiving a grant under subsection (b)(1), for each fiscal year for which the State demonstrates according to a process specified by the Secretary that such qualified high risk pool was operated in accordance with the best practices posted under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall provide a bonus grant from the funds appropriated under subparagraph (C) and allotted to the State under subparagraph (B).
Allotment; limitation.--The Secretary shall allot funds appropriated under subparagraph (C) among States qualifying for a bonus grant under subparagraph (A) in a manner specified by the Secretary, but in no case shall the amount so allotted to a State for a fiscal year exceed 10 percent of the funds so appropriated for the fiscal year.
Authorization of appropriations for bonuses.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2013 $26,000,000 for allotments under subparagraph (B).