SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENTS IN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
QUALIFIED EQUITY INVESTMENTS IN COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the community development financial institution investment credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the qualified equity investment made by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `applicable percentage' means, with respect to any investment, 25 percent, or, if the CDFI Fund establishes a lower percentage with respect to such investment for purposes of this section, such lower percentage.
Qualified Equity Investment.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified equity investment' means any stock or partnership interest in a community development financial institution (as defined in section 103 of the Community Development Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1994 (12 United States Code 4702))-- ``(A) if such institution is designated for purposes of this section by the CDFI Fund, ``(B) if such stock or partnership interest is acquired by the taxpayer at its original issue from the institution (directly or through an underwriter) in exchange for money or other property, and ``(C) to the extent the amount of such investment is designated for such purposes by such Fund.
Rules similar to the rules of section 1202(c)(3) shall apply for purposes of subparagraph (B).
Criteria for designating institutions.--Designations under paragraph (1)(A) shall be made in accordance with criteria established by the CDFI Fund.
In establishing such criteria, the CDFI Fund shall take into account the requirements and criteria set forth in sections 105(b) and 107 of such Act.
CDFI fund.--The term `CDFI Fund' means the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund established by section 104 of such Act.
Limitation on Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of credit determined under this section for any qualified equity investment shall not exceed the credit amount allocated to such investment by the CDFI Fund.
Overall limitation.--The aggregate credit amount which may be allocated by the CDFI Fund under this section shall not exceed $100,000,000.
Recapture of Credit Where Disposition of Equity Investment Within 5 Years.-- ``(1) In general.--If the taxpayer disposes of any investment with respect to which a credit was determined under subsection (a) (or any other property the basis of which is determined in whole or in part by reference to the adjusted basis of such investment) before the end of the 5-year period beginning on the date such investment was made, the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which such disposition occurs shall be increased by the aggregate decrease in tax of the taxpayer resulting from the credit determined under this subsection (a) with respect to such investment.
Exceptions.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any gift, transfer, or transaction described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of section 1245(b).
Special rule.--Any increase in tax under paragraph (1) shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of-- ``(A) determining the amount of any credit allowable under this chapter, and ``(B) determining the amount of the tax imposed by section 55.
Basis Reduction.--The basis of any qualified equity investment shall be reduced by the amount of any credit determined under this section with respect to such investment.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out this section.
Such regulations may provide for the recapture of the credit under this section with respect to investments in institutions which cease to satisfy the criteria established by the CDFI Fund for designation under subsection (c)(1)(A).
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any investment made after December 31, 2006.''
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (13) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(14) the community development financial institution investment credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Credit Allowed Against Regular and Minimum Tax.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 38 of such Code (relating to limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Special rules for community development financial institution investment credit.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of the community development financial institution investment credit-- ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be applied separately with respect to the credit, and ``(ii) in applying paragraph (1) to the credit-- ``(I) 75 percent of the tentative minimum tax shall be substituted for the tentative minimum tax under subparagraph (A) thereof, and ``(II) the limitation under paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause (I)) shall be reduced by the credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year (other than the community development financial institution investment credit).
Community development financial institution investment credit.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `community development financial institution investment credit' means the credit allowable under subsection (a) by reason of section 45D(a).''
Conforming amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 38(c)(2)(A)(ii) of such Code is amended by inserting ``and the community development financial institution investment credit'' after ``employment credit''.
Limitation on Carryback.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) No carryback of community development financial institution investment credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit under section 45D may be carried back to a taxable year ending before the date of the enactment of section 45D.''
Deduction for Unused Credit.--Subsection (c) of section 196 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) the community development financial institution investment credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Qualified equity investments in community development financial institutions.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to investments made after the date of the enactment of this Act.