This Act may be cited as the ``National Grasslands Management Act of 1996''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the inclusion of the National Grasslands within the National Forest System has prevented the Secretary of Agriculture from effectively administering and promoting grassland agriculture on National Grasslands as originally intended under the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act; (2) the National Grasslands can be more effectively managed by the Secretary of Agriculture if administered as a separate entity outside of the National Forest System; and (3) a grazing program on National Grasslands can be responsibly carried out while protecting and preserving sporting, recreational, environmental, and other multiple uses of the National Grasslands.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for improved management and more efficient administration of grazing activities on National Grasslands while preserving and protecting multiple uses of such lands, including but not limited to preserving sportsmen's hunting and fishing and other recreational activities, and protecting wildlife and wildlife habitat in accordance with applicable laws.
As used in this Act, the term-- (1) ``National Grasslands'' means those areas managed as National grasslands by the Secretary of Agriculture under title III of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010-1012) on the day before the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
REMOVAL OF NATIONAL GRASSLANDS FROM NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM.
Section 11(a) of the Forest Rangeland Renewable Resource Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1609(a)) is amended by striking the phrase ``the national grasslands and land utilization projects administered under title III of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (50 United States Statutes at Large 525, 7 United States Code 1010-1012)''.
MANAGEMENT OF NATIONAL GRASSLANDS.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service, shall manage the National Grasslands as a separate entity in accordance with this Act and the provisions and multiple use purposes of title III of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010-1012).
Consultation.--The Secretary shall provide timely opportunities for consultation and cooperation with interested State and local government entities, and other interested individuals and organizations in the development and implementation of land use policies and plans, and land conservation programs for the National Grasslands.
Grazing Activities.--In furtherance of the purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall administer grazing permits and implement grazing management decisions in consultation, cooperation, and coordination with local grazing associations and other grazing permit holders.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations to manage and protect the National Grasslands, taking into account the unique characteristics of the National Grasslands and grasslands agriculture conducted under the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010).
Such regulations shall facilitate the efficient administration of grazing and provide protection for the environment, wildlife, wildlife habitat, and Federal lands equivalent to that in the National Forest System on the day prior to the date of enactment of the Act.
Conforming Amendment to Bankhead-Jones Act.--Section 31 of the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010) is amended to read as follows: ``To accomplish the purposes of title III of this Act, the Secretary is authorized and directed to develop a separate program of land conservation and utilization for the National Grasslands, in order thereby to promote grassland agriculture and secure occupancy and economic stability of farms and ranches, control soil erosion, promote reforestation, preserve and protect natural resources, protect fish and wildlife and their habitat, develop and protect recreational opportunities and facilities, mitigate floods, prevent impairment of dams and reservoirs, develop energy resources, conserve surface and substance moisture, protect the watersheds of navigable streams, and protect the public lands, health, safety and welfare, but not to build industrial parks or commercial enterprises.''.
Hunting and Fishing, and Other Recreational Activities.-- Nothing in this Act shall be construed as limiting or precluding hunting or fishing activities on National Grasslands in accordance with applicable Federal and State laws, nor shall appropriate recreational activities be limited or precluded.
Valid Existing Rights.--Nothing in this Act shall affect valid existing rights, reservations, agreements, or authorizations.
Section 1323(a) of Public Law 96-487 shall continue to apply to non-Federal land and interests therein within the boundaries of the National Grasslands.
Fees and Charges.--Fees and charges for livestock grazing on the National Grasslands shall be determined in the same manner and according to the same formula as we used for livestock grazing on the National Grasslands during the 1996 grazing year.
The Secretary may adjust the grazing fee to compensate for approved conservation practices and administrative expenditures.