This Act may be cited as the ``Recreational Boating Safety Improvement Act of 1994''.
PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES REQUIRED FOR CHILDREN.
Prohibition.--Section 4307(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2) by striking ``or'' after the semicolon at the end; (2) in paragraph (3) by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) operate a recreational vessel under 26 feet in length unless each individual 12 years of age or younger wears a Coast Guard approved personal flotation device when the individual is on an open deck of the vessel.''.
State Authority Preserved.--Section 4307 of title 46, United States Code, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Subsection (a)(4) shall not be construed to limit the authority of a State to establish requirements relating to the wearing of personal flotation devices on recreational vessels that are more stringent than that subsection.''.
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS BASED ON STATE ADOPTION OF LAWS REGARDING BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED.
Section 13103 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (a), (b), and (c) in order as subsections (b), (c), and (d); (2) by inserting before subsection (b) (as so redesignated) the following new subsection: ``(a)(1) Beginning in fiscal year 1998, of the amounts transferred to the Secretary each fiscal year pursuant to section 4(b) of the Act of August 9, 1950 (16 United States Code 777c(b)), the Secretary shall allocate for State recreational boating safety programs $10,000,000 as follows: ``(A) One-half shall be allocated in accordance with paragraph (2) among eligible States that-- ``(i) prohibit operation of a recreational vessel by an individual who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs; and ``(ii) establish a blood alcohol concentration limit of .10 percent or less.
One-half shall be allocated in accordance with paragraph (2) among eligible States that-- ``(i) prohibit operation of a recreational vessel by an individual who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs; and ``(ii) establish an implied consent requirement that specifies that an individual is deemed to have given their consent to evidentiary testing for their blood alcohol concentration or presence of other intoxicating substances.
Of the amount allocated under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) each fiscal year-- ``(A) one-half shall be allocated equally among all eligible States receiving an allocation under that subparagraph for the fiscal year; and ``(B) one-half shall be allocated among those eligible States so that each such State receives an amount bearing the same ratio to the total amount allocated under that subparagraph for the fiscal year as the number of vessels numbered in that State under a system approved under chapter 123 of this title bears to the total number of vessels numbered under approved systems of all States receiving an allocation under that subparagraph for the fiscal year.
''; (3) in subsection (b) (as so redesignated) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by inserting ``the balance of remaining'' after ``allocate''; and (4) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) A State shall not be ineligible for an allocation under subsection (a) because of the adoption by the State of any requirement relating to the operation of a recreational vessel while under the influence of alcohol or drugs that is more stringent than the requirements for receiving the allocation.''.
Submission of Plan.--Not later than one year after enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall, in consultation with appropriate State agencies, submit to the Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a plan to increase reporting of vessel accidents to appropriate State law enforcement officials.
Penalties for Violating Reporting Requirements.--Section 6103(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or 6102'' after ``6101'' the second place it appears.
REQUIRING VIOLATORS TO TAKE RECREATIONAL BOATING SAFETY COURSE.
Negligent Operation.--Section 2302 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) An individual operating a recreational vessel in violation of this section shall complete a boating safety course approved by the Secretary.''.
Other Violations.--Section 4311 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) A person who operates a recreational vessel in violation of this chapter or a regulation prescribed under this chapter may be ordered to complete a recreational boating safety course approved by the Secretary.''.
Section 13108(a)(1) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) striking ``proceeding'' and inserting ``preceding''; and (2) striking ``Secertary'' and inserting ``Secretary''.
Passed the House of Representatives March 21, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.