This Act may be cited as the ``Public Schools Renewal and Improvement Act of 1997''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Although the majority of our Nation's elementary and secondary public schools provide high quality education for our children, many schools need additional resources to implement immediate assistance and reform to enable them to provide a basic and safe education for their students.
The Government Accounting Office recently found that \1/3\ of all elementary and secondary schools in the United States, serving 14,000,000 students, need extensive repair and renovation.
Recent reform of under-achieving schools in a number of States and school districts demonstrates that parents, teachers, school administrators, other educators, and local officials, given adequate resources and expertise, can succeed in dramatically improving public education and creating high performance schools.
Such reform efforts show that parental and community involvement in those reforms is indispensable to the objective of high quality, safe, and accountable schools.
Despite the successes of such reforms, public schools are facing tremendous challenges in educating children for the 21st century.
The elementary and secondary school population will grow by 10 percent by the year 2005, and over the next 10 years, schools will need more than 2,000,000 additional teachers to meet the demands of such expected enrollments.
Almost 7 of 10 Americans support increased Federal assistance to our Nation's public schools, and that support crosses all boundaries, including cities, towns, and rural areas.
When Federal investment in public schools and children has increased, test scores have improved, and high school graduation rates and college enrollments have increased.
The Federal Government should encourage communities that demonstrate a strong commitment to restore and reform their public schools.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to assist local communities that are taking the initiative-- (1) to overcome adverse conditions in their public schools; (2) to revitalize their public schools in accordance with local plans to achieve higher academic standards and safer and improved learning environments; and (3) to ensure that every community public school provides a quality education for all students.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Consortium.--The term ``consortium'' means a local schools consortium as defined in paragraph (2).
Local schools consortium.--The term ``local schools consortium'' means the local educational agency in collaboration with a group composed of affected parents, students, and representatives of teachers, school employees and administrators, local business and community leaders and representative of local higher education group working or residing within the boundary of a local educational agency.
Parent.--The term ``parent'' includes any of the following: (A) A grandparent.
Any other person standing in loco parentis.
Plan.--The term ``plan'' means a 3-year public schools renewal and improvement plan described in section 5.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the American Virgin Islands, Guam, and American Samoa.
In General.--A request for a declaration by the President that a ``public schools renewal effort is underway'' shall be made by a local schools consortium.
Request.--The local education agency shall submit the request to the Governor of the State who shall, with or without comment, forward such request to the President not more than 30 days after the Governor's receipt of such request.
Such request shall-- (1) include the plan; (2) describe the nature and amount of State and local resources which have been or will be committed to the renewal and improvement of the public schools; and (3) certify that State or local government obligations and expenditures will comply with all applicable matching requirements established pursuant to this Act.
Declaration.--Based on a request made under this Act, the President, in consultation with the Secretary, may declare that a ``public schools renewal effort is underway'' in such community and authorize the Department of Education and other Federal agencies to provide assistance under this Act.
Progress Reports.--The consortium shall-- (1) amend such request annually to include additional initiatives and approaches undertaken by the local educational agency to improve the academic effectiveness and safety of its public school system.
submit annual performance reports to the Secretary which shall describe progress in achieving the goals of the plan.
ELEMENTS OF RENEWAL AND IMPROVEMENT PLAN.
In General.--As part of its request to the President, and in order to receive assistance under this section, a consortium shall submit a plan that includes the elements described in subsections (b) and (c).
Adverse Conditions.--The plan shall specify the existence of any of the following factors: (1)(A) A substantial percentage of students in the affected public schools have been performing well below the national average, or below other benchmarks, including State developed benchmarks in such basic skills as reading, math, and science, consistent with Goals 2000 and title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; or (B) a substantial percentage of such students are failing to complete high school.
Some or all of such schools are overcrowded or have physical plant conditions that threaten the health, safety, and learning environment of the schools' populations.
There is a substantial shortage of certified teachers, teaching materials, and technology training.
Some or all of the schools are located where crime and safety problems interfere with the schools' ability to educate students to high academic standards.
Assurances.--The plan shall also include assurances from the local educational agency that-- (1) the plan was developed by the local schools consortium after extensive public discussion with State education officials, affected parents, students, teachers and representatives of teachers and school employees, administrators, higher education officials, other educators, and business and community leaders; (2) describe how the consortium will use resources to meet the types of reforms described in section 7; (3) provide effective opportunities for professional development of public school teachers, school staff, principals, and school administrators; (4) provide for greater parental involvement in school affairs; (5) focus substantially on successful and continuous improvement in the basic academic performance of the students in the public schools; (6) address the unique responsibilities of all stake holders in the public school system, including students, parents, teachers, school administrators, other educators, governmental officials, and business and community leaders, for the effectiveness of the public school system especially with respect to the schools targeted for greatest assistance; (7) provide for regular objective evaluation of the effectiveness of the plan; (8) the agency will give priority to public schools that need the most assistance in improving overcrowding, physical problems and other health and safety concerns, readiness for telecommunications equipment, and teacher training and the pool of certified teachers; (9) ensure that funds received under this Act shall be used to supplement, not supplant other non-Federal funds; (10) certify that the combined fiscal effort per student or the aggregate expenditures within the State with respect to the provision of free public education for the fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which the request for a declaration is made was not less than 90 percent of such combined fiscal effort or aggregate expenditures for the second fiscal year preceding the fiscal year for which the request for a declaration is made; and (11) will address other major issues which the local schools consortium determines are critical to renewal of its public schools.
In General.--To provide assistance under this Act, the President may-- (1) direct the Department of Education, with or without reimbursement, to use the authority and the resources granted to it under Federal law (including personnel, educational equipment and supplies, facilities, and managerial, technical, and advisory services) in support of State and local assistance efforts; (2) direct any other Federal agency to provide assistance as described in paragraph (1); (3) coordinate such assistance provided by Federal agencies; and (4) provide technical assistance and advisory assistance to the affected local educational agency.
Distribution of Assistance Funds.-- (1) In general.--At the direction of the President, the Secretary shall distribute funds and resources provided pursuant to a declaration under this Act to local educational agencies selected for assistance under this Act.
Existing procedures.--The Secretary shall determine the best method of distributing funds under this Act through personnel and existing procedures that are used to distribute funds under other elementary and secondary education programs.
Prohibition.--No provision of this Act shall be construed to authorize any action or conduct prohibited under the General Education Provisions Act.
Assistance provided pursuant to this Act may be used only to carry out a plan, and to effectuate the following and similar types of public school reforms: (1) Student-Targeted Resources.-- (A) Increasing and improving high-quality early childhood educational opportunities.
Providing comprehensive parent training so that parents better prepare children before they reach school age.
Establishing intensive truancy prevention and dropout prevention programs.
Establishing alternative public schools and programs for troubled students and dropouts, and establishing other public school learning ``safety nets''.
Enhancing assistance for students with special needs (including limited English proficient students, English as a second language, and students with disabilities).
Classroom focused school development.-- (A) Establishing teacher and principal academies to assist in training and professional development.
Establishing effective training links for students with area colleges and universities.
Establishing career ladders for teachers and school employees.
Establishing teacher mentor programs.
Establishing recruitment programs at area colleges and universities to recruit and train college students for the teaching profession.
Establishing stronger links between schools and law enforcement and juvenile justice authority.
Establishing stronger links between schools and parents concerning safe classrooms and effective classroom activities and learning.
Establishing parent and community patrols in and around schools to assist safe schools and passage to schools.
Implementing research-based promising educational practices and promoting exemplary school recognition programs.
Expanding the time students spend on school- based learning activities and in extracurricular activities.
Accountability reforms.-- (A) Establishing high learning standards and meaningful assessments of whether standards are being met.
Monitoring school progress and determining how to more effectively use school system resources.
Establishing performance criteria for teachers and principals through such entities as joint school board and union staff improvement committees.
Establishing promotion and graduation requirements for students, including requirements for reading, mathematics, and science performance.
Providing for strong accountability and corrective action from a continuum of options, consistent with State law and title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Assistance under this Act may be provided for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2000.
Not later than March 31, 2000, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate assessing the effectiveness of this Act in assisting recipient local schools consortia in carrying out their plans submitted under this Act.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; MATCHING REQUIREMENT.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act-- (1) for fiscal year 1998, $250,000,000; and (2) for fiscal year 1999, $500,000,000; and (3) for fiscal year 2000, such sums as may be necessary.
Matching Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Federal funds expended or obligated under this Act shall be matched (in an amount equal to such amount so expended or obligated) from State or local funds.
Other federal resources.--The Secretary shall, by regulation and in consultation with the heads of other Federal agencies, establish matching requirements for other Federal resources provided under this Act.
Waiver.--Based upon the recommendation of the Secretary, the President may waive paragraph (1) or (2).