This Act may be cited as the ``Water Pollution Program Improvement Act of 2000''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Pollutant loadings from both public and private point sources have decreased dramatically since the enactment of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act in 1972 and such reductions have greatly contributed to achieving national water quality goals.
Appropriate emphasis on the management of nonpoint source pollution through a variety of flexible management practices is necessary to meet water quality standards and the goals of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Comprehensive watershed management strategies (including estuary management programs, source water protection programs, and other voluntary or statutory programs) are important tools in coordinating point source and nonpoint source water quality programs.
State and local governments, businesses, and landowners are expected to spend billions of dollars over the next 20 years to implement watershed management strategies and other programs to address nonpoint source pollution.
In order to complete the total maximum daily load calculations required for currently identified waters, States will be required to develop one total maximum daily load allocation per week per region for each of the next 15 years at an estimated cost to the States ranging from $670,000,000 to $1,200,000,000.
States have overwhelmingly cited a lack of credible and reliable data and a lack of the resources necessary to collect and analyze such data, as significant limitations to carrying out their responsibilities under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, including the identification of impaired waters and the development of total maximum daily loads.
The General Accounting Office recently concluded that only 6 States have the majority of data needed to assess the condition of their waters.
In cases in which there are no reliable monitoring or other analytical data to support a listing or total maximum daily load allocation, waters of the United States are being identified as impaired and total maximum daily loads are being developed under section 303(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1313(d)) on the basis of anecdotal evidence.
The data used are frequently not subject to quality assurance or quality control measures.
Any Federal regulatory or nonregulatory water quality management program-- (A) must be based on sound science, including credible and reliable monitoring data; (B) must be subject to rigorous cost analysis; (C) must be effectively and efficiently implemented; and (D) must have the strong support of affected stakeholders, including State and local governments, landowners, businesses, environmental organizations, and the general public.
Any Federal water quality management program or initiative must recognize and accommodate-- (A) State water rights allocations and management programs; (B) the clear distinction between point and nonpoint sources of pollution provided in the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes); and (C) the exclusive authority of the States to regulate nonpoint sources of pollution.
NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES STUDY.
Study Required.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall make arrangements with the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a study on-- (1) the scientific basis underlying the development and implementation of total maximum daily loads for pollutants in waters identified under section 303(d)(1)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1313(d)(1)(A)); (2) the costs of implementing measures to comply with the total maximum daily loads; and (3) the availability of alternative programs or mechanisms to reduce the discharge of pollutants from point sources and to reduce pollution from nonpoint sources to achieve water quality standards.
Scope.--The study shall include an evaluation of the following: (1) The scientific methodologies (including water quality monitoring and monitoring plans) that are being used by States to identify waters under section 303(d)(1)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1313(d)(1)(A)) and to develop and implement total maximum daily loads for pollutants in such waters, and the costs associated with the methodologies.
Any procedures or programs that are being implemented by States and Federal agencies to coordinate and improve monitoring methodologies and the quality of monitoring data.
The availability of alternative programs and other regulatory or nonregulatory mechanisms (including Federal, State, and local programs that operate as a functional equivalent to the total maximum daily load program) that may achieve comparable environmental benefits in an impaired water, watershed, or basin.
The results achieved by regulatory and voluntary programs, activities, and practices that are being implemented to reduce nonpoint source pollution and the costs of such programs, activities, and practices to State and local governments and the private sector.
The feasibility of implementing a pollutant trading program between point sources and nonpoint sources of pollution.
An assessment of the total costs (including the costs to Federal land management agencies, State and local governments, and the private sector) associated with programs to reduce the discharge of pollutants from point sources to meet water quality standards on waters currently identified under section 303(d)(1)(A) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1313(d)(1)(A)) and with programs to reduce pollution from nonpoint sources in such waters under section 319 of such Act (33 United States Code 1329).
Peer Review.--Before submitting a report under subsection (d), the National Academy of Sciences shall provide appropriate Federal, State, and private sector interests an opportunity to review and submit written comments on the report.
Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the National Academy of Sciences shall submit a report on the study to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
The report shall include recommendations of the National Academy of Sciences for improving the methodologies evaluated under the study, as well as any recommendations received pursuant to subsection (c) that are not otherwise incorporated into the report.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.
Proposed Rules Defined.--In this section, the term ``proposed rules'' means the Proposed Revisions to the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Program and Federal Antidegradation Policy and the Proposed Revisions to the Water Quality Planning and Management Regulations Concerning Total Maximum Daily Loads, published in the Federal Register on August 23, 1999.
Consideration of Study.--Before making a final determination with respect to the proposed rules, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall-- (1) review the report submitted by the National Academy of Sciences under section 3(d) and incorporate, as appropriate, into the proposed rules the recommendations contained in the report, including recommendations received pursuant to section 3(c); and (2) publish in the Federal Register and receive public comment on-- (A) the recommendations described in paragraph (1) that were incorporated into the proposed rules; and (B) the recommendations described in paragraph (1) that were not incorporated into the proposed rules, including an explanation of why the recommendations were not incorporated.
Effect on Proposed Rules.--The Administrator shall not make a final determination on the proposed rules identified in subsection (a) until the conclusion of the public notice and comment period provided under subsection (b)(2).
Prohibited Actions.--Except as specifically provided by an Act enacted after the date of enactment of this Act, to ensure that States continue to have exclusive authority to regulate nonpoint sources of pollution-- (1) the Administrator shall not take any action to affect any definition of, or distinction made between, point sources and nonpoint sources of pollution contained in a rule of the Environmental Protection Agency in effect on June 1, 2000; and (2) the Administrator shall not require approval of any measures set forth by a State to control nonpoint sources of pollution pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes), except as authorized by section 319 of such Act (33 United States Code 1329).