This Act may be cited as the ``Forest Ecosystem Stewardship Demonstration Act of 1995''.
FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND DEFINITIONS.
Findings.--Congress makes the following finding: (1) In many of the units of the National Forest System, current conditions--such as unnatural fuel loads, high tree density, threat of catastrophic fires, disease, and insect infestations, habitat loss, and loss of historic species, stand diversity and integrity--adversely affect the biodiversity, health, and sustainability of the forest ecosystems of such units.
A new and innovative contracting process for the National Forest System is required to meet Federal goals of improving forest resource conditions through implementation of ecosystem management.
Ecosystem management is not just a biological concept.
It is the convergence of a set of activities that is simultaneously ecologically sound, economically viable, and socially responsible.
The improvement of the health and natural functioning of the forest resource is vital to the long-term viability of species found on National Forest System lands.
Ecosystem restoration and conservation work performed with revenues from forest activities would improve employment opportunities in communities near units of the National Forest System to the benefit of long-term economic sustainability and community viability.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To improve and restore the health of forest resources through implementation of ecosystem management.
To provide for employment opportunities and economic health and viability for rural communities near units of the National Forest System.
To provide for flexibility in procurement and funding practices to enter into stewardship contracts to achieve management objectives and requirements prescribed in the following provisions of law: (A) The Act of June 4, 1897 (commonly known as the Organic Administration Act; 16 United States Code 473-475, 477-482, 551).
The Multiple-Use Sustained Yield Act of 1960 (16 United States Code 528-531).
The Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1600-1614).
Section 14 of the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 United States Code 472a).
The Act of May 23, 1908, and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 United States Code 500).
The Federal Grants and Agreements Act of 1977 (31 United States Code 6303-6308).
National Forest Fund Act of March 4, 1907 (16 United States Code 499).
Definitions.--For purposes of this Act: (1) Account.--The term ``Account'' means the Stewardship Account established under section 4.
Design specification contract.--The term ``design specification contract'' is used to describe contracts in which the contracting entity specifically identifies all the tasks to be performed, and the contractor performs per the designed specifications.
Forest stewardship council.--The term ``Forest Stewardship Council'' means any one of the local councils established under section 3(f) of this Act to, in cooperation with resource managers: prioritize and select stewardship projects, set operational goals in the context of current national forest management policies and local forest plans, evaluate contractor performance and accomplishments, recommend progress payments for work successfully completed by contractors, and make recommendations for the improvement of the stewardship contract process.
Performance specification contract.--The term ``performance specification contract'' is used to describe contracts in which the contracting entity identifies the parameters of the project, and the contractor identifies the method to accomplish the work.
Resource activities.--The term ``resource activities'' includes area access, site preparation, replanting, fish and wildlife habitat restoration or enhancement, silvicultural treatments, watershed improvement, fuel treatments (including prescribed burning), and road closure or obliteration.
Resource manager.--The term ``resource manager'' refers to the line officer responsible for management decisions associated with project implementation on a national forest.
Roadside sale.--The term ``roadside sale'' refers to the sale by the Forest Service to the highest bidder(s) of all contract-designated products of the forest removed as part of the management activities conducted under a stewardship contract.
(Non-designated products may be assigned to the contractor for salvage.)
A roadside sale is a completely separate transaction from the awarding of the stewardship contract itself.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Statement of work contract.--The term ``statement of work contract'' is used to describe contracts in which the contracting entity gives a general overview of the project, and the bidding contractor provides the specifics on how he/she envisions the project and the end result he/she would obtain using his/her particular approach to land stewardship.
Stewardship contract.--The term ``stewardship contract'' means a contract for carrying out resource activities for the improvement and restoration of forest ecosystems of units of the National Forest System and to encourage or enhance the economic sustainability and the viability of rural and regional communities.
A stewardship contract could use a design specification format (definition 2, above), a performance specification format (definition 4, above), a statement of work format (definition 9, above), or some combination thereof.
USE OF STEWARDSHIP CONTRACTS.
Use Authorized.--The Secretary shall establish and implement in the Forest Service a demonstration program through which forest- and/or district-level resource managers use stewardship contracts to carry out resource activities in a comprehensive manner to restore and preserve the ecological integrity and productivity of forest ecosystems within the National Forest System and to encourage or enhance the economic sustainability and the viability of nearby rural communities.
The resource activities undertaken should be consistent with the precepts of ecosystem management and with the forest's management plan for achieving the desired future conditions of the area being treated.
Use Limited.--Within the limits of available financial resources, each forest within the National Forest System may use stewardship contracts to carry out ecosystem management projects, if those contracts: (1) Provide for payment to the contractor based on the number of acres satisfactorily treated in accordance with an approved plan to create a desired future condition on the land.
Are used for projects where the harvest of timber is secondary to creating specific resource conditions (e.g., wildlife habitat enhancement, watershed improvement, insect and disease control).
Are not used for projects involving the construction of new permanent roads or entries into roadless areas.
Will result in the removal of no more than 300,000 board feet of merchantable timber per project.
Provide for the roadside sale of all contract- designated merchantable timber which is extracted.
Are awarded competitively to qualified contractors with no more than 25 employees.
Include stewardship skill and experience qualification requirements which have been established by the local Forest Stewardship Council and approved by the Forest Service.
Are monitored not only by the Forest Service, but also by the local Forest Stewardship Council.
Provide for periodic progress payments to contractors based on successful completion of contract activities on a per acre basis.
The acceptability of the contractor's work shall be determined by the Forest Service, taking into account the recommendation of the local Forest Stewardship Council.
Demonstration Research Objectives.--The Secretary shall insure that in the carrying out of the provisions of this Act enough flexibility is provided to resource managers to enable them to test various approaches to solving questions left unresolved in previous demonstrations of stewardship and end results contracts authorized in fiscal year 1991 and 1992 through the Department of the Interior and Related Appropriation Acts.
These questions include, but are not limited to: (1) The need for the bonding of stewardship contractors and/or possible alternatives which could reduce the financial burden on small businesses.
Preferred methods of marketing timber or other products of the forest removed as a result of stewardship contract activities.
The standards to be used in evaluating the quality and acceptability of the work performed by a stewardship contractor.
The desirability of multi-year contracts for stewardship projects.
The relative merits of using design specifications, performance specifications, or statements of work in offering, awarding, and evaluating stewardship contracts.
The costs, benefits, problems, and opportunities resulting from increased community involvement in the design and monitoring of stewardship contracts.
The benefits and problems resulting from restricting stewardship contracts to very small (no more than 25 employees) contractors.
The extent to which local economic sustainability and rural community viability are affected by the use of stewardship contracts.
The difference between estimated and actual revenues derived from roadside sales of timber.
The level of utilization of timber and other products of the forest derived from stewardship contract projects as compared with conventional timber sales.
The extent to which stewardship contracting contributes to the achievement of forest ecosystem management plans.
The extent to which the revenues from stewardship contracts cover the cost of such contracts or are offset by the costs which could reasonably be expected to result if the contracts are not carried out (e.g., fire suppression costs in areas with heavy fuel loads).
The administrative costs or savings involved in the use of stewardship contracts.
The benefits and/or disadvantages of using local Forest Stewardship Councils as part of the stewardship contracting process.
The benefits and/or disadvantages of various methods of selecting members, organizing, administering, and conducting the business of local Forest Stewardship Councils.
Development and Use of Contracts.--Each resource manager of a unit of the National Forest System may enter into stewardship contracts with qualified non-Federal entities (as established in regulations relating to procurement by the Federal Government or as determined by the Secretary.)
The local Forest Stewardship Council, in cooperation with the Forest Service resource manager, shall select the type of stewardship contract that is most suitable to local conditions.
Contracts should clearly describe the desired future condition for each resource managed under the contract and the evaluation criteria to be used to determine acceptable performance.
The length of a stewardship contract shall be consistent with the requirements of section 14 of the National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 United States Code 472a).
Selection of Areas for Contracts.--In selecting areas within units of the National Forest System to be subject to stewardship contracts, the Secretary, resource managers, and local Forest Stewardship Councils shall base the selection on the need to improve forest health, maintain and improve soil and water quality, and improve fisheries and wildlife habitat.
Priorities for activities within individual units will be established by local resource managers, in consultation with the appropriate local Forest Stewardship Council.
Establishment of Local Forest Stewardship Councils.--Local Forest Stewardship Councils shall be established for each unit of the National Forest System which offers stewardship contracts.
The role of a Forest Stewardship Council will be to, in cooperation with the resource managers, prioritize and select stewardship projects, set operational goals in the context of current national forest management policies and local forest plans, evaluate contractor performance and accomplishments, recommend progress payments for work successfully completed by contractors, and make recommendations for the improvement of the stewardship contract process.
Each participating National Forest System unit shall establish, after soliciting the comments of local citizens, the size of the local council, the method of selection or election of council members, the terms of service of members, and the council administrative budget, if any.
At least 51 percent of members of any Forest Stewardship Council shall be drawn from the private sector, in a manner which insures representation of a broad range of public interests.
The functioning of the Forest Stewardship Councils must assure a continuing and open process and must in no way interfere with the broad public involvement in Federal resource management decision making required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1976.
Application of Contracts.--Subject to subsection (h), the revenue received from the sale of timber or any other products of the forest resulting to the Federal Government as a result of work carried out under a stewardship contract shall be deposited into a Stewardship Account as established in section 4(a).
Effect on Other Revenue Requirements.--Twenty-five percent of the revenues received from roadside sale of products extracted through stewardship contract activities shall remain available for payments to States, as required under the Act of May 23, 1908, and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1991 (16 United States Code 500).
The Secretary shall first collect revenues to make such payments before exercising the authority provided in subsection g. SEC.
STEWARDSHIP CONTRACT RECEIPTS AND EXPENDITURES.
Receipts.--Monetary receipts received as payment for contract- designated timber and other products of the forest extracted through stewardship contract activities shall be deposited in a designated fund to be known as the ``Stewardship Account''.
Amounts in the Account shall be used to make payments to States under the Act of May 23, 1908, and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 United States Code 500), and to fund resource activities.
Amounts in the Account are hereby appropriated and shall be available to the Secretary until expended, except that those amounts found by the Secretary to be in excess of the needs of the Secretary shall be transferred to miscellaneous receipts in the Treasury of the United States.
Any additional revenues made available through direct appropriations to the Forest Service for stewardship contracting and ecosystem management purposes also shall be deposited in the Account.
Expenditures.--Not less than 80 percent of amounts in the Account available for resource activities shall be used for the direct costs of such resource activities.
The revenues received from sales of contract-designated products resulting from stewardship contracts shall be returned to the national forest from which they were generated, to be used to fund additional stewardship contracts.
To the extent that additional revenues are received in the Account from direct appropriations by the Congress of funds for stewardship contract activities, such funds shall be made available to those forest units using stewardship contracts through a process to be developed by the Secretary.
Reporting.--As part of the annual report of the Secretary to Congress, the Secretary shall include an accounting of revenues, expenditures, and accomplishments related to the stewardship contracts.
RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
All stewardship contracts shall comply with existing applicable laws, and nothing in this Act may be construed as modifying the provisions of any other law except as explicitly provided in this Act.
This Act shall be effective upon passage.
Unless extended by a subsequent act of the Congress, this Act shall terminate five years from its effective date.