entitled ``Joint Resolution to approve the `Covenant To Establish a Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands in Political Union with the United States of America', and for other purposes'' approved March 24, 1976 (48 United States Code 1801 et sequentes), is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
LABELING OF TEXTILE FIBER PRODUCTS.
In General.--No textile fiber product shall have a stamp, tag, label, or other means of identification or substitute therefore on or affixed to the product stating `Made in the USA' or otherwise stating or implying that the product was made or assembled in the United States unless-- ``(1) each individual providing direct labor in production of such textile fiber product was paid a wage equal to or greater than the wage set by section 8; and ``(2) the product was manufactured in compliance with all Federal laws relating to labor rights and working conditions, including, but not limited to, the National Labor Relations Act, the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, and the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938.
A textile fiber product which does not comply with subsection (a) shall be deemed to be misbranded for purposes of the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act (15 United States Code 70 et sequentes).
Definition.--For purposes of this section the term `direct labor' includes any work provided to prepare, assemble, process, package, or transport a textile fiber product, but does not include supervisory, management, security, or administrative work.
''; (2) by adding, after the new section added by paragraph (1), the following new section: ``SEC.
``The minimum wage provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et sequentes), shall apply to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, except that-- ``(1) through December 31, 1997, the minimum wage applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands shall be $3.55 per hour; ``(2) on January 1, 1998, and on July 1 and January 1 of each year thereafter, the minimum wage applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands shall be $0.50 per hour more than the minimum wage that was applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands for the preceding six-month period until the minimum wage applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands is equal to the minimum wage rate set forth in section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938; and ``(3) after the minimum wage applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands is equal to the minimum wage rate set forth in section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938, pursuant to paragraph (2), the minimum wage applicable to the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands shall increase as necessary to remain equal to the minimum wage rate set forth in section 6(a)(1) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938.
''; and (3) by adding, after the new sections added by paragraphs (1) and (2), the following new section: ``SEC.
APPLICABILITY OF IMMIGRATION LAWS.
``Section 506(a) of the foregoing Covenant shall be construed and applied as if it included at the end the following subsection: ```(e)(1) For purposes of entry into the Northern Mariana Islands by any individual (but not for purposes of entry by an individual into the United States from the Northern Mariana Islands), the Immigration and Nationality Act shall apply as if the Northern Mariana Islands were a State (as defined in section 101(a)(36) of the Immigration and Nationality Act).
The Attorney General, acting through the Commissioner of Immigration and Naturalization, shall enforce the preceding sentence.
Notwithstanding paragraph (1), with respect to an individual seeking entry into the Northern Mariana Islands for purposes of employment in the textile, hotel, tourist, or construction industry (including employment as a contractor), the Federal statutes and regulations governing admission to Guam of individuals described in section 101(a)(15)(H)(ii)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act shall apply.
Such statutes and regulations shall be so applied by substituting the term ``United States citizen, national, or resident workers'' for the term ``United States resident workers'', and by substituting the term ``the Northern Mariana Islands'' for the term ``Guam'' each place it appears.
When deploying personnel to enforce the provisions of this section, the Attorney General shall coordinate with, and act in conjunction with, State and local law enforcement agencies to ensure that such deployment does not degrade or compromise the law enforcement capabilities and functions currently performed by immigration officers.'.''.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall include the results of the study required by subsection (b) in the annual report transmitted to Congress which is entitled ``Federal-CNMI Initiative on Labor, Immigration, and Law Enforcement''.
Study.--A study shall be conducted of the extent of human rights violations and labor rights violations in the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, including the use of forced or indentured labor, and any efforts being taken by the government of the United States or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Island to address or prohibit such violations.
Consultation Regarding Study.--Appropriate local government officials, law enforcement agencies, and non-governmental organizations active in instituting and protecting human and labor rights may be consulted when preparing and conducting the study required by subsection (b).
EFFECT ON OTHER LAW.
The provisions of paragraph (1) of section 3 shall be in addition to, but shall not otherwise modify, the requirements of the Textile Fiber Products Identification Act (15 United States Code 70 et sequentes).
Labeling of Textile Fiber Products; Immigration of Workers.-- The amendment made by paragraph (1) of section 3 and the provision of the amendment made by paragraph (3) of section 3 which is designated as ``(e)(2)'' shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Minimum Wage.--The amendment made by paragraph (2) of section 3 shall take effect 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Immigration.--Except as provided in subsection (a), the amendment made by paragraph (3) of section 3 shall apply to individuals entering the Northern Mariana Islands after the expiration of the 6- month period beginning with the date of the enactment of this Act.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.