This Act may be cited as the ``Battle of Midway National Memorial Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) September 2, 1995, marks the 50th anniversary of the United States victory over Japan in World War II.
The Battle of Midway proved to be the turning point in the war in the Pacific, as United States Navy forces inflicted such severe losses on the Imperial Japanese Navy during the battle that the Imperial Japanese Navy never again took the offensive against United States or allied forces.
During the Battle of Midway, an outnumbered force of the United States Navy, consisting of 29 ships and other units of the Armed Forces under the command of Admiral Nimitz and Admiral Spruance, out-maneuvered and out-fought 350 ships of the Imperial Japanese Navy.
It is in the public interest to erect a memorial to the Battle of Midway that is suitable to express the enduring gratitude of the American people for victory in the battle and to inspire future generations of Americans with the heroism and sacrifice of the members of the Armed Forces who achieved that victory.
In General.--There is established the Battle of Midway National Memorial (referred to in this Act as the ``Memorial'').
Lease of Land.--The Secretary of the Navy shall lease to the International Midway Memorial Foundation, Inc. (referred to in this Act as the ``Foundation''), for use as a Memorial for the Battle of Midway, the lands (including any equipment, facilities, infrastructure, and other improvements to such lands) and waters of the Midway Islands that are owned by the United States, are within the jurisdiction of the Secretary, and are designated as historic landmarks.
Terms and Conditions of Lease.-- (1) Term of lease.--The lease under this subsection shall be for a term of 99 years.
Consideration.--As consideration for the lease under this subsection, the Foundation shall pay to the United States the amount of $1 per year for each year of the term of the lease.
The Secretary shall deposit the amount in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
Management.--In managing the Memorial, the Foundation shall-- (1) determine the boundaries of all properties, including those comprising the airstrip on Eastern Island, bunkers, cable buildings, and gun emplacements on the Midway Atolls, which the Secretary of the Interior shall designate as historic landmarks open to the public; (2) maintain the lands (including any equipment, facilities, infrastructure, and other improvements to such lands) and waters that are so designated; (3) continue management of the remainder of Midway Atolls as a wildlife refuge; (4) provide for use of the waters, shoals, and reefs adjacent to the Midway Islands consistent with protection of the natural habitat of the Hawaiian monk seal and the green sea turtle; (5) allow facilities on Sand Island to continue to function as-- (A) a Coast Guard air-sea rescue facility; (B) a commercial air terminal; (C) a private and contract aircraft refueling site; and (D) a seaport facility; (6) at its discretion, erect such structures and facilities on Sand Island as the Foundation considers necessary to support visitors to the Memorial; and (7) establish a Battle of Midway Memorial Museum on Sand Atoll.
Access Requirements.-- (1) Access by foundation.--The Secretary shall provide the Foundation such access to the lands and waters covered by the lease under subsection (b) as the Foundation shall require in order to improve, operate, and maintain the Memorial.
Access by others.--The Secretary shall not limit the number of members of the public who may have access to the Midway Islands or to the Memorial established under this Act.
Performance of Functions Under Contract.--The Foundation may perform any of its functions under this Act through contracts with private entities under such terms and conditions as the Foundation considers to be in the best interests of the Memorial, including provisions for payment of a portion of the revenues derived from operations under contract into the fund established under subsection (h) in appropriate amounts to assist in the accomplishment of the purposes described in paragraph (3) of that subsection.
Advisory Assistance for Foundation.--The Secretary shall appoint an advisory board which shall provide advisory services to the Foundation for the Memorial.
The Secretary shall appoint as members of the advisory board the following: (1) Appropriate employees of the Department of Defense.
In consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, appropriate employees of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and of the National Park Service.
In consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, appropriate employees of the Coast Guard.
Individuals from the private sector.
Members of the Foundation.
Battle of Midway Memorial Fund.-- (1) Establishment.--The Foundation shall establish a fund to be known as the ``Battle of Midway Memorial Fund'' (referred to in this section as the ``Fund'').
Transfers into the fund.--There shall be transferred quarterly into the Fund-- (A) user fees and other revenues collected directly by the Foundation; (B) payments required by contracts under subsection (f); and (C) donations received from private sources.
Purposes.--The Foundation may use amounts in the Fund to pay the costs of making capital improvements to, maintaining, and operating the Memorial.