This Act may be cited as the ``Coastal Pollution Reduction Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The existing discharge from the Mayaguez publicly owned treatment works is to the stressed waters of Mayaguez Bay, an area containing severely degraded coral reefs, and relocation of that discharge to unstressed ocean waters could benefit the marine environment.
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act should, consistent with the environmental goals of the Act, be administered with sufficient flexibility to take into consideration the unique characteristics of Mayaguez, Puerto Rico.
Some deep ocean areas off the coastline of Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, might be able to receive a less-than-secondary sewage discharge while still maintaining healthy and diverse marine life.
A properly designed and operated deep ocean outfall off the coast of Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, coupled with other pollution reduction activities in the Mayaguez Watershed could facilitate compliance with the requirements and purposes of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act without the need for more costly treatment.
The owner or operator of the Mayaguez publicly owned treatment works should be afforded an opportunity to make the necessary scientific studies and submit an application proposing use of a deep ocean outfall for review by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under section 301(h) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Application for Secondary Treatment Waiver for Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, Deep Ocean Outfall.--Section 301 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1311) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(q) Application for Waiver.-- ``(1) Study.--In order to be eligible to apply for a waiver under this section, the owner or operator of the Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, publicly owned treatment works shall transmit to the Administrator a report on the results of a study of the marine environment of coastal areas in the Mayaguez area to determine the feasibility of constructing a deep ocean outfall for the Mayaguez treatment works.
In conducting the study, the owner or operator shall consider variations in the currents, tidal movement, and other hydrological and geological characteristics at any proposed outfall location.
Such study may recommend one or more technically feasible and environmentally acceptable locations for a deep ocean outfall intended to meet the requirements of subsection (h).
Such study may be initiated, expanded, or continued not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
Section 301(h) application for mayaguez, puerto rico.--Notwithstanding subsection (j)(1)(A), not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection, an application may be submitted for a modification pursuant to subsection (h) of the requirements of subsection (b)(1)(B) by the owner or operator of the Mayaguez, Puerto Rico, publicly owned treatment works at a location recommended in a study conducted pursuant to paragraph (1).
Such application shall not be subject to the application revision procedures of section 125.59(d) of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations.
No such application may be filed unless and until the applicant has entered into a binding consent decree with the United States that includes, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) A schedule and milestones to ensure expeditious compliance with the requirements of subsection (b)(1)(B) in the event the requested modification is denied, including interim effluent limits and design activities to be undertaken while the application is pending.
A schedule and interim milestones to ensure expeditious compliance with the requirements of any modification of subsection (b)(1)(B) in the event the requested modification is approved.
A commitment by the applicant to contribute not less than $400,000 to the Mayaguez Watershed Initiative in accordance with such schedules as may be specified in the consent decree.
Initial determination.--On or before the 270th day after the date of submittal of an application under paragraph (2) that has been deemed complete by the Administrator, the Administrator shall issue to the applicant a tentative determination regarding the requested modification.
Final determination.--On or before the 270th day after the date of issuance of the tentative determination under paragraph (3), the Administrator shall issue a final determination regarding the modification.
Additional condition.--The Administrator may not grant a modification pursuant to an application submitted under this subsection unless the Administrator determines that the new deep water ocean outfall will use a well-designed and operated diffuser that discharges into unstressed ocean waters and is situated so as to avoid discharge (or transport of discharged pollutants) to coral reefs, other sensitive marine resources or recreational areas, and shorelines.
Effectiveness.--If a modification is granted pursuant to an application submitted under this subsection, such modification shall be effective only if the new deepwater ocean outfall is operational on or before the date that is 4\1/2\ years after the date of the Administrator's initial tentative determination on the application.''.
Grants for Comprehensive Conservation and Management Plans.-- Section 320(g)(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1330(g)(2)) is amended by inserting ``and implementation'' after ``development''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 320(i) of such Act (33 United States Code 1330(i)) is amended by striking ``1987'' and all that follows through ``1991'' and inserting the following: ``1987 through 1991, such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1992 through 1997, and $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1998''.
Passed the House of Representatives November 13, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.