This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Electronic and Information Technology Accessibility Compliance Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) There are approximately 145,000 Federal employees with disabilities and these employees comprise 7.5 percent of the Federal workforce.
(A) Although section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794d) requires Federal agencies to comply with Federal guidelines to ensure that electronic and information technology used by such agencies is accessible to individuals with disabilities, there is no enforcement mechanism in such Act to provide for compliance.
As a result, Federal agencies have an uneven record of offering accessible technologies to their employees with disabilities.
(A) States or other recipients of assistance under section 102 of the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals With Disabilities Act of 1988 (29 United States Code 2212) currently are required to comply with the guidelines established under section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
The authority for section 102 of the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals With Disabilities Act of 1988 is expected to expire in 1998, eliminating the link between the States and the guidelines established under section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to strengthen compliance by Federal agencies with the guidelines established under section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794d); and (2) to require States to continue to comply with such guidelines.
REQUIREMENT THAT FEDERAL AGENCIES PROVIDE CERTIFICATION OF COMPLIANCE WITH ELECTRONIC AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES UNDER THE REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973.
Section 508(b) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C 794d(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Compliance.-- ``(1) In general.--Each Federal agency shall comply with the guidelines established under this section.
Certification.-- ``(A) Establishment of certification procedures.-- The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall establish uniform procedures under which the head of each Federal agency shall submit to the Director a written certification, containing such information as the Director may reasonably require, that such agency is in compliance with the guidelines established under this section.
Submission of certification.--Not later than September 30 of each year, the head of each Federal agency shall submit to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget a written certification in accordance with the procedures established under subparagraph (A).
Review of certification.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget-- ``(i) shall review each certification submitted by each Federal agency under subparagraph (B); and ``(ii) shall provide notice to each such Federal agency that such agency is either in compliance or not in compliance with the guidelines established under this section, as the case may be.
Assistance for and monitoring of agencies not in compliance.--In the case of a Federal agency that is not in compliance with the guidelines established under this section, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget-- ``(i) shall assist such agency in efforts to comply with such guidelines; and ``(ii) shall monitor the progress of such agency to comply with such guidelines.''.
REQUIREMENT THAT STATES CONTINUE TO COMPLY WITH ELECTRONIC AND INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY ACCESSIBILITY GUIDELINES UNDER TITLE I OF THE REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973.
In General.--Section 101(a) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 U.S.C 721(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (35), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (36), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(37) provide assurances that the State, or any recipient of funds made available to the State under this title, will comply with the guidelines established under section 508(a).''.
Effective Date.--Paragraph (37) of section 101(a) of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.