This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Benefits Programs Modification Act of 2001''.
EXCLUSION OF CERTAIN ADDITIONAL INCOME FROM DETERMINATIONS OF ANNUAL INCOME FOR PENSION PURPOSES.
Life Insurance Proceeds.--Section 1503(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (9), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (10), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph (11): ``(11) proceeds of any life insurance policy of a veteran; and''.
Other Non-Recurring Income.--That section is further amended by inserting after paragraph (11), as added by subsection (a)(3) of this section, the following new paragraph (12): ``(12) any other non-recurring income from any source.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 2002, and shall apply with respect to determinations of annual income under section 1503 of title 38, United States Code, as so amended, on or after that date.
EFFECTIVE DATES OF AWARDS AND REDUCTIONS AND DISCONTINUANCES OF BENEFITS.
Repeal of 45-Day Rule for Effective Date of Award of Death Pension.--Section 5110(d) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``(1)''; and (2) by striking paragraph (2).
Effective Date of Change in Recurring Income for Benefits Purposes.--Section 5112(b)(4) of that title is amended by striking subparagraph (A) and inserting the following new subparagraph (A): ``(A) change in recurring income will be the last day of the calendar year in which the change occurred (with the pension rate for the following calendar year based on all anticipated countable income); and''.
TIME LIMITATION ON RECEIPT OF CLAIM INFORMATION PURSUANT TO REQUEST BY DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
In General.--Section 5102 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Time Limitation.--(1) If information that a claimant and the claimant's representative, if any, are notified under section 5103(a) of this title is necessary to complete an application is not received by the Secretary within one year from the date of such notification, no benefit may be paid or furnished by reason of the claimant's application.
This subsection shall not apply to any application or claim for Government life insurance benefits.''.
Repeal of Superseded Provisions.--Section 5103 of that title is amended-- (1) by striking ``(a) Required Information and Evidence.-- ''; and (2) by striking subsection (b).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if enacted on November 9, 2000, immediately after the enactment of the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (Public Law 106-475; 114 United States Statutes at Large 2096).
CLARIFICATION OF EFFECTIVE DATE OF MODIFICATIONS OF DUTY TO ASSIST.
Clarification.--Section 7 of the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000 (Public Law 106-475; 114 United States Statutes at Large 2096; 38 United States Code 5107 note) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``the provisions of section 5107 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 4 of this Act'' and inserting ``the amendments to chapter 51 of title 38, United States Code, made by this Act''; and (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and not final as of that date'' and inserting ``in which a decision had not been issued by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs before that date''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking ``Rule for Claims the Denial of Which Became Final After the Court of Appeals for Veterans Claims Decision in the Morton Case.--(1)'' and inserting ``(1)''; and (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``that--'' and all that follows through the end of the paragraph and inserting the following: ``that-- ``(A) became final during the period beginning on July 14, 1999, and ending on the date of the enactment of this Act and was issued by the Secretary or a court because the claim was not well grounded (as that term was used in section 5107(a) of title 38, United States Code, as in effect during that period); or ``(B) did not become final before the date of the enactment of this Act.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Veterans Claims Assistance Act of 2000, to which such amendments relate.
PROHIBITION ON PROVIDING CERTAIN BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO VETERANS WHO ARE FUGITIVE FELONS.
Prohibition.--(1) Chapter 53 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5313A the following new section: ``Sec.
Prohibition on providing certain benefits with respect to veterans who are fugitive felons ``(a) A veteran described in subsection (b), or dependent of the veteran, who is otherwise eligible for a benefit described in subsection (c) may not be paid or otherwise provided such benefit during any period in which the veteran is a fugitive as described in subsection (b).
(1) A veteran described in this subsection is a veteran who is a fugitive by reason of-- ``(A) fleeing to avoid prosecution, or custody or confinement after conviction, for an offense, or an attempt to commit an offense, which is a felony under the laws of the place from which the veteran flees; or ``(B) violating a condition of probation or parole imposed under Federal or State law.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `felony' includes a high misdemeanor under the laws of a State which characterizes as high misdemeanors offenses that would be felony offenses under Federal law.
A benefit described in this subsection is any benefit under the following: ``(1) Chapter 11 of this title.
Chapter 15 of this title.
Chapter 17 of this title.
Chapter 19 of this title.
Chapters 30, 31, 32, and 34 of this title.
Chapter 37 of this title.
(1) The Secretary shall furnish to any Federal, State, or local law enforcement official, upon the written request of such official, the most current address maintained by the Secretary of a veteran who is eligible for a benefit described in subsection (c) if such official-- ``(A) provides the Secretary such information as the Secretary may require to fully identify the veteran; ``(B) identifies the veteran as being a fugitive described in subsection (b); and ``(C) certifies to the Secretary that the location and apprehension of the veteran is within the official duties of such official.
The Secretary shall enter into memoranda of understanding with Federal law enforcement agencies, and may enter into agreements with State and local law enforcement agencies, for purposes of furnishing information to such agencies under paragraph (1).''.
The table of sections at the beginning of that chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5313A the following new item: ``5313B.
Prohibition on providing certain benefits with respect to veterans who are fugitive felons.''.
Sense of Congress on Entry Into Memoranda of Understanding and Agreements.--It is the sense of Congress that the memoranda of understanding and agreements referred to in section 5313B(d)(2) of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), should be entered into as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, but not later than six months after that date.
LIMITATION ON PAYMENT OF COMPENSATION FOR VETERANS REMAINING INCARCERATED FOR FELONIES COMMITTED BEFORE OCTOBER 7, 1980.
Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the payment of compensation to or with respect to a veteran described in subsection (b) shall, for the remainder of the period of incarceration of the veteran described in that subsection, be subject to the provisions of section 5313 of title 38, United States Code, other than subsection (d) of that section.
Covered Veterans.--A veteran described in this subsection is any veteran entitled to compensation who-- (1) was incarcerated on October 7, 1980, for a felony committed before that date; and (2) remains incarcerated for conviction of that felony after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall apply with respect to the payment of compensation for months beginning on or after that date.
Compensation Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``compensation'' shall have the meaning given that term in section 5313 of title 38, United States Code.
ELIGIBILITY FOR SURVIVORS' AND DEPENDENTS' EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE OF SPOUSES AND SURVIVING SPOUSES OF VETERANS WITH TOTAL SERVICE-CONNECTED DISABILITIES.
Designation of Eligibility.--Section 3501(a)(1)(D) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(D)''; and (2) by inserting ``(ii)'' after ``or''.
Restatement and Expansion of Treatment of Use of Eligibility.-- (1) Section 3511 of that title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Any entitlement used by any eligible person as a result of eligibility under section 3501(a)(1)(A)(iii), 3501(a)(1)(C), or 3501(a)(1)(D)(i) of this title shall be deducted from any entitlement to which such person may subsequently become entitled under this chapter.''.
Section 3512 of that title is amended by striking subsection (g).
Delimiting Period.-- (1) In general.--Section 3512(b) of that title is amended-- (A) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following new paragraph (1): ``(1)(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), a person made eligible by subparagraph (B) or (D) of section 3501(a)(1) of this title may be afforded educational assistance under this chapter during the 10-year period beginning on the date (as determined by the Secretary) the person became an eligible person within the meaning of section 3501(a)(1)(B), 3501(D)(i), or 3501(D)(ii) of this title.
In the case of a surviving spouse made eligible by clause (ii) of section 3501(a)(1)(D) of this title, the 10-year period may not be reduced by any earlier period during which the person was afforded educational assistance under this chapter as a spouse made eligible by clause (i) of that section.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), an eligible person referred to in that subparagraph may, subject to the Secretary's approval, elect a later beginning date for the 10-year period than would otherwise be applicable to the person under that subparagraph.
The beginning date so elected may be any date between the beginning date determined for the person under subparagraph (A) and whichever of the following dates applies: ``(i) The date the Secretary notifies the veteran from whom eligibility is derived that the veteran has a service-connected total disability permanent in nature.
The date on which the Secretary determines that the veteran from whom eligibility is derived died of a service- connected disability.
''; and (B) by striking paragraph (3).
Applicability.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to any determination (whether administrative or judicial) of the eligibility of a spouse or surviving spouse for educational assistance under chapter 35 of title 38, United States Code, made on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, whether pursuant to an original claim for such assistance or pursuant to a reapplication or attempt to reopen or readjudicate a claim for such assistance.
REPEAL OF FISCAL YEAR LIMITATION ON NUMBER OF VETERANS IN PROGRAMS OF INDEPENDENT LIVING SERVICES AND ASSISTANCE.
Repeal of Limitation.--Section 3120(e) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Programs'' and all that follows through ``such programs'' and inserting ``First priority in the provision of programs of independent living services and assistance under this section''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on September 30, 2001.
INCREASE IN HOME LOAN GUARANTY AMOUNT FOR CONSTRUCTION AND PURCHASE OF HOMES.
Section 3703(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$50,750'' each place it appears in subparagraphs (A)(i)(IV) and (B) and inserting ``$63,175''.