This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Independence Through Presidential Leadership Act''.
PRESIDENTIAL LEADERSHIP TO ENACT COMPREHENSIVE ENERGY POLICY.
Congressional Findings.--The Congress finds that: (1) The United States increasingly depends on foreign nations to supply its energy needs.
That dependence leaves the United States increasingly vulnerable to the whims of foreign nations and constitutes a grave and worsening threat to our national security and our economy.
Lessening this dependence is not easy, and it cannot be done in a short period of time.
The United States can lessen its dependence over a longer period of time by enacting a comprehensive energy policy designed to address the numerous elements of the problem.
Those elements include: increased domestic energy production consistent with reasonable environmental guidelines, increased domestic refining and transportation capacity consistent with reasonable environmental guidelines, increased diplomatic pressure on foreign nations that produce oil, increased energy efficiency of engines and generation facilities, increased use of renewable energy sources throughout our economy, and a reformed excise tax structure.
Because the elements of a comprehensive energy policy are so varied--involving many groups within society and the jurisdiction of many government agencies and congressional committees--Congress can only enact such a policy with committed leadership from the President.
In the meantime, Congress and the President should provide some minimal relief for consumers hit by high gasoline prices.
Sense of Congress Resolution.--It is the sense of Congress that the President should take immediate and appropriate action to lead the United States in developing and enacting a comprehensive energy policy to lessen our dependence on foreign nations to supply our energy needs.
IMMEDIATE CONSUMER RELIEF THROUGH REPEAL OF DEFICIT REDUCTION TAX.
Highway Gasoline.--Clause (i) of section 4081(a)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``18.3 cents'' and inserting ``14 cents''.
Diesel Fuel and Kerosene.--Clause (iii) of section 4081(a)(2)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``24.3 cents'' and inserting ``20 cents''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (B) of section 40(e)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``during which the rates of tax under section 4081(a)(2)(A) are 4.3 cents per gallon'' and inserting ``during which the rate of tax under section 4081(a)(2)(A)(i) does not apply''.
Clauses (i) and (ii) of section 4041(m)(1)(A) of such Code are amended to read as follows: ``(i) 7 cents per gallon on and after the date of the enactment of this clause and before October 1, 2005, and ``(ii) zero after September 30, 2005, and''.
Subsection (c) of section 4081 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (6) and by redesignating paragraphs (7) and (8) as paragraphs (6) and (7), respectively.
Paragraph (1) of section 4081(d) of such Code is amended by striking ``4.3 cents per gallon'' and inserting ``zero''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Floor Stock Refunds.-- (1) In general.--If-- (A) before the date of the enactment of this Act, tax has been imposed under section 4081 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 on any liquid, and (B) on such date such liquid is held by a dealer and has not been used and is intended for sale, there shall be credited or refunded (without interest) to the person who paid such tax (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the ``taxpayer'') an amount equal to the excess of the tax paid by the taxpayer over the amount of such tax which would be imposed on such liquid had the taxable event occurred on such date.
Time for filing claims.--No credit or refund shall be allowed or made under this subsection unless-- (A) claim therefor is filed with the Secretary of the Treasury before the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, based on a request submitted to the taxpayer before the date which is 3 months after such date of enactment, by the dealer who held the liquid on such date of enactment, and (B) the taxpayer has repaid or agreed to repay the amount so claimed to such dealer or has obtained the written consent of such dealer to the allowance of the credit or the making of the refund.
Exception for fuel held in retail stocks.--No credit or refund shall be allowed under this subsection with respect to any liquid in retail stocks held at the place where intended to be sold at retail.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the terms ``dealer'' and ``held by a dealer'' have the respective meanings given to such terms by section 6412 of such Code.
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (b) and (c) of section 6412 of such Code shall apply for purposes of this subsection.