This Act may be cited as the ``Nuclear Secrets Safety Act of 2000''.
INVENTORY OF RESTRICTED DATA AT NATIONAL SECURITY LABORATORIES.
Inventory Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator for Nuclear Security shall conduct an inventory of each document or device at each national security laboratory that contains Restricted Data and shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives a report containing the results of that inventory.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``national security laboratory'' has the meaning given such term in section 3281 of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act (50 United States Code 2471).
The term ``Restricted Data'' has the meaning given such term in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 11 y. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2014(y)).
INCREASED SECURITY FOR VAULTS AT NATIONAL SECURITY LABORATORIES.
Access to Vaults.--(1) Section 3234 of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act (50 United States Code 2424) is amended-- (A) by striking ``The Administrator'' and inserting ``(a) Procedures Required.--The Administrator''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Access to Vaults at National Security Laboratories.--With respect to any vault containing Restricted Data at any national security laboratory, the procedures shall, at a minimum, provide that an individual shall not have unrestricted access to any such vault except in accordance with the following requirements: ``(1) Before each such access, the identity of the individual is verified by-- ``(A) an attendant through direct visual observation; ``(B) biometric technology; or ``(C) other means providing a high confidence level in verifying the identity of the individual.
For each such access, a permanent record of such access is maintained.
Change of Lock Combinations to Vaults at National Security Laboratories.--The Administrator shall ensure, for each vault containing Restricted Data at each national security laboratory, that the combination of each lock to such vault is changed not later than-- ``(1) one week after each removal of an individual from the list of individuals permitted access to such vault; and ``(2) 12 months after the date on which the combination was last changed.''.
The requirements of subsection (b) of section 3234 of such Act (as added by paragraph (1)) shall apply to each access referred to in that subsection that occurs after the expiration of the 24-hour period beginning upon the enactment of this Act.
The Administrator for Nuclear Security shall ensure, for each vault containing Restricted Data at each national security laboratory, that the combination of each lock to such vault is changed not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Report on NNSA Polygraph Policy.--(1) Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator for Nuclear Security shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives a report on the policy recommendations of the Adminstrator regarding the use of counterintelligence polygraph examinations within the National Nuclear Security Administration.
The report shall contain the recommendations of the Administrator as to what the policy of the Administration should be regarding-- (A) the use of such examinations generally as a prerequisite to access (restricted or unrestricted) to Restricted Data; and (B) the use of such examinations as a prerequisite to access (restricted or unrestricted) to vaults containing Restricted Data.
For purposes of this section, the term ``Restricted Data'' has the meaning given such term in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 11 y. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2014(y)).
USE OF ELECTRONIC LOCKS FOR CLASSIFIED AREAS AND CLASSIFIED INFORMATION OF NATIONAL NUCLEAR SECURITY ADMINISTRATION.
Section 3234 of the National Nuclear Security Administration Act (50 United States Code 2424), as amended by section 3 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Electronic Locks Required.--The Administrator shall ensure that, after October 1, 2002, each lock used by the Administration to secure any vault, safe, or other container used to store Restricted Data is an electronic lock that meets or exceeds the FF-L-2740A lock standard of the General Services Administration, as in effect on the date of the enactment of the Nuclear Secrets Safety Act of 2000.''.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to require an inventory of documents and devices containing Restricted Data at the national security laboratories of the National Nuclear Security Administration, to improve security procedures for access to the vaults containing Restricted Data at those laboratories, and for other purposes.