This Act may be cited as the ``Indian Financing Act Reform Amendment''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Indian Financing Act of 1974 (Public Law 93-262; 88 United States Statutes at Large 77 et sequentes) was intended to provide Native American borrowers with access to commercial capital sources which otherwise would not be available through loans guaranteed or insured by the Secretary of the Interior.
Although the Secretary has made loan guarantees and insurance available, their use by lenders to benefit Native American business borrowers has been limited.
27 years after the date of the enactment of the Indian Financing Act of 1974, the promotion and development of Native American-owned business remains an essential foundation for growth of economic and social stability of Native Americans.
Commercial lenders' use of the available loan insurance and guarantees may be limited by liquidity and other capital market-driven concerns.
It is in the best interest of the Secretary's insured and guaranteed loan program to encourage the orderly development and expansion of a secondary market, for loans guaranteed or insured by the Secretary of the Interior, and expand the number of lenders originating loans under the Indian Financing Act of 1974.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to reform and clarify the Indian Financing Act of 1974 in order to-- (1) stimulate the use by lenders of secondary market investors for loans guaranteed or insured by the Secretary; (2) preserve the authority of the Secretary to administer the program and regulate lenders; (3) clarify that a good faith investor in loans insured or guaranteed by the Secretary will receive appropriate payments; (4) provide for the appointment by the Secretary of a qualified fiscal transfer agent which will establish and administer a system for the orderly transfer of such loans; (5) authorize the Secretary to develop regulations to encourage and expand a secondary market program for loans guaranteed or insured by the Secretary and to allow the pooling of such loans as the secondary market develops; and (6) authorize the Secretary to establish a schedule for assessing lenders and investors for the necessary costs of the fiscal transfer agent and system.
AMENDMENT OF THE INDIAN FINANCING ACT.
Limitation on Loan Amounts Without Prior Approval.--Section 204 of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 (25 United States Code 1484) is amended by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$250,000''.
Sale or Assignment of Loans and Underlying Security.--Section 205 of such Act (25 United States Code 1485) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Any loan''; (2) by inserting ``insured or'' before ``guaranteed''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(b)(1) The lender of a loan insured or guaranteed under this title may transfer to any individual or legal entity all of the lender's rights and obligations in such loan or in the unguaranteed or uninsured portion thereof, and the security given therefor.
Such transfer shall be consistent with such regulations as the Secretary shall establish, and the lender shall give notice of such transfer to the Secretary or the Secretary's designee.
Upon any transfer permitted by this subsection, the transferee shall be deemed to be the lender under this title, shall become the secured party of record, and shall be responsible for performing the duties of the lender and for serving the loan in accordance with the terms of the Secretary's guarantee thereof.
(1) The lender of a loan insured or guaranteed under this title, and any subsequent transferee of all or part of the insured or guaranteed portion of such loan, may transfer to any individual or legal entity all or part of the insured or guaranteed portion of such loan and the security therefor.
Such transfer shall be consistent with such regulations as the Secretary shall establish, and the transferor shall give notice of such transfer to the Secretary or the Secretary's designee.
The Secretary or the Secretary's designee shall issue to the transferee the Secretary's acknowledgement of the transfer and of the transferee's interest in the guaranteed or insured portion of the loan.
Notwithstanding any transfer permitted by this subsection, the lender shall-- ``(A) remain obligated on its guarantee agreement or insurance agreement with the Secretary; ``(B) continue to be responsible for servicing the loan in a manner consistent with such guarantee agreement or insurance agreement; and ``(C) remain the secured creditor of record.
The full faith and credit of the United States is pledged to the payment of all loan guarantees and loan insurance made under this title after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
The validity of a guarantee of, or insurance of, a loan shall be incontestable in the hands of a transferee of the guaranteed or insurance obligations whose interest in a guaranteed loan or insurance has been acknowledged by the Secretary, or by the Secretary's designee, except if the transferee has actual knowledge of fraud or misrepresentation, or participates in or condones fraud or misrepresentation in connection with the loan.
Notwithstanding section 3302 of title 31, United States Code (commonly known as the `Miscellaneous Receipts Act'), the Secretary may recover from the lender any damages suffered by the Secretary as a result of a material breach of the lender's obligations under the Secretary's guarantee or insurance of the loan.
The Secretary may collect a fee for any loan or guaranteed or insured portion thereof transferred in accordance with subsection (g).
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall develop such procedures and shall adopt such regulations as are necessary for the facilitation, administration, and promotion of transfers of loans and guaranteed and insured portions thereof under this section.
Upon adoption of final regulations, the Secretary shall provide for a central registration of all guaranteed or insured loans transferred pursuant to this section and shall contract with a fiscal transfer agent to act as the Secretary's designee and to carry out on behalf of the Secretary the central registration and paying agent functions and issuance of the Secretary's acknowledgement required by subsection (b).
Nothing in this title prohibits the pooling of whole loans or interests in loans transferred under this section.
The Secretary may issue regulations to effect orderly and efficient pooling procedures.