This Act may be cited as the ``Prevent Act of 2003''.
BUSINESS CREDIT FOR SECURITY DEVICES, ASSESSMENTS, AND OTHER SECURITY-RELATED EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN BUSINESS SECURITY EXPENDITURES.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the building security credit determined under this section is an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) 20 percent of the cost of each qualified building securities device placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year, ``(2) 30 percent of the qualified security assessment expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year, and ``(3) 30 percent of the co-location property placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Qualified Building Security Device.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified building security device.--The term `qualified building security device' means a security device (to which section 168 applies)-- ``(A) which is acquired by purchase (as defined in section 179(d)(2)), and ``(B) which is used to provide security for any building used by the taxpayer in any trade or business.
Security device.--The term `security device' means any of the following: ``(A) An electronic access control device or system.
Biometric identification or verification device or system.
Closed-circuit television or other surveillance and security cameras and equipment.
Locks for doors and windows, including tumbler, key, and numerical or other coded devices.
Computers and software used to combat cyberterrorism.
Electronic alarm systems to provide detection notification and off-premises transmission of an unauthorized entry, attack, or fire.
An electronic device capable of tracking or verifying the presence of assets.
High efficiency air filtering systems.
Mechanical and non-mechanical vehicle arresting barricades.
Signal repeating devices for emergency response personnel wireless communication systems.
Components, wiring, system displays, terminals, auxiliary power supplies, computer systems, software, networking infrastructure and other equipment necessary or incidental to the operation of any item described in any of the preceding subparagraphs.
Qualified Security Assessment Expenses.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified security assessment expenses' means, with respect to any business premises of the taxpayer, expenses for a security analysis of such premises, including-- ``(1) the susceptibility of such premises to security threats, ``(2) the extent to which such threats can damage or interrupt business operations at such premises, and ``(3) identifying processes that ensure the continuity of business operations following such damage or interruption at such premises.
Co-Location Property.--The term `co-location property' means buildings and equipment the exclusive purpose of which is to replicate business operations of the taxpayer in the event of damage or interruption of such operations by a terrorism-related disaster, including all computer network, telecommunication network and business process equipment or any fraction thereof as considered necessary by the business.
Recapture of Credit in Certain Cases.-- ``(1) In general.--If the taxpayer uses co-location property for a purpose other than the purpose described in subsection (d) at any time during the 5-year period beginning on the date that such property is placed in service, then the tax imposed under this chapter for the taxable year in which such use occurs is increased by the credit recapture amount.
Credit recapture amount.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the credit recapture amount is an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed to the taxpayer under section 38 for all prior taxable years which would have resulted if no credit had been determined under this section with respect to such property, plus ``(B) interest at the underpayment rate established under section 6621 on the amount determined under subparagraph (A) for each prior taxable year for the period beginning on the due date for filing the return for the prior taxable year involved.
No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for interest described in subparagraph (B).
Special rules.-- ``(A) Tax benefit rule.--The tax for the taxable year shall be increased under paragraph (1) only with respect to credits allowed by reason of this section which were used to reduce tax liability.
In the case of credits not so used to reduce tax liability, the carryforwards and carrybacks under section 39 shall be appropriately adjusted.
No credits against tax.--Any increase in tax under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit under this chapter or for purposes of section 55.''.
Credit Treated as Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) the building security credit determined under section 45G(a).''.
No Carrybacks.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code (relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(11) No carryback of section 45g credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the building security credit determined under section 45G may be carried back to a taxable year ending before the date of the enactment of section 45G.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``45G.
Certain business security expenditures.''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.
Assessment expenses.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to qualified security assessment expenses paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.