The Congress finds that: (1) By Interstate Compact (Chapter 170 of the Laws of 1937 of the State of New York; Chapter 148 of the Laws of 1937 of the State of New Jersey) and by Resolution of the 75th Congress (H.J.
Resolution 445), the Palisades Interstate Park Commission was formed in 1937.
The Palisades Interstate Park Commission is the only interstate park management agency in the United States and is responsible for the management of 23 parks and historic sites in New York and New Jersey, consisting of 82,000 acres.
More than 8,000,000 national and international visitors per year seek outdoor recreational opportunities in the Palisades Park System.
The management of these sites is consistent with standards maintained by the National Park Service.
Sterling Forest is a biologically diverse 17,500 acre corporate-owned open space property on the New York/New Jersey border.
The property is a highly significant watershed area for northern New Jersey, and an important outdoor recreational asset in the Northeastern United States.
Clean drinking water flows from the property into a reservoir system which serves 25 percent of the population of the State of New Jersey.
Twenty- seven rare and endangered wildlife species have been identified at Sterling Forest by The Nature Conservancy.
The land supports a mixed hardwood forest, wetlands, lakes, glaciated valleys and ridge lines, and is strategically located on a north-south wildlife migratory route.
The Appalachian Trail, administered by the National Park Service, passes through Sterling Forest.
Sterling Forest shares a common boundary with the 51,680 acre Harriman/Bear Mountain State Parks in which the first segment of the Appalachian Trail was constructed in 1923.
If protected, Sterling Forest would greatly enhance the Appalachian Trail and would become the largest park created in the Northeastern United States since World War II.
Sterling Forest is located in the most densely populated metropolitan region in the United States, and is a very critical open space buffer for a large urban population.
A 14 percent growth rate is projected for the region in the next 20 years.
Lands held and managed by the Palisades Interstate Park Commission in the State of New York traditionally remain on the tax rolls.
Taxes are paid by the State.
Stewardship and management costs for lands in the Palisades Park System traditionally are paid by the States of New York and New Jersey.
The Palisades Interstate Park Commission is committed to a willing seller--willing buyer transaction with the corporate owners of Sterling Forest.
Use of eminent domain authority is not anticipated, nor would it be acceptable to the Palisades Interstate Park Commission.
In establishing the Federal Agencies Program for the Land and Water Conservation Fund, the Congress specified the need to address the increasing demand for the creation of recreation areas of national significance easily accessible to large centers of the population, and to provide a partial basis for financing the extension of Federal recreational facilities in the East and Midwest.
Given the nationally significant watershed, outdoor recreational, and wildlife attributes of Sterling Forest, the demand for park open space in the Northeastern United States, the lack of open space in the densely populated New York-New Jersey-Connecticut Tri-State Region, and the presence of a willing seller and a federally chartered interstate park management agency, there is clear Federal interest in acquiring land in Sterling Forest for permanent protection of watershed, recreational, and wild flora and fauna open space.
Funding.--In order to enhance protection of watershed, outdoor recreational, wildlife habitat, and Appalachian Trail values in the Sterling Forest area of the New York/New Jersey Highlands Region, there is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior for transfer to the Palisades Interstate Park Commission (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') for fiscal year 1995 not more than $35,000,000 to be used by the Commission for purposes of acquiring an undeveloped, open space tract of land presently owned by the Sterling Forest Corporation.
Such sums shall remain available for expenditure through fiscal year 1999.
Property Taxes.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize the United States Government, or relieve the Commission and the State of New York of any obligation otherwise imposed under New York State law, to pay property taxes or provide for the costs of stewardship and management of any lands located in the State of New York which may be acquired through this authorization.
Management.--The Commission shall hold and manage all property acquired with funds made available under this Act for the purposes referred to in subsection (a).