SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Child and Adult Care Food Program Integrity Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Eligibility criteria for participating organizations.
Approval of sponsoring organizations; other requirements.
Termination or suspension of participating organizations.
Recovery of amounts from institutions.
Limitation on administrative expenses for certain sponsoring organizations.
Limitations on ability of family or group day care homes to transfer sponsoring organizations.
Reallocation of audit funds.
Technical and training assistance for identification and prevention of fraud and abuse.
Statewide demonstration projects involving private for-profit organizations that provide nonresidential day care services.
Program for at-risk school children.
Withholding of funds for failure to provide sufficient training, technical assistance, and monitoring.
ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA FOR PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS.
Section 17(a)(2) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(a)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, or has not been determined to be ineligible to participate in any other Federal program by reason of violation of the requirements of such program'' before ``, for a period''; (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``; and'' and inserting ``, and in the case of a sponsoring organization, the organization shall employ an appropriate number of monitoring personnel based upon the number and characteristics of child care centers and family or group day care homes sponsored by the organization, as approved by the State (in accordance with regulations developed by the Secretary), to ensure effective oversight of the operations of the child care centers and family or group day care homes;''; (3) in subparagraph (D), by striking the period and inserting a semicolon; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(E) in the case of a sponsoring organization, that such organization has in effect a policy that restricts other employment by employees that interferes with the responsibilities and duties of such sponsoring organization employees with respect to the program; and ``(F) in the case of a private institution that applies for initial participation in the program on or after the date of the enactment of the Child and Adult Care Food Program Integrity Act of 2000, that, if the State requires such institutions to be bonded under State law, regulation, or policy, the institution is bonded in accordance with such law, regulation, or policy.''.
APPROVAL OF SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS; OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
Approval of Sponsoring Organizations.--Section 17(d)(1) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(d)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(d)(1) Any eligible public institution'' and inserting ``(d)(1)(A) Any eligible public institution''; (2) by striking ``Any eligible private institution'' and inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (B), any eligible private institution''; (3)(A) by striking ``(A) has tax exempt status'' and inserting ``(i) has tax exempt status''; and (B) by striking ``(B) is currently operating'' and inserting ``(ii) is currently operating''; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(B) In approving the initial application of a sponsoring organization for participation in the program, the State shall consider whether the sponsoring organization has the administrative capability to operate the program (including whether or not the sponsoring organization has business experience and management plans appropriate to operate the program), would fulfill an identified need under the program, and will meet the other requirements of this section.
In the case of a sponsoring organization of a family or group day care home seeking approval for participation in the program on or after the date of the enactment of the Child and Adult Care Food Program Integrity Act of 2000, the State may limit the number of such sponsoring organizations in any geographical area of the State if the State determines that a sufficient number of sponsoring organizations, based on identified and documented need, are available and able to serve the day care homes in the geographical area.''.
Site Visits.--Section 17(d)(2)(A) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(d)(2)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (2) by redesignating clause (ii) as clause (iii); and (3) by inserting after clause (i) the following: ``(ii)(I) requires periodic unannounced site visits at not less than 3-year intervals to sponsored child care centers and family or group day care homes to identify and prevent management deficiencies and fraud and abuse under the program; ``(II) requires at least one scheduled site visit each year to sponsored child care centers and family or group day care homes to identify and prevent management deficiencies and fraud and abuse under the program and to improve program operations; and ``(III) requires at least one scheduled site visit at not less than 3-year intervals to institutions to identify and prevent management deficiencies and fraud and abuse under the program and to improve program operations; and''.
Program Information.-- (1) In general.--Section 17(d) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Upon enrollment of a child in a sponsored child care center or family or group day care home participating in the program, the center or home (or its sponsoring organization) shall provide to the child's parents or guardians information that describes the program and its benefits and the name and telephone number of the sponsoring organization of the center or home and the State agency involved in the operation of the program.
The information described in subparagraph (A) shall be in a form and, to the extent practicable, language easily understandable by the child's parents or guardians.''.
Effective date.--In the case of a child that is enrolled in a sponsored child care center or family or group day care home participating in the child and adult care food program under section 17 of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766) before the date of the enactment of this Act, the center or home shall provide information to the child's parents or guardians pursuant to section 17(d)(3) of such Act, as added by paragraph (1), not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Allowable Administrative Expenses for Sponsoring Organizations.--Section 17(d) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(d)), as amended by subsection (c), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) The Secretary, in consultation with State agencies and sponsoring organizations, shall develop and provide for the dissemination to State agencies and institutions, of a list of allowable reimbursable administrative expenses for sponsoring organizations under the program.''.
TERMINATION OR SUSPENSION OF PARTICIPATING ORGANIZATIONS.
Section 17(d) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(d)), as amended by section (3), is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5)(A) The Secretary shall establish procedures for the termination of participation by institutions and sponsored child care centers and family or group day care homes under the program.
Procedures established pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall include standards for terminating the participation of an institution or sponsored child care center or family or group day care home that-- ``(i) engages in unlawful practices, falsifies information provided to the State agency, or conceals a criminal background; or ``(ii) substantially fails to fulfill the terms of its agreement with the State agency.
Procedures established pursuant to subparagraph (A)-- ``(i) shall require an entity described in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B) to undertake corrective action; and ``(ii) may require the immediate suspension of operation of the program by an entity described in clause (i) or (ii) of subparagraph (B), without the opportunity for corrective action, if the State agency determines that there is imminent threat to the health or safety of a participant at the entity or the entity engages in any activity that poses a threat to public health or safety.
An institution or sponsored child care center or family or group day care home shall be provided a fair hearing in accordance with subsection (e)(1) prior to any determination to terminate participation by the institution under the program.
The Secretary shall maintain a list of institutions, sponsored child care centers, sponsored family or group day care homes, and individuals that have been terminated or otherwise disqualified from participation in the program.
The Secretary shall make such list available to State agencies for use in approving or renewing applications by institutions, sponsored child care centers, sponsored family or group day care homes, and individuals for participation in the program.''.
RECOVERY OF AMOUNTS FROM INSTITUTIONS.
Section 17(f)(1) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(f)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(f)(1) Funds paid'' and inserting ``(f)(1)(A) Funds paid''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(B)(i) The State may recover funds disbursed under subparagraph (A) to an institution if the State determines that the institution has engaged in fraud or abuse with respect to the program or has submitted an invalid claim for reimbursement.
Amounts recovered under clause (i)-- ``(I) may be paid by the institution to the State over a period of 1 or more years; and ``(II) shall not be paid from funds used to provide meals and supplements.
An institution shall be provided a fair hearing in accordance with subsection (e)(1) prior to any determination to recover funds under this subparagraph.''.
LIMITATION ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES FOR CERTAIN SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS.
Section 17(f)(2) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(f)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(C)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), a sponsoring organization of a day care center may reserve not more than 15 percent of the funds provided under paragraph (1) for the administrative expenses of the organization.
A State may waive the requirement in clause (i) with respect to a sponsoring organization if the organization provides justification to the State that the organization requires funds in excess of 15 percent of the funds provided under paragraph (1) to pay such administrative expenses.''.
LIMITATIONS ON ABILITY OF FAMILY OR GROUP DAY CARE HOMES TO TRANSFER SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS.
Section 17(f)(3) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(f)(3)) is amended by striking subparagraph (D) and inserting the following: ``(D) Limitations on ability of family or group day care homes to transfer sponsoring organizations.-- ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), a State agency shall limit the ability of a family or group day care home to transfer from a sponsoring organization to another sponsoring organization more frequently than once a year.
Good cause.--The State agency may permit or require a family or group day care home to transfer from a sponsoring organization to another sponsoring organization more frequently than once a year for good cause (as determined by the State agency).
Such good cause may include circumstances where the sponsoring organization of the family or group day care home ceases to participate in the child and adult care food program.''.
REALLOCATION OF AUDIT FUNDS.
In General.--Section 17(i) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(i)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(i) The Secretary shall'' and inserting the following: ``(i) Audit Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Reallocation of funds.-- ``(A) Return to the secretary.--For each fiscal year, any amounts allocated to a State under this subsection that are not obligated during the fiscal year shall be returned to the Secretary in accordance with procedures established by the Secretary.
Reallocation by the secretary.--The Secretary shall allocate any amounts returned under subparagraph (A) among States that demonstrate a need for the amounts, for the purposes described in paragraph (1), in accordance with procedures established by the Secretary.
Annual report.--Each State agency administering the program that receives amounts for a fiscal year for the purpose of conducting audits of participating institutions pursuant to paragraph (1) shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a report that contains a summary description of the results of the audits and other activities conducted with such amounts.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 2000, or the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs later.
TECHNICAL AND TRAINING ASSISTANCE FOR IDENTIFICATION AND PREVENTION OF FRAUD AND ABUSE.
Section 17(q)(1) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(q)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``As part of such training and technical assistance, the Secretary shall provide training on a continuous basis to State agencies, and shall ensure that such training is provided to sponsoring organizations, for the identification and prevention of fraud and abuse under the program and to improve management of the program.''.
STATEWIDE DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS INVOLVING PRIVATE FOR-PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS THAT PROVIDE NONRESIDENTIAL DAY CARE SERVICES.
In General.--Section 17(p) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(p)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by striking ``2 statewide demonstration projects'' and inserting ``statewide demonstration projects in 4 States''; and (2) in paragraph (3)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(C) in 2 other States, as approved by the Secretary through a competitive application process.''.
Effective Date.--The Secretary of Agriculture may carry out demonstration projects in States described in section 17(p)(3)(C) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act, as added by subsection (a)(2)(C), beginning no earlier than October 1, 2001.
PROGRAM FOR AT-RISK SCHOOL CHILDREN.
Section 17(r) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1766(r)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``meals or'' before ``supplements''; (2) in paragraph (4)-- (A) in the heading, by striking ``Supplement'' and inserting ``Meal and supplement''; (B) in subparagraph (A)-- (i) by striking ``only for'' and all that follows through ``(i) a supplement'' and inserting ``only for one meal per child per day and one supplement per child per day''; (ii) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a period; and (iii) by striking clause (ii); (C) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``Rate.--A supplement'' and inserting the following: ``Rates.-- ``(i) Meals.--A meal shall be reimbursed under this subsection at the rate established for free meals under subsection (c).
Supplements.--A supplement''; and (D) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``meal or'' before ``supplement''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Limitation.--The Secretary shall limit reimbursement under this subsection for meals served under a program to institutions located in 6 States, as approved by the Secretary through a competitive application process.''.
WITHHOLDING OF FUNDS FOR FAILURE TO PROVIDE SUFFICIENT TRAINING, TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, AND MONITORING.
Section 7(a)(9)(A) of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1776(a)(9)(A)) is amended by inserting after ``the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes)'' the following: ``(including the requirement to provide sufficient training, technical assistance, and monitoring of the child and adult care food program under section 17(k) of the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act)''.