Congress finds the following: (1) It is in the national interest that all citizens, including active-duty service members, be allowed to vote in Federal elections.
Since 1977, active-duty service members serving overseas or on the United States mainland have been excluded from fully participating and voting in both general and runoff Federal elections in American Samoa due to several factors, including local law that requires active duty military members to register in person, limited air and mail service between the United States Reports mainland and American Samoa, and delays in the preparation of new ballots in the case of runoff elections.
American Samoa law requiring uniformed service voters to register to vote in person is contrary to the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff et seq.).
The Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act has been in effect for over 15 years, and American Samoa has not addressed this discrepancy between Federal and territorial law, despite notice that the discrepancy exists.
It is necessary to take additional action to ensure that the votes of uniformed voters are counted in Federal elections conducted in American Samoa and that active duty service members (including reservists called to active duty) do not need to appear in person to register to vote.
It is necessary to state that the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act supersedes American Samoa law and American Samoa must comply with this Federal law.
It is also in the national interest that, to the extent possible, Members of the United States House of Representatives and non-voting Delegates be elected in the first week of November in even-numbered years.
Since 1980, when the first election for the Congressional Delegate from American Samoa was held, there have been several general elections at which there was no final resolution of who was elected as the Delegate for the next Congress, and run-off elections were required.
When the outcome of the Delegate election is not resolved until a runoff election is held, a final determination of who the Delegate will be is not made known until late November.
A delayed outcome may place a newly elected Delegate in a more junior position to other Members of Congress elected on the first Tuesday after the first Monday of November in an election year.
When more than 2 candidates file to run for election for the office of Delegate, holding a primary election to reduce the number of candidates to 2 will greatly increase the likelihood that the general election will produce a candidate who receives a majority of the votes cast.
Section 2(a) of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide that the Territory of American Samoa be represented by a nonvoting Delegate to the United States House of Representatives, and for other purposes'', approved October 31, 1978 (48 United States Code 1732(a)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(2) In any general election year when 3 or more eligible individuals file by the first Tuesday of July as candidates for the office of Delegate, a primary election shall be held on the first Tuesday of August of that general election year.
If the primary election results in 1 candidate receiving more than 50 percent of the votes cast, then that candidate shall be the only candidate on the ballot for the general election for Delegate that year.
If the primary election results in no candidate receiving more than 50 percent of the votes cast, then the 2 candidates receiving the most votes cast shall be on the ballot for the general election year.
If there is a tie for the 2 candidates receiving the most votes, the names of the 2 candidates shall be listed on the ballot for that general election year.
Candidates for the office of Delegate to the United States House of Representatives must file their candidacy not later than the first Tuesday of July each year that a general election referred to in paragraph (1) is scheduled to be held.''.
Section 4 of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide that the Territory of American Samoa be represented by a nonvoting Delegate to the United States House of Representatives, and for other purposes'', approved October 31, 1978 (48 United States Code 1734), is amended by inserting ``in a general Federal election'' after ``ties between candidates''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on January 1, 2003.