This Act may be cited as the ``Competitive Communities Demonstration Act of 1994''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Traditionally, the Economic Development Administration has primarily helped communities develop the necessary public infrastructure to enable such communities to foster private sector investment and in many communities public infrastructure remains a critical enabler to economic development.
However, in many distressed communities the primary economic development challenge is not a lack of public infrastructure but rather a lack of supporting high growth, globally competitive private sector activities as a generator of quality jobs.
Therefore, building upon its existing network of programs, the Economic Development Administration should institute a Competitive Communities Demonstration Program to assist distressed communities develop the necessary economic base to compete in the global marketplace.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act include the following: (1) To enable the Economic Development Administration to become a more active partner in bringing community leadership together with competitive growth businesses to build a new competitive economic base in communities outside the mainstream of economic growth.
To raise the economic aspirations of such communities beyond the retention of the existing economic base to building a new competitive economic base for the future.
COMPETITIVE COMMUNITIES DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Title IX of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3241-3245) is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 905 as section 908; and (2) by inserting after section 904 the following: ``SEC.
COMPETITIVE COMMUNITIES DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish and carry out a Competitive Communities Demonstration Program (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `program') under which the Secretary may make grants to eligible intermediaries in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Eligible Intermediary Defined.--In this section, the term `eligible intermediary' means an economic development district established under title IV of this Act, an Indian tribe, a State, a city or other political subdivision of a State, a nonprofit organization, or a consortium of any of such entities which demonstrate the financial expertise, ability, and legal authority to make investments under the program, as well as the ability to develop and implement a community investment strategy.
Use of Grants.--A grant made to an eligible intermediary under the program shall be used by the eligible intermediary to provide financial assistance to high growth businesses in a distressed community.
Such financial assistance may include loans, loan guarantees, and payments to reduce interest on loan guarantees.
Grant Applications.--An eligible intermediary seeking a grant under the program shall submit to the Secretary a grant application which-- ``(1) identifies proposed uses of the grant amounts; ``(2) demonstrates that receipt of the grant amounts would be a determining factor in a business decision to proceed with an investment in a high growth business in a distressed community; ``(3) demonstrates that the proposed uses of the grant amounts are part of a community investment strategy for economic development; ``(4) contains assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the proceeds from the repayment of loans made by the eligible intermediary under the program will be used for purposes which are consistent with the purposes of the program; and ``(5) is in such form and contains such additional information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Panel of Experts.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a panel of experts to review grant applications submitted to the Secretary under the program.
Such panel shall consist of 7 members as follows: ``(A) The Secretary (or the Secretary's designee).
The Assistant Secretary for Economic Development.
1 Regional Director of the Economic Development Administration appointed by the Secretary.
1 Economic Development Representative of the Economic Development Administration appointed by the Secretary.
3 private citizens with economic development and business expertise appointed by the Secretary.
Diversity of members.-- In making appointments under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall seek to appoint members with diverse ethnic, cultural, and geographic backgrounds.
Selection of Grant Recipients.-- ``(1) In general.--Grant recipients under the program will be selected by the Secretary on the basis of recommendations made by the panel of experts established pursuant to subsection (e) after a merit-based comparative evaluation of proposed projects conducted as part of a national competition.
The national competition shall be held on a periodic basis.
Scoring system.--In order to make recommendations pursuant to paragraph (1), the panel shall rank the proposed projects by priority using a scoring system based on criteria described in subsection (g).
Geographic balance.--The project scoring system used pursuant to paragraph (2) shall be weighted to promote a balance among the regions of the United States and a balance among urban and rural areas; except that no specific formula may be used to apportion the projects between urban and rural areas.
Criteria To Be Used by Panel.-- ``(1) Criteria.--In recommending grant recipients under the program, the panel shall consider the following: ``(A) The role of the intermediary in the community, including the extent to which the intermediary has a clearly articulated role in the economic development strategy of the community and the extent to which such role is supported by both private sector and public sector leaders in the community.
The capacity of the eligible intermediary to participate in the program.
The business plans and prospects of the businesses which would receive assistance from the grant amounts.
The quantity and quality of jobs to be created or retained by the projects.
The commitment of the businesses to remain in the community.
The level of economic distress in the community involved.
The leveraging of non-Federal funds committed to the projects.
Special considerations.--In recommending grant recipients under the program, the panel shall give special consideration to the following applicants: ``(A) Applicants who operate existing revolving loan funds.
Applicants who have applied for designation as empowerment zones or enterprise communities under subchapter U of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 but have not received such designation because of the limited number of communities that may receive such designation.
Applicants who represent communities adversely affected by the closure or realignment of a military installation or by defense industry cutbacks.
Deadlines.-- ``(1) Submission of applications.--The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register deadlines for the submission of grant applications under the program.
Approval or disapproval of applications.--The Secretary shall approve or disapprove each grant application received by the Secretary under the program on or before the 60th day following the deadline for submission of such grant application established pursuant to paragraph (1).
Use of grant amounts.--Any grant agreement entered into by the Secretary and an eligible intermediary under the program shall require that the eligible intermediary provide assistance to businesses using the grant amounts on or before the 90th day after the date of receipt of such grant amounts or shall return any remaining portion of such grant amounts to the Secretary for subsequent grant awards under the program.
Funding.--Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this title for fiscal year 1995 $20,000,000 shall be available to carry out this section.''.
LOAN GUARANTEE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Title IX of such Act is further amended by inserting after section 905, as added by section 3 of this Act, the following: ``SEC.
LOAN GUARANTEE DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Authority To Guarantee Loans.--To the extent the Secretary considers appropriate to carry out the economic adjustment purposes of this title, the Secretary is authorized to guarantee loans made to private borrowers by private lending institutions, community development financial institutions, and other lenders.
Eligible Activities.--Activities for which loans may be guaranteed under this section include the development of land and facilities (including machinery and equipment) for industrial or commercial usage (such as the construction of new buildings, the rehabilitation of abandoned or unoccupied buildings, and alterations, conversion, or enlargement of existing buildings) and the provision of working capital.
Terms and Conditions.--The Secretary may make loan guarantees under this section upon application of the lenders and upon such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe; except that-- ``(1) no such guarantee shall at any time exceed 90 percent of the outstanding unpaid balance of such loans; and ``(2) no such guarantee shall be provided unless the lender or the lender's designee is responsible and makes adequate provision for servicing the loan on reasonable terms and for protecting the financial interests of the United States.
Full Faith and Credit.--Loan guarantees provided under this section shall have the full faith and credit of the United States.
Preferred Lenders.--To the extent feasible, the Secretary shall conduct the guarantee program established under this section on a preferred lenders basis and shall authorize lenders, in accordance with agreements entered into between the Secretary and such lenders, to take such actions on the Secretary's behalf as the Secretary considers appropriate, including the determination of eligibility and credit worthiness and loan monitoring, collections, and liquidation.
Funding.--Of the amounts appropriated to carry out this title for fiscal year 1995 $10,000,000 shall be available to carry out this section.''.
Title IX of such Act is further amended by inserting after section 906, as added by section 4 of this Act, the following: ``SEC.
``As part of the annual report to be transmitted to Congress under section 707 of this Act, the Secretary shall include an assessment of-- ``(1) the competitiveness of the economic base of the Nation's distressed areas; ``(2) the Nation's progress in encouraging investment in competitive businesses located in distressed areas outside the mainstream of economic growth; ``(3) the success of the Competitiveness Communities Demonstration Program authorized by section 905, including the number of grants provided under the program, the distribution of such grants among geographic regions and among urban and rural areas, the amount of non-Federal funds leveraged using such grants, and the quantity and quality of jobs created; and ``(4) the success of the loan guarantee program authorized by section 906, including the subsidy cost of loan guarantees made under the program.