This Act may be cited as the ``Meat Labeling Act of 1999''.
LABELING OF IMPORTED MEAT AND MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS.
Definitions.--Section 1 of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(w) Beef.--The term `beef' means meat produced from cattle (including veal).
Imported beef.--The term `imported beef' means beef that is not United States beef, whether or not the beef is graded with a quality grade issued by the Secretary.
Imported lamb.--The term `imported lamb' means lamb that is not United States lamb, whether or not the lamb is graded with a quality grade issued by the Secretary.
Imported pork.--The term `imported pork' means pork that is not United States pork.
Lamb.--The term `lamb' means meat, other than mutton, produced from sheep.
Pork.--The term `pork' means meat produced from hogs.
United states beef.-- ``(1) In general.--The term `United States beef' means beef produced from cattle slaughtered in the United States.
Exclusion.--The term `United States beef' does not include beef produced from cattle imported into the United States in sealed trucks for slaughter.
United states lamb.-- ``(1) In general.--The term `United States lamb' means lamb produced from sheep slaughtered in the United States.
Exclusion.--The term `United States lamb' does not include lamb produced from sheep imported into the United States in sealed trucks for slaughter.
United states pork.-- ``(1) In general.--The term `United States pork' means pork produced from hogs slaughtered in the United States.
Exclusion.--The term `United States pork' does not include pork produced from hogs imported into the United States in sealed trucks for slaughter.''.
Misbranding.--Section 1(n) of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601(n)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (11), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) in paragraph (12), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(13)(A) if it is imported beef, imported lamb, or imported pork offered for retail sale as muscle cuts of beef, lamb, or pork and does not bear a label that identifies its country of origin; ``(B) if it is United States beef, United States lamb, or United States pork offered for retail sale as muscle cuts of beef, lamb, or pork, and does not bear a label that identifies its country of origin; or ``(C) if it is United States or imported ground beef, ground lamb, or ground pork and is not accompanied by labeling that identifies it as United States beef, United States lamb, United States pork, imported beef, imported lamb, imported pork, or other designation that identifies the content of United States beef, imported beef, United States lamb, imported lamb, United States pork, and imported pork contained in the product, as determined by the Secretary.''.
Labeling.--Section 7 of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 607) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Mandatory Labeling.--The Secretary shall provide by regulation that the following offered for retail sale bear a label that identifies its country of origin: ``(1) Muscle cuts of United States beef, United States lamb, United States pork, imported beef, imported lamb, and imported pork.
Ground beef, ground lamb, and ground pork.
Audit Verification System for United States and Imported Muscle Cuts of Beef, Lamb, and Pork and Ground Beef, Lamb, and Pork.-- The Secretary may require by regulation that any person that prepares, stores, handles, or distributes muscle cuts of United States beef, imported beef, United States lamb, imported lamb, United States pork, imported pork, ground beef, ground lamb, or ground pork for retail sale maintain a verifiable recordkeeping audit trail that will permit the Secretary to ensure compliance with the regulations promulgated under subsection (g).''.
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall promulgate final regulations to carry out the amendments made by this section.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect 60 days after the date on which final regulations are promulgated under subsection (d).