This Act may be cited as the ``Pulmonary Fibrosis Research Enhancement Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Pulmonary fibrosis (in this section referred to as ``PF'') is a relentlessly progressive, ultimately fatal disease that affects the lungs, gradually robbing a person of the ability to breathe.
More than 200,000 individuals may be living with PF in the United States, 48,000 individuals in the United States are diagnosed with PF annually, and as many as 40,000 die annually.
Prevalence of PF has increased more than 150 percent since 2001, and is expected to continue rising.
The median survival rate for a person with PF is 2.8 years.
The cause of PF is not well understood, and in most cases is unknown, though there is growing evidence that one cause of PF may be environmental or occupational exposure to pollutants.
There is no Food and Drug Administration-approved treatment or cure for PF.
Public awareness of PF remains low compared to rare diseases of lesser prevalence, despite PF's increasing prevalence.
There has been no federally funded national awareness or educational effort to improve understanding of PF in the public or medical communities, though nonprofit patient education and research groups have begun to increase awareness.
The first Federal legislation expressing Congress's support for PF research, H. Con.
182, was agreed to by both Houses of Congress in 2007.
PULMONARY FIBROSIS ADVISORY BOARD AND REGISTRY.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 317T the following: ``SEC.
PULMONARY FIBROSIS ADVISORY BOARD AND REGISTRY.
Advisory Board.-- ``(1) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall establish a board to be known as the National Pulmonary Fibrosis Advisory Board (in this section referred to as the `Advisory Board').
The Advisory Board shall be composed of at least one member, to be appointed by the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, representing each of the following: ``(A) The National Institutes of Health.
The National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences.
The Department of Veterans Affairs.
The Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Patients with PF or their family members and other individuals with an interest in developing and maintaining the National PF Registry.
Patient advocates, including organizations representing such advocates.
Clinicians with expertise on PF and related diseases.
Epidemiologists with experience working with data registries.
Geneticists or experts in genetics who have experience with the genetics of PF or other interstitial lung diseases.
Duties.--The Advisory Board shall-- ``(A) review information and make recommendations to the Secretary concerning-- ``(i) the development and maintenance of the National PF Registry; ``(ii) the type of information to be collected and stored in the National PF Registry; ``(iii) the manner in which such data is to be collected; ``(iv) the use and availability of such data, including guidelines for such use; and ``(v) the collection of information about diseases and disorders that primarily affect the lungs that are considered essential to furthering the study and cure of PF; and ``(B) consult with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention regarding preparation of the National Pulmonary Fibrosis Education and Awareness Plan under section 4(a) of the Pulmonary Fibrosis Research Enhancement Act.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, the Advisory Board shall submit to the Secretary, the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, and the Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions Committee of the Senate a report on the review conducted under paragraph (2), including the recommendations of the Advisory Board resulting from such review.
Establishment of Registry.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the receipt of the report required by subsection (a)(3), the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and in consultation with patients, patient advocates, and others with expertise in research and care of pulmonary fibrosis (referred to in this section as `PF'), shall-- ``(A) develop a system to collect data on PF and other interstitial lung diseases that are related to PF, including information with respect to the incidence and prevalence of the disease in the United States; and ``(B) establish a national registry (in this section referred to as the `National PF Registry') that-- ``(i) is used for the collection and storage of data described in subparagraph (A); and ``(ii) includes a population-based registry of cases in the United States of PF and other interstitial lung diseases that are related to PF.
Purpose.--The purpose of the National PF Registry shall be to gather available data concerning-- ``(A) PF, including the incidence and prevalence of PF in the United States; ``(B) environmental and occupational factors that may be associated with the disease; ``(C) age, race or ethnicity, gender, and family history of individuals who are diagnosed with the disease; ``(D) pathogenesis of PF; and ``(E) other matters as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Coordination With State, Local, and Federal Registries.-- ``(1) In general.--In establishing the National PF Registry under subsection (b), the Secretary shall-- ``(A) identify, build upon, expand, and coordinate among existing data and surveillance systems, surveys, registries, and other Federal public health and environmental infrastructure wherever possible, including-- ``(i) existing systems in place at universities, medical centers, and government agencies; ``(ii) State-based PF registries, National Institutes of Health registries, and Department of Veterans Affairs registries, as available; and ``(iii) any other relevant databases that collect or maintain information on interstitial lung diseases; and ``(B) provide for research access to PF data in accordance with applicable statutes and regulations, including those protecting personal privacy.
Coordination with nih and department of veterans affairs.--Consistent with applicable privacy statutes and regulations, the Secretary shall ensure that epidemiological and other types of information obtained under subsection (b) is made available to the National Institutes of Health and the Department of Veterans Affairs.''.
NATIONAL PULMONARY FIBROSIS EDUCATION AND AWARENESS PLAN.
In General.-- (1) Preparation of plan.--The Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, in consultation with the National Pulmonary Fibrosis Advisory Board established under section 317U of the Public Health Service Act, as added by section 3 of this Act, shall prepare a comprehensive plan (in this section referred to as the ``National Pulmonary Fibrosis Education and Awareness Plan'').
Report to congress.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and at the same time as the report is submitted under section 317U(a)(3) of the Public Health Service Act, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall submit the National Pulmonary Fibrosis Education and Awareness Plan to the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate.
Content.--The National Pulmonary Fibrosis Education and Awareness Plan shall-- (1) focus on strategies to increase public education and awareness of pulmonary fibrosis; (2) accelerate patient education strategies, with respect to pulmonary fibrosis, nationwide; (3) address the need for new physician education strategies to improve diagnosis and treatment standards with respect to pulmonary fibrosis; (4) assess and monitor the costs of pulmonary fibrosis and its burden on patients and families; and (5) develop such strategies in partnership with patients, patient advocates, and others with expertise in research and care of pulmonary fibrosis.
PULMONARY FIBROSIS RESEARCH EXPANSION.
Subpart 2 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285b et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 424C the following: ``SEC.
PULMONARY FIBROSIS RESEARCH EXPANSION.
``The Director of the Institute is encouraged to expand, intensify, and coordinate the activities of the Institute with respect to research on pulmonary fibrosis, as appropriate.