This Act may be cited as the ``Governors Island Reinforcement Act of 1994''.
Prohibiting Trade and Certain Transactions Involving Haiti.-- The following are prohibited: (1) The import into the United States of any goods or services of Haitian origin, other than publications and material imported for news publications or news broadcast dissemination.
The export to Haiti of any goods, technology (including technical data or other information) or services from the United States, except publications, food, medicine, and medical supplies and donations of articles intended to relieve human suffering, such as clothing and temporary housing.
The purchase by any United States person of any goods for export from Haiti to any country.
The performance by any United States person of any contract in support of an industrial or other commercial or governmental project in Haiti.
The grant or extension of credits or loans by any United States person to the unelected military rulers of Haiti, its instrumentalities and controlled entities.
Prohibition of Certain Air Transport Involving Haiti.--The following is prohibited: (1) Any transaction by a United States person relating to air transportation to or from Haiti.
The provision of transportation to or from the United States by aircraft of Haitian registration.
The sale in the United States by any person holding authority under the Federal Aviation Act of any transportation by air which includes any stop in Haiti.
Sanctions Against Other Nations.-- (1) If the President determines that a foreign country is not cooperating with United States sanctions against Haiti under this Act or with applicable sanctions against Haiti imposed by the United Nations and the Organization of American States, effective 60 days after such determination no United States assistance may be provided to such foreign country.
If the President makes a determination under paragraph (1)-- (A) the President shall impose at least one other penalty or sanction which the President considers to be appropriate under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act; and (B) the President may impose such other sanctions and penalties under the International Emergency Economic Powers Act as the President considers appropriate.
For the purpose of this subsection, the term ``United States assistance'' means assistance of any kind which is provided by grant, sale, loan, lease, credit, guaranty, or insurance, or by any other means, by any agency or instrumentality of the United States Government, including-- (A) assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961; and (B) sales, credits, and guaranties under the Arms Export Control Act.
Sanctions by Other Countries.--The President shall direct the United States Ambassador to the United Nations to assume a leadership role within the United Nations Security Council to ensure that sanctions against Haiti unilaterally imposed by the United States under this Act are adopted by the international community.
Termination of Sanctions.--The provisions of this section shall cease to have effect on the date the President certifies to the Congress that the democratically-elected President of Haiti has been reinstated and Haiti's military high command has met its obligations under the Governors Island Agreement.
Human Rights Observers.--The Congress strongly urges the President to take such steps as are necessary to facilitate the return to Haiti of a full contingent of human rights observers under the auspices of the United Nations and/or the Organization of American States.
Multinational Border Patrol.--Subject to the request of the democratically-elected President of Haiti Jean-Bertrand Aristide, the Congress strongly urges President Clinton to take all available measures to effect the deployment of a multinational border patrol between the Dominican Republic and Haiti which will be fully equipped in terms of personnel and equipment to halt cross-border violations of sanctions against Haiti imposed by the United States and other countries.
Multilateral Socioeconomic and Peacekeeping Assistance.--The Congress reaffirms the unwavering committment of the United States to support multilateral socioeconomic and peacekeeping assistance to Haiti upon the return to power of the democratically-elected President of Haiti and the removal of Haiti's military high command.
SANCTITY OF GOVERNORS ISLAND AGREEMENT.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b) and notwithstanding any other provision of law, no officer or employee of the United States shall attempt, directly or indirectly, to amend, reinterpret, or nullify the Governors Island Agreement.
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to the October 30, 1993, deadline for the return to power of the democratically-elected President of Haiti, Jean-Bertrand Aristide.
TERMINATION OF BILATERAL MIGRANT INTERDICTION AGREEMENT.
The President shall notify the Government of Haiti immediately of the intention of the United States Government to terminate the agreement between the United States and Haiti relating to migrant interdiction (effected by the exchange of notes signed at Port-au- Prince on September 23, 1981; 33 UST 3559, TIAS 6577).
ADHERENCE TO INTERNATIONAL LAW REQUIREMENT OF NONREFOULEMENT WITH RESPECT TO HAITI.
Obligations Outside the United States.--The United States Government shall not return, cause to be returned, or affect the movement in any manner which results in returning, to Haiti a national or habitual resident of Haiti, who is outside the territorial boundaries of Haiti, and no funds may be expended with respect to any such return, unless the United States Government first determines in a manner that incorporates procedural safeguards consistent with internationally endorsed standards and guidelines that such individual is not a refugee of Haiti under Article 1 of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (done at Geneva July 28, 1951) as applied under Article I of the United Nations Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (done at New York, January 31, 1967) or a person designated under Article 33 of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
Obligations Within the Territorial Waters of Haiti.--The United States Government shall not return, cause to be returned, or affect the movement in any manner which results in returning, to Haiti a national or habitual resident of Haiti, who is within the territorial waters of Haiti, and no funds may be expended with respect to any such return, unless the United States Government first determines in a manner that incorporates procedural safeguards consistent with internationally endorsed standards and guidelines that if that individual were outside the territorial boundaries of Haiti such individual would not be a refugee of Haiti under Article I of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees (done at Geneva, July 28, 1951) as applied under Article I of the United National Protocol Relating to the Status of Refugees (done at New York, January 31, 1967) or a person designated under Article 33 of the Convention Relating to the Status of Refugees.
This subsection shall not constitute authority for conducting operations by the United States Government within the territorial waters of Haiti or any other country.
Limitations.--The provisions of this section do not apply to an individual if-- (1) such individual ordered, incited, assisted, or otherwise participated in the persecution of any person on account of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group or political opinion; or (2) such individual, having been convicted by a final judgment of an aggravated felony (as defined in section 101(a)(43) of the Immigration and Nationality Act), constitutes a danger to the community of the United States.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to impose new obligations on the Government of the United States in its treatment of nationals and habitual residents of a country at United States diplomatic and consular missions in that country.
TEMPORARY PROTECTED STATUS FOR HAITIANS.
Designation.--During the period specified in subsection (c) of this section, Haiti is hereby designated under section 244A(b)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (relating to temporary protected status).
Eligible Haitians.--Any alien-- (1) who is a national of Haiti and is present in the United States or in the custody or control of the United States (including Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, and any other vessel or facility of the United States Government) at any time during the period described in subsection (c) of this section, (2) who is not an alien designated under section 8(b) or 9(b) of this Act, (3) who meets the requirements of section 244A(c)(1)(A)(iii) of the Immigration and Nationality Act, and (4) who, during the period described in subsection (c) of this section, registers for temporary protected status to the extent and in a manner which the Attorney General establishes, shall be granted temporary protected status for the duration of that period and section 244A(a)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act shall apply with respect to such alien.
Period of Designation.--The designation pursuant to subsection (a) shall be in effect during the period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act and ending on the date on which the President certifies to the Congress that the democratically-elected President of Haiti has been reinstated and Haiti's military high command has met its obligations under the Governors Island Agreement.
Subsections (b)(2) and (b)(3) of section 244A of the Immigration and Nationality Act do not apply with respect to the designation pursuant to subsection (a) of this section.
CERTAIN HAITIANS INELIGIBLE TO RECEIVE VISAS AND EXCLUDED FROM ADMISSION.
Exclusion.--During the period specified in subsection (c), an alien designated under subsection (b) shall be ineligible to receive any visa and shall be excluded from admission into the United States.
Designated Alien.--An alien designated under this subsection is any alien who-- (1) is a national of Haiti; and (2)(A) is a member of the Haitian military; (B) provided financial or other material support for, or directly assisted, the military coup of September 30, 1991, which overthrew the democratically-elected Haitian Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide; (C) provided financial or other material support for, or directly participated in, terrorist acts against the Haitian people during any period after such coup; or (D) contributed to the obstruction of United Nations resolutions 841 and 843, the Governors Island Agreement, or the activities of the United Nations Mission in Haiti.
Period of Exclusion.--The period of exclusion specified in this subsection begins on the date of the enactment of this Act and ends on the date on which the President certifies to the Congress that the democratically-elected President of Haiti has been reinstated and Haiti's military high command has met its obligations under the Governors Island Agreement.
BLOCKING OF ASSETS OF CERTAIN HAITIANS.
Blocking of Assets.--During the period specified in subsection (c), all property and interests in property of aliens designated under subsection (b) that are in the United States, that hereafter come within the United States, or that are or hereafter come within the possession or control of United States persons (including overseas branches of United States persons), are blocked.
Designated Alien.--An alien designated under this subsection is any alien who-- (1) is a national of Haiti; and (2)(A) is a member of the Haitian military; (B) provided financial or other material support for, or directly assisted, the military coup of September 30, 1991, which overthrew the democratically-elected Haitian Government of President Jean-Bertrand Aristide; (C) provided financial or other material support for, or directly participated in, terrorist acts against the Haitian people during any period after such coup; or (D) contributed to the obstruction of United Nations resolutions 841 and 843, the Governors Island Agreement, or the activities of the United Nations Mission in Haiti.
Period of Exclusion.--The period of exclusion specified in subsection (a) begins on the date of the enactment of this Act and ends on the date on which the President certifies to the Congress that the democratically-elected President of Haiti has been reinstated and Haiti's military high command has met its obligations under the Governors Island Agreement.