SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Intelligence Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2006''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES Sec.
Classified Schedule of Authorizations.
Intelligence Community Management Account.
TITLE II--CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY SYSTEM Sec.
TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec.
Increase in employee compensation and benefits authorized by law.
Restriction on conduct of intelligence activities.
Clarification of delegation of transfer or reprogramming authority.
Additional duties for the Director of Science and Technology.
Comprehensive inventory of special access programs.
Sense of Congress on budget execution authority procedures.
Sense of Congress with respect to multi-level security clearances.
Reports on failure to timely implement the National Counterterrorism Center.
TITLE I--INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES SEC.
Funds are hereby authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2006 for the conduct of the intelligence and intelligence-related activities of the following elements of the United States Government: (1) The Office of the Director of National Intelligence.
The Central Intelligence Agency.
The Department of Defense.
The Defense Intelligence Agency.
The National Security Agency.
The Department of the Army, the Department of the Navy, and the Department of the Air Force.
The Department of State.
The Department of the Treasury.
The Department of Energy.
The Department of Justice.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The National Reconnaissance Office.
The National Geospatial-Intelligence Agency.
The Department of Homeland Security.
CLASSIFIED SCHEDULE OF AUTHORIZATIONS.
Specifications of Amounts and Personnel Ceilings.--The amounts authorized to be appropriated under section 101, and the authorized personnel ceilings as of September 30, 2006, for the conduct of the intelligence and intelligence-related activities of the elements listed in such section, are those specified in the classified Schedule of Authorizations prepared to accompany the bill H.R.
2475 of the One Hundred Ninth Congress.
Availability of Classified Schedule of Authorizations.--The Schedule of Authorizations shall be made available to the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and House of Representatives and to the President.
The President shall provide for suitable distribution of the Schedule, or of appropriate portions of the Schedule, within the executive branch.
Authority for Adjustments.--With the approval of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of National Intelligence may authorize employment of civilian personnel in excess of the number authorized for fiscal year 2006 under section 102 when the Director of National Intelligence determines that such action is necessary to the performance of important intelligence functions.
Notice to Intelligence Committees.--The Director of National Intelligence shall notify promptly the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives whenever the Director exercises the authority granted by this section.
INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT ACCOUNT.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the Intelligence Community Management Account of the Director of National Intelligence for fiscal year 2006 the sum of $446,144,000.
Within such amount, funds identified in the classified Schedule of Authorizations referred to in section 102(a) for advanced research and development shall remain available until September 30, 2007.
Authorized Personnel Levels.--The elements within the Intelligence Community Management Account of the Director of National Intelligence are authorized 817 full-time personnel as of September 30, 2006.
Personnel serving in such elements may be permanent employees of the Intelligence Community Management Account or personnel detailed from other elements of the United States Government.
Classified Authorizations.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--In addition to amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Intelligence Community Management Account by subsection (a), there are also authorized to be appropriated for the Intelligence Community Management Account for fiscal year 2006 such additional amounts as are specified in the classified Schedule of Authorizations referred to in section 102(a).
Such additional amounts for advanced research and development shall remain available until September 30, 2007.
Authorization of personnel.--In addition to the personnel authorized by subsection (b) for elements of the Intelligence Community Management Account as of September 30, 2006, there are also authorized such additional personnel for such elements as of that date as are specified in the classified Schedule of Authorizations.
Reimbursement.--Except as provided in section 113 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 404h), during fiscal year 2006 any officer or employee of the United States or a member of the Armed Forces who is detailed to the staff of the Intelligence Community Management Account from another element of the United States Government shall be detailed on a reimbursable basis, except that any such officer, employee, or member may be detailed on a nonreimbursable basis for a period of less than one year for the performance of temporary functions as required by the Director of National Intelligence.
TITLE II--CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE AGENCY RETIREMENT AND DISABILITY SYSTEM SEC.
There is authorized to be appropriated for the Central Intelligence Agency Retirement and Disability Fund for fiscal year 2006 the sum of $244,600,000.
TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
INCREASE IN EMPLOYEE COMPENSATION AND BENEFITS AUTHORIZED BY LAW.
Appropriations authorized by this Act for salary, pay, retirement, and other benefits for Federal employees may be increased by such additional or supplemental amounts as may be necessary for increases in such compensation or benefits authorized by law.
RESTRICTION ON CONDUCT OF INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES.
The authorization of appropriations by this Act shall not be deemed to constitute authority for the conduct of any intelligence activity which is not otherwise authorized by the Constitution or the laws of the United States.
CLARIFICATION OF DELEGATION OF TRANSFER OR REPROGRAMMING AUTHORITY.
Paragraph (5)(B) of section 102A(d) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 403-1(d)), as added by section 1011(a) of the National Security Intelligence Reform Act of 2004 (title I of Public Law 108- 458; 118 United States Statutes at Large 3643), is amended by striking ``or agency involved'' in the second sentence and inserting ``involved or the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency (in the case of the Central Intelligence Agency)''.
ADDITIONAL DUTIES FOR THE DIRECTOR OF SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY.
Coordination and Prioritization of Research Conducted by Elements of the Intelligence Community.--Subsection (d) of section 103E of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 403-3e), as added by section 1011(a) of the National Security Intelligence Reform Act of 2004 (title I of Public Law 108-458; 118 United States Statutes at Large 3643), is amended-- (1) by inserting ``and prioritize'' after ``coordinate'' in paragraph (3)(A); and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In carrying out paragraph (3)(A), the Committee shall identify basic, advanced, and applied research programs to be carried out by elements of the intelligence community.''.
Development of Technology Goals.--Section 103E of such Act (50 United States Code 403-3e), as so added, is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (B) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6); and (C) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph: ``(5) assist the Director in establishing goals for the elements of the intelligence community to meet the technology needs of the community; and''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Goals for Technology Needs of the Intelligence Community.--In carrying out subsection (c)(5), the Director of Science and Technology shall-- ``(1) perform systematic identification and assessment of the most significant intelligence challenges that require technical solutions; and ``(2) examine options to enhance the responsiveness of research and design programs to meet the requirements of the intelligence community for timely support.''.
Report.--Not later than June 30, 2006, the Director of National Intelligence shall submit to Congress a report containing a strategy for the development and use of technology in the intelligence community through 2021.
Such report may be submitted in classified form and shall include-- (1) an assessment of the highest priority intelligence gaps across the intelligence community that may be resolved by the use of technology; (2) goals for advanced research and development and a strategy to achieve such goals; (3) an explanation of how each advanced research and development project funded under the National Intelligence Program addresses an identified intelligence gap; (4) a list of all current and projected research and development projects by research type (basic, advanced, or applied) with estimated funding levels, estimated initiation dates, and estimated completion dates; and (5) a plan to incorporate technology from research and development projects into National Intelligence Program acquisition programs.
COMPREHENSIVE INVENTORY OF SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAMS.
Not later than January 15, 2006, the Director of National Intelligence shall submit to the congressional intelligence committees (as defined in section 3(7) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401a(7))) a classified report providing a comprehensive inventory of all special access programs under the National Intelligence Program (as defined in section 3(6) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401a(6))).
SENSE OF CONGRESS ON BUDGET EXECUTION AUTHORITY PROCEDURES.
It is the sense of Congress that the Director of National Intelligence should expeditiously establish the necessary budgetary processes and procedures with the heads of the departments containing agencies or organizations within the intelligence community, and the heads of such agencies and organizations, in order to-- (1) implement the budget execution authorities provided under, and submit the reports to Congress required by, subsection (c) of section 102A of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 403-1), as amended by section 1011(a) of the National Security Intelligence Reform Act of 2004 (title I of Public Law 108-458; 118 United States Statutes at Large 3643); and (2) carry out the duties and authorities of the Director of National Intelligence with respect to the transfer and reprogramming of funds under the National Intelligence Program under subsection (d) of such section, as so amended.
SENSE OF CONGRESS WITH RESPECT TO MULTI-LEVEL SECURITY CLEARANCES.
It is the sense of Congress that the Director of National Intelligence should promptly establish and oversee the implementation of a multi-level security clearance system across the intelligence community to leverage the cultural and linguistic skills of subject matter experts and individuals proficient in foreign languages critical to national security.
REPORTS ON FAILURE TO TIMELY IMPLEMENT THE NATIONAL COUNTERTERRORISM CENTER.
Initial Report on Failure to Meet Deadlines Imposed Under Law.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of National Intelligence shall provide written notice to Congress explaining the failure of the executive branch to implement the National Counterterrorism Center, as established under section 119 of the National Security Act of 1947, as added by section 1021 of the National Security Intelligence Reform Act of 2004 (title I of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004; Public Law 108-458), by the deadlines imposed under section 1097(a) of such Act for the implementation of such Center, including the failure by the President to nominate an individual to serve as Director of the National Counterterrorism Center.
Subsequent Monthly Updates.--The Director of National Intelligence shall provide to Congress monthly updates to the initial notice to Congress under subsection (a) until the National Counterterrorism Center is fully implemented and operational.
Passed the House of Representatives June 21, 2005.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.