Such regulations shall also grant the option to deduct as expenses intangible drilling and development costs in the case of wells drilled for any geothermal deposit (as defined in section 613(e)(2)) to the same extent and in the same manner as such expenses are deductible in the case of oil and gas wells.
This subsection shall not apply with respect to any costs to which any deduction is allowed under section 59(e) or 291.
Exclusion.-- ``(A) In general.--This subsection shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)).
Amortization of amounts not allowable as deductions under subparagraph (a).--The amount not allowable as a deduction for any taxable year by reason of subparagraph (A) shall be allowable as a deduction ratably over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which the costs are paid or incurred.
For purposes of section 1254, any deduction under this subparagraph shall be treated as a deduction under this subsection.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION ALLOWANCE FOR OIL AND GAS WELLS.
In General.--Section 613A is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- In the case of any taxable year in which the taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)), the allowance for percentage depletion shall be zero.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
LIMITATION ON DEDUCTION FOR TERTIARY INJECTANTS.
In General.--Section 193 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Application With Respect to Major Integrated Oil Companies.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall not apply to amounts paid or incurred by a taxpayer in any taxable year in which such taxpayer is a major integrated oil company (within the meaning of section 167(h)(5)).
Amortization of amounts not allowable as deductions under paragraph (1).--The amount not allowable as a deduction for any taxable year by reason of paragraph (1) shall be allowable as a deduction ratably over the 60-month period beginning with the month in which the costs are paid or incurred.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2015.
TITLE VI--CONSERVATION REAUTHORIZATION SEC.
NATIONAL PARK SERVICE CENTENNIAL FUND.
In General.--Chapter 1049 of title 54, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
National Park Service Centennial Fund ``(a) In General.--There is established in the Treasury a fund, to be known as the `National Park Service Centennial Fund' (referred to in this section as the `Fund').
Deposits to Fund.--Notwithstanding any provision of law providing that the proceeds shall be credited to miscellaneous receipts of the Treasury, for each fiscal year, there shall be deposited in the Fund, from revenues due and payable to the United States under section 9 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1338), $150,000,000.
Availability.--Amounts deposited in the Fund shall be made available for expenditure, without further appropriation or fiscal year limitation, in accordance with this section.
Use of Fund.--The Secretary shall use amounts in the Fund for critical National Park System maintenance and infrastructure needs and other projects and programs that will better enable the National Park Service to protect park resources and provide improved visitor services.
Land Acquisition Prohibition.--Amounts in the Fund shall not be used for land acquisition.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 1049 of title 54, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 104907 the following: ``Sec.
National Park Service Centennial Fund.''.
LAND AND WATER CONSERVATION FUND.
Permanent Authorization.--Section 200302 of title 54, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``During the period ending September 30, 2015, there'' and inserting ``There''; and (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``through September 30, 2015''; and (3) by striking paragraph (3).
Full Funding.--Section 200303 of title 54, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Availability of funds ``(a) In General.--Amounts deposited in the Fund under section 200302 on or after the date of enactment of the American Energy Innovation Act shall be made available for expenditure, without further appropriation or fiscal year limitation, to carry out the purposes of the Fund (including accounts and programs made available from the Fund under the Consolidated and Further Continuing Appropriations Act, 2015 (Public Law 113-235)).
Additional Amounts.--Amounts made available under subsection (a) shall be in addition to amounts made available to the Fund under section 105 of the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act of 2006 (43 United States Code 1331 note; Public Law 109-432) or otherwise appropriated from the Fund.
Allocation Authority.-- ``(1) Submission of cost estimates.--The President shall submit to Congress detailed account, program, and project allocations to be funded under subsection (a) as part of the annual budget submission of the President.
Alternate allocation.-- ``(A) In general.--Appropriations Acts may provide for alternate allocation of amounts made available under subsection (a), including allocations by account and program.
Allocation by president.-- ``(i) No alternate allocations.--If Congress has not enacted legislation establishing alternate allocations by the date that is 120 days after the date on which the applicable fiscal year begins, amounts made available under subsection (a) shall be allocated by the President.
Insufficient alternate allocation.-- If Congress enacts legislation establishing alternate allocations for amounts made available under subsection (a) that are less than the full amount appropriated under that subsection, the difference between the amount appropriated and the alternate allocation shall be allocated by the President.
Annual report.--The President shall submit to Congress an annual report that describes the final allocation by account, program, and project of amounts made available under subsection (a), including a description of the status of obligations and expenditures.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for title 54 is amended by striking the item relating to section 200303 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Public Access.--Section 200306 of title 54, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Public Access.--Not less than 1.5 percent of the annual authorized funding amount shall be made available each year for projects that secure recreational public access to existing Federal public land for hunting, fishing, or other recreational purposes.''.
Authorization.--Section 303102 of title 54, United States Code, is amended by striking ``of fiscal years 2012 to 2015'' and inserting ``fiscal year''.
Use and Availability.--Section 303103 of title 54, United States Code, is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting the following: ``Amounts deposited in the Historic Preservation Fund on or after the date of enactment of the American Energy Innovation Act shall only be used to carry out this division and shall be available for expenditure without further appropriation.