This Act may be cited as the ``National Marine Sanctuaries Renewal Act of 1996''.
REAUTHORIZATION OF THE NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARIES ACT.
The National Marine Sanctuaries Act (16 United States Code 1431-1445a) is amended as follows: (1) In subsection 311(b) (16 United States Code 1442(b)), by adding after the first sentence the following: ``The Secretary may also create, or participate in the creation of, nonprofit organizations to solicit donations to carry out the purposes and policies of this title.''.
In subsection 311(c) (16 United States Code 1442(c)), by adding at the end of the subsection the following: ``The Secretary is authorized to recruit, train, and accept the services of individuals without compensation as volunteers, and may provide for incidental expenses such as transportation, uniforms, lodging, and subsistence of such volunteers.
The provisions of 16 United States Code 742f(c)(3)-(5) shall apply to such volunteers.''.
In section 313 (16 United States Code 1444), by striking ``and'' in paragraph (3) and inserting ``; and (5) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000'' before the period.
In section 315(e)(3) (16 United States Code 1445a(e)(3)), by adding before the period ``; such notice, however, need only be published locally in the case of an advisory council established to provide assistance to a particular sanctuary''.
By adding the following new sections after section 315: ``SEC.
ENHANCING SUPPORT FOR NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARIES.
In General.--To augment appropriations and enhance funding for the designation and management of national marine sanctuaries, the Secretary is authorized to develop, market, and sell symbols under this section and products under section 317.
Program.--The Secretary's authority under this section specifically includes-- ``(1) the creation, adoption, and publication in the Federal Register by the Secretary of a symbol for the national marine sanctuary program, or for individual national marine sanctuaries; ``(2) the solicitation of persons to be designated as official sponsors of the national marine sanctuary program or of individual national marine sanctuaries; ``(3) the designation of persons by the Secretary as official sponsors of the national marine sanctuary program or of individual sanctuaries; ``(4) the authorization by the Secretary of the use of any symbol published under paragraph (1) by official sponsors of the national marine sanctuary program or of individual national marine sanctuaries; ``(5) the establishment of prices and collection by the Secretary of monetary and/or in-kind payments from official sponsors for the manufacture, reproduction, or use of the symbols published under paragraph (1); ``(6) the establishment of a special interest-bearing revolving fund; ``(7) the retention of any monetary proceeds collected under paragraph (5) by the Secretary in the fund established under paragraph (6); and ``(8) the use of in-kind proceeds collected under paragraph (5) by the Secretary, and the expenditure of any amounts in the fund established under paragraph (6), without appropriation, by the Secretary to designate and manage national marine sanctuaries.
Contract Authority.--The Secretary may contract with any person for the creation of symbols or the solicitation of official sponsors under subsection (b).
Restrictions.--The Secretary may restrict the use of the symbols published under subsection (b), and the designation of official sponsors of the national marine sanctuary program or of individual national marine sanctuaries to ensure compatibility with the goals of the national marine sanctuary program.
Property of the United States.--Any symbol which is adopted by the Secretary and published in the Federal Register under subsection (b) is deemed to be the property of the United States.
Prohibited Activities.--It is unlawful for any person-- ``(1) designated as an official sponsor to influence or seek to influence any decision by the Secretary or any other Federal official related to the designation or management of a national marine sanctuary, except to the extent that a person who is not so designated may do so; ``(2) to represent himself or herself to be an official sponsor absent a designation by the Secretary; ``(3) to manufacture, reproduce, or use any symbol adopted by the Secretary absent designation as an official sponsor and without payment of monetary and/or in-kind proceeds to the Secretary; or ``(4) to violate any regulation promulgated by the Secretary under this section.
Definition.--The term `official sponsor' means any person designated by the Secretary who is authorized to manufacture, reproduce, or use any symbol created, adopted, and published in the Federal Register under this section for monetary and/or in-kind proceeds paid to the Secretary.
CREATION AND SALE OF NATIONAL MARINE SANCTUARY PRODUCTS.
Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to create, market, and sell products to promote the National Marine Sanctuary Program and may enter into exclusive or nonexclusive agreements authorizing entities to create, market and/or sell such products on the Secretary's behalf.
Proceeds.--The proceeds from sale of these products shall be deposited in the interest bearing revolving fund established by section 316(b)(6).
Expenditure.--The Secretary may expend the proceeds from sale of National Marine Sanctuary products deposited in the revolving fund established by section 316(b)(6) and interest, without appropriation, to designate and manage national marine sanctuaries.