This Act may be cited as the ``Utah Schools and Lands Improvement Act of 1993''.
Additions to Reservation.--For the purpose of securing in trust for the Navajo Nation certain lands belonging to the State of Utah, which comprise approximately thirty-eight thousand five hundred acres of surface and subsurface estate, and approximately an additional nine thousand five hundred acres of subsurface estate, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Utah-Navajo Land Exchange'', dated May 18, 1992, such lands are hereby declared to be part of the Navajo Indian Reservation in the State of Utah effective upon the completion of conveyance from the State of Utah and acceptance of title by the United States.
Authorization.--The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to acquire through exchange those lands described in subsection (a) which are owned by the State of Utah, subject to valid existing rights.
STATE LANDS WITHIN THE GOSHUTE INDIAN RESERVATION.
Addition to Reservation.--For the purpose of securing in trust for the Goshute Indian Tribe certain lands belonging to the State of Utah, which comprise approximately nine hundred eighty acres of surface and subsurface estate, and an additional four hundred and eighty acres of subsurface estate, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Utah- Goshute Land Exchange'', dated May 18, 1992, such lands are hereby declared to be part of the Goshute Indian Reservation in the State of Utah effective upon the completion of conveyance from the State of Utah and acceptance of title by the United States.
Authorization.--The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to acquire through exchange those lands described in subsection (a) which are owned by the State of Utah, subject to valid existing rights.
Other Land.--(1) The following tract of Federal land located in the State of Nevada, comprising approximately five acres more or less, together with all improvements thereon is hereby declared to be part of the Goshute Indian Reservation, and shall be held in trust for the Goshute Indian Tribe: Township 30 north, range 69 east, lots 5, 6, 7, 9, 11, and 14 of section 34.
No part of such lands shall be used for gaming or any related purpose.
The exchanges authorized by sections 2 and 3 of this Act shall be conducted without cost to the Navajo Nation and the Goshute Indian Tribe.
STATE LANDS WITHIN THE NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM.
Authorization.--The Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to accept on behalf of the United States the school and institutional trust lands owned by the State of Utah within units of the National Forest System, comprising approximately seventy-six thousand acres as depicted on a map entitled ``Utah Forest Land Exchange'', dated May 18, 1992.
Status.--Any lands acquired by the United States pursuant to this section shall become a part of the national forest within which such lands are located and shall be subject to all the laws and regulations applicable to the National Forest System.
STATE LANDS WITHIN THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM.
Authorization.--The Secretary of the Interior is hereby authorized to accept on behalf of the United States all school and institutional trust lands owned by the State of Utah located within all units of the National Park System, comprising approximately eighty thousand acres, located within the State of Utah on the date of enactment of this Act.
Status.--(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, all lands of the State of Utah within units of the National Park System that are conveyed to the United States pursuant to this section shall become a part of the appropriate unit of the National Park System, and be subject to all laws and regulations applicable to that unit of the National Park System.
The Secretary of the Interior shall, as a part of the exchange process of this Act, compensate the State of Utah for the fair market value of five hundred eighty and sixty-four one-hundredths acres within Capitol Reef National Park that were conveyed by the State of Utah to the United States on July 2, 1971, for which the State has never been compensated.
The fair market value of these lands shall be established pursuant to section 8 of this Act.
Specific Offers.--Within thirty days after enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall transmit to the State of Utah a list of lands, or interests in lands, within the State of Utah for transfer to the State of Utah in exchange for the State lands and interests described in sections 2, 3, 5, and 6 of this Act.
Such list shall include only the following Federal lands, or interests in lands: (1) Blue Mountain Telecommunications Site, fee estate, approximately six hundred and forty acres.
Beaver Mountain Ski Resort Site, fee estate, approximately three thousand acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Beaver Mountain Ski Resort'' dated September 16, 1992.
The unleased coal located in the Winter Quarters tract.
The unleased coal located in the Crandall Canyon tract.
All royalties receivable by the United States with respect to coal leases in the Quitchupah (Convulsion Canyon) tract.
The unleased coal located in the Cottonwood Canyon tract.
The unleased coal located in the Soldier Creek tract.
Additional Offers.--(1) In addition to the lands and interests specified in subsection (a), the Secretary shall offer to the State of Utah a portion of the royalties receivable by the United States with respect to Federal geothermal, oil, gas, or other mineral interests in Utah which on December 31, 1992, were under lease and covered by an approved permit to drill or plan of development and plan of reclamation, were in production, and were not under administrative or judicial appeal.
No offer under this subsection shall be for royalties aggregating more than 50 per centum of the total appraised value of the State lands described in sections 2, 3, 5, and 6.
The Secretary shall make no offer under this subsection which would enable the State of Utah to receive royalties under this section exceeding $12,500,000 annually.
If the total value of lands and interests therein and royalties offered to the State pursuant to subsections (a) and (b) is less than the total value of the State lands described in sections 2, 3, 5, and 6, the Secretary shall provide the State a list of all public lands in Utah that as of December 31, 1992, the Secretary in Resource Management Plans prepared, pursuant to the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, had identified as suitable for disposal by exchange or otherwise, and shall offer to transfer to the State any or all of such lands, as selected by the State, in partial exchange for such State lands, to the extent consistent with other applicable laws and regulations.
APPRAISAL OF LANDS TO BE EXCHANGED.
Equal Value.--All exchanges authorized under this Act shall be for equal value.
No later than ninety days after enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of Agriculture, and the Governor of the State of Utah shall provide for an appraisal of the lands or interests therein involved in the exchanges authorized by this Act.
A detailed appraisal report shall utilize nationally recognized appraisal standards including, to the extent appropriate, the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisition.
Deadline and Dispute Resolution.--(1) If after two years from the date of enactment of this Act, the parties have not agreed upon the final terms of some or all of the exchanges authorized by this Act, including the value of the lands involved in some or all of such exchanges, notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the United States District Court for the District of Utah, Central Division, shall have jurisdiction to hear, determine, and render judgment on the value of any and all lands, or interests therein, involved in the exchange.
Any action provided for in this subsection can be filed with the court no sooner than two years and no later than five years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Any decision of a district court under this Act may be appealed in accordance with the applicable laws and rules.
Adjustment.--If the State shares revenue from the selected Federal properties the value of such properties shall be the value otherwise established under this section, less the percentage which represents the Federal revenue sharing obligation, but such adjustment shall not be considered as reflecting a property right of the State of Utah.
Interest.--Any royalty offer by the Secretary pursuant to subsection 7(b) shall be adjusted to reflect net present value as of the effective date of the exchange.
The State shall be entitled to receive a reasonable rate of interest at a rate equivalent to a five- year treasury note on the balance of the value owed by the United States from the effective date of the exchange until full value is received by the State and mineral rights revert to the United States as prescribed by subsection 9(a)(3).
Terms.--(1) The State of Utah shall be entitled to receive so much of those lands or interests in lands and additional royalties described in section 7 that are offered by the Secretary of the Interior and accepted by the State as are equal in value to the State lands and interests described in sections 2, 3, 5, and 6.
For those properties where fee simple title is to be conveyed to the State of Utah, the Secretary of the Interior shall convey, subject to valid existing rights, all right, title, and interest, subject to the provisions of subsection (b).
For those properties where less than fee simple is to be conveyed to the State of Utah, the Secretary shall reserve to the United States all remaining right, title, and interest of the United States.
All right, title, and interest in any mineral rights described in section 7 that are conveyed to the State of Utah pursuant to this Act shall revert to the United States upon removal of minerals equal in value to the value attributed to such rights in connection with an exchange under this Act.
If the State of Utah accepts the offers provided for in this Act, the State shall convey to the United States, subject to valid existing rights, all right, title, and interest of the State to all school and institutional trust lands described in sections 2, 3, 5, and 6 of this Act.
Except as provided in section 7(b), conveyance of all lands or interests in lands shall take place within sixty days following agreement by the Secretary of the Interior and the Governor of the State of Utah, or entry of an appropriate order of judgment by the district court.
Inspections.--Both parties shall inspect all pertinent records and shall conduct a physical inspection of the lands to be exchanged pursuant to this Act for the presence of any hazardous materials as presently defined by applicable law.
The results of those inspections shall be made available to the parties.
Responsibility for costs of remedial action related to materials identified by such inspections shall be borne by those entities responsible under existing law.
Conditions.--(1) With respect to the lands and interests described in section 7, enactment of this Act shall be construed as satisfying the provisions of section 206(a) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 requiring that exchanges of lands be in the public interest.
Development of any mineral interest transferred to the State of Utah pursuant to this Act shall be subject to all laws, rules, and regulations applicable to development of non-Federal mineral interests, including, where appropriate, laws, rules, and regulations applicable to such development within national forests.
In General.--As soon as practicable after enactment, a map and legal description of the lands added to the Navajo and Goshute Indian Reservations and all lands exchanged under this Act shall be filed by the appropriate Secretary with the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, and each such map and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the appropriate Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in each such legal description and map.
Each such map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior and the Utah offices of the appropriate agencies of the Department of the Interior and Department of Agriculture.
Pilot.--Section 6902(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking ``acquisition.''
and inserting in lieu thereof ``acquisition, nor does this subsection apply to payments for lands in Utah acquired by the United States if at the time of such acquisition units, under applicable State law, were entitled to receive payments from the State for such lands, but in such case no payment under this chapter with respect to such acquired lands shall exceed the payment that would have been made under State law if such lands had not been acquired.''.
Intent.--The lands and interests described in section 7 are an offer related only to the State lands and interests described in this Act, and nothing in this Act shall be construed as precluding conveyance of other lands or interests to the State of Utah pursuant to other exchanges under applicable existing law or subsequent Act of Congress.
It is the intent of Congress that the State should establish a funding mechanism, or some other mechanism, to assure that counties within the State are treated equitably as a result of this exchange.
Costs.--The United States and the State of Utah shall each bear its own respective costs incurred in the implementation of this Act.
Definition.--As used in this Act, the term ``school and institutional trust lands'' means those properties granted by the United States in the Utah Enabling Act to the State of Utah in trust and other lands which under State law must be managed for the benefit of the public school system or the institutions of the State which are designated by the Utah Enabling Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.