DENIAL OF EPA BENEFITS FOR CERTAIN PERSONS.
Ineligibility.--Any person who applies for an Environmental Protection Agency benefit is ineligible from receiving the benefit if the person has been-- (1) convicted of violating any Federal environmental law; or (2) found by the Administrator to hold, or previously to have held, a beneficial business interest in any business concern which is required to be listed on the person's disclosure statement under section 2 and which has been convicted of violating a Federal environmental law.
Determination of Ineligibility.--The Administrator shall determine whether a person applying for an Environmental Protection Agency benefit is ineligible for the benefit by reason of subsection (a).
Such determination shall be made not later than 6 months after the person submits a disclosure statement under section 2.
Rehabilitation.--The Administrator may not determine that a person is ineligible for a benefit by reason of subsection (a)(1) if the person demonstrates by clear and convincing evidence that the person has been rehabilitated.
Factors that the Administrator may consider in reviewing the evidence include the following: (1) The nature and responsibilities of the position held by the person.
The nature and seriousness of the offense.
The circumstances under which the offense occurred.
The date of the offense.
The age of the person when the offense was committed.
Whether the offense was an isolated or repeated incident.
Period of Ineligibility.--The ineligibility for benefits under this section shall apply for a period, as determined by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, of not less than 10 years after the date of the conviction or finding by the Administrator under subsection (a).
Requirement for Submission of Disclosure Statement.--For purposes of enforcing section 1, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall require any person who-- (1) applies for any permit under a Federal environmental law; (2) applies for any type of grant or loan from the Environmental Protection Agency; (3) in the case of a procurement for goods or services being conducted by the Environmental Protection Agency, submits a sealed bid or competitive proposal to the agency in response to a solicitation for bids or request for proposals for the goods or services; or (4) applies for any other Environmental Protection Agency benefit; to submit a disclosure statement as described in subsection (b).
Such disclosure statement shall be submitted to the Environmental Protection Agency at the same time as the application, bid, or proposal is submitted.
Contents of Disclosure Statement.--The following information shall be included in the disclosure statement submitted under subsection (a): (1) In the case of an individual, the full name and business address of the individual.
In the case of a business concern, the full name and business address of any officers, directors, partners, or key employees of the business concern and all individuals or business concerns holding any equity in or debt liability of the business concern, or, if the business concern is a publicly traded corporation, all individuals or business concerns holding more than 5 percent of the equity in or debt liability of the business concern.
The full name and business address of all officers, directors, or partners of any business concern disclosed in the statement and the names and addresses of all individuals or business concerns holding any equity in or debt liability of any business concern so disclosed, or, if the business concern is a publicly traded corporation, all individuals or business concerns holding more than 5 percent of the equity in or debt liability of that business concern.
The full name and business address of any business concern which collects, transports, treats, stores, or disposes of solid waste or hazardous waste in which the individual or business concern submitting the disclosure statement holds an equity interest.
A description of the experience and credentials in, including any past or present licenses for, the collection, transportation, treatment, storage, or disposal of solid waste or hazardous waste possessed by the individual or business concern, or by any key employee, officer, director, or partner of the business concern.
A listing and explanation of any notices of violation or prosecution, administrative orders, or license or permit revocations issued by any State or Federal authority, in the 10 years immediately preceding the submission of the disclosure statement, which are pending or have resulted in a finding or a settlement of a violation of any law, rule, or regulation relating to the collection, transportation, treatment, storage, or disposal of solid waste or hazardous waste by the individual or business concern, or by any key employee, officer, director, or partner of the business concern.
A listing and explanation of any judgment of liability or conviction which was rendered, pursuant to any State or Federal statute or local ordinance, against the individual or business concern, or against any key employee, officer, director, or partner of the business concern.
A listing of any State or local agencies which had regulatory responsibility over the individual or business concern in connection with the individual's or business concern's collection, transportation, treatment, storage, or disposal of solid waste or hazardous waste.
Any other information the Administrator may require that relates to the competency, reliability, or good character of the individual or business concern.
Revisions.--Each person that submits a disclosure statement under this section shall, if any information required to be included in the disclosure statement changes, or if any additional information should be added after the submission of the statement, provide that information to the Administrator in writing not later than 30 days after the change or addition.
ENFORCEMENT AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS.
In General.--The Administrator shall enforce section 1 by examination of the disclosure statement required under section 2 and by such other means, including record and field investigations, as the Administrator considers necessary.
Access Entry.--For purposes of enforcing this Act-- (1) any officer, employee, or representative of the Environmental Protection Agency may enter at reasonable times any establishment or other place where a person who applies for an Environmental Protection Agency benefit carries out business; and (2) any person who applies for an Environmental Protection Agency benefit shall, upon request of any such officer, employee, or representative, furnish information relating to the benefit application and disclosure statement and permit any such officer, employee, or representative at all reasonable times to have access to, and to copy all records relating to, such application and statement.
Hearing.--Any person who is determined by the Administrator to be ineligible for an Environmental Protection Agency benefit under this Act shall, upon written request to the Administrator not later than 30 days after the determination is made, be afforded the opportunity for a hearing on the record in accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
Confidentiality.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), disclosure statements, records, and other information obtained from individuals or business concerns under this Act shall be available to the public.
Upon a showing satisfactory to the Administrator by an individual or business concern that the public disclosure of a disclosure statement, record, or other information obtained under this Act would divulge information entitled to protection under section 1905 of title 18, United States Code, such information shall be considered confidential in accordance with the purposes of that section.
Regulations.--Not later than six months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall prescribe regulations to administer and enforce this Act.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Beneficial business interest.--The term ``beneficial business interest'' means any form of monetary interest in a business concern, including an equity interest, debt liability, or other interest, by means of which the holder of the interest may influence, decide, or manage the activities of the business concern.
Business concern.--The term ``business concern'' means any corporation, firm, joint stock company, association, partnership, trust, or other form of commercial organization.
Environmental protection agency benefit.--The term ``Environmental Protection Agency benefit'' means any of the following: (A) A permit under a Federal environmental law.
Any type of grant or loan awarded by the Administrator pursuant to a Federal environmental law.
Any other benefit awarded by the Administrator pursuant to a Federal environmental law that is determined by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency to be appropriate for inclusion under this Act.
Federal environmental law.--The term ``Federal environmental law'' includes the following: (A) The Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7401 et sequentes).
The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
The Safe Drinking Water Act (42 United States Code 300f et seq.).
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et seq.).
The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 United States Code 2601 et sequentes).
Key employee.--The term ``key employee'' means a person employed by an individual or business concern to carry out supervisory, managerial, or decisionmaking duties.
Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual or a business concern.
Solid and hazardous waste.--The terms ``solid waste'' and ``hazardous waste'' have the meaning given such terms by section 1004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
This Act shall apply to any person who applies for an Environmental Protection Agency benefit after the expiration of the six-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.