This Act may be cited as the ``Boat Protection Act of 1996''.
PROTECTION OF VESSEL HULL DESIGNS.
Title 17, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 12--PROTECTION OF VESSEL HULL DESIGNS ``Sec.
Subject matter of protection.
Exclusive rights in plugs or molds.
Limitation on exclusive rights: reverse engineering; first sale.
Limitation on exclusive rights: innocent infringement.
Plug or mold notice.
Enforcement of exclusive rights.
Relation to other laws.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) `vessel hull' has the meaning given that term in regulations which the Register of Copyrights shall issue; ``(2) a `plug' means a device or model used to make a mold for the purpose of exact duplication, regardless of whether the device or model has an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not only to portray the appearance of the product or to convey information; ``(3) a `mold' means a matrix or form in which a substance for material is used, regardless of whether the matrix or form has an intrinsic utilitarian function that is not only to portray the appearance of the product or to convey information; ``(4) a plug or mold is `fixed' in a vessel hull when its embodiment in the vessel hull, by or under the authority of the owner of the plug or mold, is sufficiently permanent or stable to permit the vessel hull to be perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of more than transitory duration; ``(5) a plug or mold is `original' if it is the independent creation of a person who did not copy it from another source; ``(6) to `commercially exploit' a plug or mold is to sell, offer for sale after the plug or mold is fixed in a vessel hull, or otherwise distribute to the public for profit vessel hulls embodying the plug or mold; ``(7) the `owner' of a plug or mold is-- ``(A) the person who created the plug or mold; ``(B) the legal representative of that person if that person is deceased or under a legal incapacity; ``(C) the employer of that person if that person created the plug or mold within the scope of that person's employment; or ``(D) a party to whom the rights of the person, representative, or employer described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) are transferred in accordance with this chapter; ``(8) an `innocent purchaser' is a person who purchases a vessel hull or a product in which a vessel hull is contained in good faith and without having notice of protection under this chapter with respect to that vessel hull or product; ``(9) having `notice of protection' means having actual knowledge that, or reasonable grounds to believe that, a plug or mold fixed in a vessel hull is protected under this chapter; and ``(10) an `infringing vessel hull' is a vessel hull which is made, imported, or distributed in violation of the exclusive rights of the owner of a plug or mold under this chapter.
Subject matter of protection ``(a) Nationality Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--An original plug or mold fixed in a vessel hull is eligible for protection under this chapter if-- ``(A) on the date on which the plug or mold is first commercially exploited, the owner of the plug or mold is a national or domiciliary of the United States, or is a national, domiciliary, or sovereign authority of a foreign nation that is party to a treaty affording protection to plugs or molds to which the United States is also a party, or is a stateless person, wherever that person may be domiciled; ``(B) the plug or mold is first commercially exploited in the United States; or ``(C) the plug or mold comes within the scope of a Presidential proclamation issued under paragraph (2).
Presidential proclamations.--Whenever the President finds that a foreign nation extends, to plugs or molds of owners who are nationals or domiciliaries of the United States or to plugs or molds on the date on which the plugs or molds are first commercially exploited, protection-- ``(A) on substantially the same basis as that on which the foreign nation extends protection to plugs or molds of its own nationals and domiciliaries and plugs or molds first commercially exploited in that nation, or ``(B) on substantially the same basis as provided in this chapter, the President may by proclamation extend protection under this chapter to plugs or molds-- ``(i) of owners who are, on the date on which the plugs or molds are first commercially exploited, nationals, domiciliaries, or sovereign authorities of that nation, or ``(ii) which are first commercially exploited in that nation.
Exclusion for Products Not Original.--Protection under this chapter shall not be available for a plug or mold that-- ``(1) is not original; or ``(2) consists of designs that are staple, commonplace, or familiar in the vessel manufacturing industry, or variations of such designs, combined in a way that is not original.
Other Exclusions.--In no case does protection under this chapter for a plug or mold extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the form of which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in the plug or mold.
Ownership and transfer ``(a) Vesting of Rights in Owner.--The exclusive rights in a plug or mold under the chapter shall vest in the owner of the plug or mold.
Transfer of Rights.--The exclusive rights in a plug or mold under this chapter may be transferred in whole or in part by any means of conveyance or by operation of law, and may be bequeathed by will or pass as personal property by the applicable laws of intestate succession.
Conflicting Transfers.--In any case in which conflicting transfers of the exclusive rights in a plug or mold are made, the transfer first executed shall be void as against a subsequent transfer which is made for a valuable consideration and without notice of the first transfer, unless the first transfer is recorded in the Copyright Office within 3 months after the date on which it is executed, but in no case later than the day before the date of such subsequent transfer.
Protection Excluded for United States Government.--Plugs or molds prepared by an officer or employee of the United States Government as part of that person's official duties are not protected under this chapter, but the United States Government is not precluded from receiving and holding exclusive rights in plugs or molds transferred to the Government under subsection (b).
Duration of protection ``(a) Commencement of Protection.--The protection provided for a plug or mold under this chapter shall commence on the date on which the plug or mold is first commercially exploited.
Term of Protection.--Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the protection provided under this chapter to a plug or mold shall continue for a term of 10 years beginning on the date on which such protection commences under subsection (a).
Exclusive rights in plugs or molds ``Subject to the other provisions of this chapter, the owner of a plug or mold has the exclusive rights to do and to authorize any of the following: ``(1) Reproduce the plug or mold by optical, electronic, or any other means.
Import or distribute a vessel hull in which the plug or mold is embodied.
Induce or knowingly cause another person to do any of the acts described in paragraphs (1) and (2).
Limitation on exclusive rights: reverse engineering; first sale ``(a) Reverse Engineering.--Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1205(1), it is not an infringement of the exclusive rights of the owner of a plug or mold to reproduce the plug or mold solely for the purpose of teaching, analyzing, or evaluating the concepts or techniques embodied in the plug or mold or the design or organization of components used in the plug or mold.
First Sale.--Notwithstanding the provisions of section 1205(2), the owner of a particular vessel hull lawfully made under this chapter, or any person authorized by such owner, is entitled, without the authority of the owner of the plug or mold, to sell or otherwise dispose of that vessel hull.
Limitation on exclusive rights: innocent infringement ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, an innocent purchaser of an infringing vessel hull-- ``(1) shall incur no liability under this chapter with respect to the importation or distribution of units of the infringing vessel hull that occurred before that innocent purchaser had notice of protection with respect to that vessel hull; and ``(2) shall be liable only for a reasonable royalty on each unit of the infringing vessel hull that the innocent purchaser imports or distributes after having notice of protection with respect to that vessel hull.
The amount of the royalty referred to in paragraph (2) shall be based on wholesale cost and shall be determined by voluntary negotiation between the parties, mediation, or binding arbitration, or, if the parties do not resolve the issue, by the court in a civil action for infringement.
Subsequent Purchases.--The immunity from liability and limitation on liability referred to in subsection (a) shall apply to any person who directly or indirectly purchases an infringing vessel hull from an innocent purchaser.
Applicability Only to Products Purchased Before Notice of Protection.--The provisions of subsections (a) and (b) apply only with respect to units of an infringing vessel hull that an innocent purchaser purchased before having notice of protection with respect to that vessel hull.
Plug or mold notice ``(a) Affixation Notice.--The owner of a plug or mold provided protection under this chapter may affix notice to the plug or mold or to the vessel hull embodying the plug or mold in such manner and location as to give reasonable notice of such protection.
The Register of Copyrights shall prescribe by regulation, as examples, specific methods of affixation and positions of notice for purposes of this section, but these specifications shall not be considered exhaustive.
The affixation of such notice is not a condition of protection under this chapter but shall constitute prima facie evidence of notice of protection.
Contents of Notice.--The notice referred to in subsection (a) shall consist of-- ``(1) the words 'plug or mold', or the letters PM in a circle; ``(2) the year in which the plug or mold was first fixed in a vessel hull; and ``(3) the name of the owner or owners of the plug or mold or an abbreviation by which the name is recognized or is generally known.
Enforcement of exclusive rights ``(a) Infringers.--Except as otherwise provided by this chapter, any person who violates any of the exclusive rights of the owner of a plug or mold under this chapter shall be liable as an infringer of such rights.
Civil Action for Infringement.--The owner of a plug or mold protected under this chapter shall be entitled to institute a civil action for any infringement of the exclusive rights in that plug or mold under the chapter.
Enforcement of Right To Import.-- ``(1) Regulations.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the United States Postal Service shall separately or jointly issue regulations for the enforcement of the right to import set forth in section 1205.
These regulations may require, as a condition for the exclusion of articles from the United States, that the person seeking exclusion-- ``(A) obtain a court order enjoining, or an order of the International Trade Commission under section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930 excluding, importation of the articles; or ``(B) furnish proof that the plug or mold involved is protected under this chapter and that the importation of the articles would infringe the rights in the plug or mold under this chapter, and also post a surety bond for any injury that may result if the detention or exclusion of the articles proves to be unjustified.
Seizure and forfeiture of infringing articles.-- Articles imported in violation of the right to import set forth in section 1205 are subject to seizure and forfeiture in the same manner as property imported in violation of the customs laws.
Any such forfeited article shall be destroyed as directed by the Secretary of the Treasury or the court, as the case may be, except that the articles may be returned to the country of export whenever it is shown to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury that the importer had no reasonable grounds for believing that his or her acts constituted a violation of the law.
Remedies for infringement ``(a) Injunctive Relief.--Any court having jurisdiction of a civil action arising under this chapter may grant temporary and permanent injunctions on such terms as the court may deem reasonable to prevent or restrain infringement of the exclusive rights in a plug or mold under this chapter.
Actual Damages and Profits.--Upon finding for the owner of the plug or mold, the court shall award the owner actual damages suffered by the owner as a result of the infringement.
The court shall also award the owner the infringer's profits that are attributable to the infringement and are not taken into account in computing the award of actual damages.
In establishing the infringer's profits, the owner of the plug or mold is required to present proof only of the infringer's gross revenue, and the infringer is required to prove his or her deductible expenses and the elements of profit attributable to factors other than the plug or mold.
Statutory Damages.--At any time before final judgment is rendered, the owner of the plug or mold may elect, instead of actual damages and profits as provided in subsection (b), an award of statutory damages for all infringements involved in the action with respect to any one plug or mold for which any one infringer is liable individually, or for which any two or more infringers are liable jointly and severally, in an amount not more than $250,000 as the court considers just.
Recovery of Costs by Prevailing Party.--In any action for infringement under this chapter, the court in its discretion may allow the recovery of full costs, including reasonable attorneys' fees, to the prevailing party.
Time Limitation on Bringing Actions.--An action for infringement under this chapter shall not be maintained unless the action is commenced within 3 years after the claim accrues.
Destruction or Other Disposition of Infringing Articles.--As part of the final judgment or decree, the court may order the destruction or other disposition of any infringing vessel hulls, and any plugs, molds, or other articles by means of which such vessel hulls may be reproduced.
Relation to other laws ``(a) Other Rights Not Affected.--Nothing in this chapter shall affect any right or remedy held by any person under chapters 1 through 11 of this title, or under title 35.
References in Chapters 1 Through 11.--References to `this title' or `title 17' in chapters 1 through 11 of this title shall be deemed not to apply to this chapter.
Preemption.--The provisions of this chapter shall preempt the laws of any State to the extent those laws provide any rights or remedies with respect to a plug or mold which are equivalent to those provided by this chapter, except that such preemption shall be effective only with respect to actions filed on or after January 1, 1998.
Applicability of Title 28 Provisions.--The provisions of sections 1338, 1400(a), and 1498(b) and (c) of title 28 shall apply with respect to exclusive rights in plugs or molds under this chapter to the same extent as those provisions apply to mask works.''.
The table of chapters of title 17, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``12.
Protection of Vessel Hulls Designs.......................1201.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on January 1, 1997.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.