This Act may be cited as the ``Medicaid Community Attendant Services Act of 1997''.
COVERAGE OF COMMUNITY-BASED ATTENDANT SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
Requiring Coverage for Individuals Entitled to Nursing Facility Services or Intermediate Care Facility Services for the Mentally Retarded.--Section 1902(a)(10)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(D)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(D)'', and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(ii) subject to section 1932(b), for the inclusion of qualified community-based attendant services for any individual who, under the State plan, is entitled to nursing facility services or intermediate care facility services for the mentally retarded and who requires such services based on functional need (and without regard to age or disability);''.
Medicaid Coverage of Community-Based Attendant Services.-- (1) In general.--Title XIX of the Social Security Act, as amended by section 114(a) of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996, is amended-- (A) by redesignating section 1932 as section 1933, and (B) by inserting after section 1931 the following new section: ``coverage of qualified community-based attendant services ``Sec.
Qualified Community-Based Attendant Services Defined.-- ``(1) In general.--In this title, the term `qualified community-based attendant services' means attendant services (as defined by the Secretary) furnished to an individual-- ``(A) on an as-needed basis under a plan of service that is based on an assessment of functional need and that is agreed to by the individual; ``(B) in a home or community-based setting, which may include a school, workplace, or recreation or religious facility, but does not include a nursing facility, an intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded, or other institutional facility; ``(C) under either an agency-provider model or other model (as defined in subsection (c)); and ``(D) the furnishing of which is selected, managed, controlled by the individual (as defined by the Secretary).
Services included.--Such term includes-- ``(A) backup and emergency attendant services; ``(B) voluntary training on how to select, manage, and dismiss attendants; and ``(C) health-related tasks (as defined by the Secretary) that are assigned to, delegated to, or performed by, unlicensed personal attendants.
Excluded services.--Subject to paragraph (4), such term does not include-- ``(A) provision of room and board, and ``(B) prevocational, vocational, and supported employment.
Flexibility in transition to home setting.--Under regulations of the Secretary, such term may include expenditures for transitional costs, such as rent and utility deposits, first months's rent and utilities, bedding, basic kitchen supplies, and other necessities required for an individual to make the transition from a nursing facility or intermediate care facility for the mentally retarded to a home setting.
Limitation on Amounts of Expenditures as Medical Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out section 1902(a)(10)(D)(ii), a State shall permit an individual who is entitled to medical assistance with respect to nursing facility services or intermediate care facility services for the mentally retarded and who qualifies for the receipt of such services to choose to receive medical assistance for qualified community-based attendant services (rather than medical assistance for such institutional services), in the most integrated setting appropriate to the needs of the individual, so long as the aggregate amount of the Federal expenditures for such individuals in a fiscal year does not exceed the total that would have been expended for such individuals to receive such institutional services in the year plus, subject to subsection (e), the transitional allotment to the State for the fiscal year involved, as determined under paragraph (2)(B).
Transitional allotments.-- ``(A) Total amount.--The total amount of the transitional allotments under this paragraph for-- ``(i) fiscal year 1998 is $580,000,000, ``(ii) fiscal year 1999 is $480,000,000, ``(iii) fiscal year 2000 is $380,000,000, ``(iv) fiscal year 2001 is $280,000,000, ``(v) fiscal year 2002 is $180,000,000 and ``(vi) fiscal year 2003 is $100,000,000.
State allotments.--The Secretary shall provide a formula for the distribution of the total amount of the transitional allotments provided in each fiscal year under subparagraph (A) among States.
Such formula shall give preference to States that have a relatively higher proportion of long-term care services furnished to individuals in an institutional setting but who have a plan under subsection (e) to significantly reduce such proportion.
Use of funds.--Such funds allotted to, but not expended in, a fiscal year to a State are available for expenditure in the succeeding fiscal year.
Delivery Models.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Agency-provider model.--The term `agency-provider model' means, with respect to the provision of community-based attendant services for an individual, a method of providing such services under which a single entity contracts for the provision of such services.
Other model.--The term `other model' means a method, other than an agency-provider model, for provision of services.
Such a model may include the provision of vouchers, direct cash payments, or use of a fiscal agent to assist in obtaining services.
Quality Assurance.-- ``(1) In general.--No Federal financial participation shall be available with respect to qualified community-based attendant services furnished under an agency-provider model or other model unless the State establishes and maintains a quality assurance program that is developed after public hearings, that is based on consumer satisfaction, and that, in the case of services furnished under the agency-provider model, meets the following requirements: ``(A) Survey and certification.--The State periodically certifies and surveys such provider- agencies.
Such surveys are conducted on an unannounced basis and average at least 1 a year for each agency- provider.
Standards.--The State adopts standards for survey and certification that include-- ``(i) minimum qualifications and training requirements for provider staff; ``(ii) financial operating standards; and ``(iii) a consumer grievance process.
Monitoring boards.--The State provides a system that allows for monitoring boards consisting of providers, family members, consumers, and neighbors to advise and assist the State.
Public reporting.--The State establishes reporting procedures to make available information to the public.
Ongoing monitoring.--The State provides ongoing monitoring of the delivery of attendant services and the effect of those services on the health and well-being of each recipient.
Protection of beneficiaries.-- ``(A) In general.--The regulations promulgated under section 1930(h)(1) shall apply with respect to the protection of the health, safety, and welfare of individuals receiving qualified community-based attendant services in the same manner as they apply to individuals receiving community supported living arrangements services.
Development of additional regulations.--The Secretary shall develop additional regulations to protect the health, safety, and welfare for individuals receiving qualified community-based attendant services other than under an agency-provider model.
Such regulations shall be designed to maximize the consumers' independence and control.
Sanctions.--The provisions of section 1930(h)(2) shall apply to violations of regulations described in subparagraph (A) or (B) in the same manner as they apply to violations of regulations described in section 1930(h)(1).
Transition Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--As a condition for receipt of a transitional allotment under subsection (b)(2), a State shall develop a long-term care services transition plan that establishes specific action steps and specific timetables to increase the proportion of long-term care services provided under the plan under this title in home and community-based settings, rather than institutional settings.
Participation.--The plan under paragraph (1) shall be developed with major participation by both the State Independent Living Council and the State Developmental Disabilities Council, as well as input from the Councils on Aging.
Eligibility.--Effective January 1, 1999, a State may not exercise the option of coverage of individuals under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(V) without providing coverage under section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI).
Report on Impact of Section.--The Secretary shall submit to Congress periodic reports on the impact of this section on beneficiaries, States, and the Federal Government.''.
Coverage as Medical Assistance.-- (1) In general.--Section 1905(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396d) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (24), (B) by redesignating paragraph (25) as paragraph (26), and (C) by inserting after paragraph (24) the following new paragraph: ``(25) qualified community-based attendant services (to the extent allowed and as defined in section 1932); and''.
Eligibility classifications.--Section 1902(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI) (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(A)(ii)(VI)) is amended by inserting ``or qualified community-based attendant services'' after ``section 1915'' each it appears.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1902(j) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(j)) is amended by striking ``(25)'' and inserting ``(26)''.
Section 1902(a)(10)(C)(iv) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(C)(iv)) is amended by striking ``(24)'' and inserting ``(25)''.
Review of, and Report on, Regulations.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall review existing regulations under title XIX of the Social Security Act insofar as they regulate the provision of home health services and other services in home and community-based settings.
The Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on how excessive utilization of medical services can be reduced under such title by using qualified community-based attendant services.
Development of Functional Needs Assessment Instrument.--The Secretary shall develop a functional needs assessment instrument that assesses an individual's need for qualified community-based attendant services and that may be used in carrying out sections 1902(a)(10)(D)(ii) and 1932 of the Social Security Act.
Task Force on Financing of Long-Term Care Services.--The Secretary shall establish a task force to examine appropriate methods for financing long-term care services.
Such task force shall include significant representation of individuals (and representatives of individuals) who receive such services.
STATE OPTION FOR ELIGIBILITY FOR INDIVIDUALS.
In General.--Section 1903(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(f)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4)(C), by inserting ``subject to paragraph (5),'' after ``does not exceed'', and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(5)(A) A State may waive the income limitation described in paragraph (4)(C) in such cases as the State finds the potential for employment opportunities would be enhanced through the provision of such services.
In the case of an individual who is made eligible for medical assistance because of subparagraph (A), notwithstanding section 1916(b), the State may impose a premium based on a sliding scale relating to income.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to medical assistance provided for items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1998.