This Act may be cited as the ``Gun Buy Back Partnership Grant Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) 36,000 Americans are killed each year by the use of a gun; (2) 16 children are killed each day by the use of a gun; (3) guns are present in almost 35 percent of all American households; and (4) according to studies, between 1985 and 1994, 709 law enforcement officers in the United States were feloniously killed in the line of duty, and more than 92 percent of such law enforcement officers were killed by the use of a gun.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to reduce the number of guns on the streets by helping State and local law enforcement departments conduct community gun buy back programs.
Grants.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance may make grants to States or units of local government to conduct community gun buy back programs.
Distribution and Use of Funds.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall distribute each grant made under subsection (a) directly to the State or unit of local government involved, which shall use the grant only to conduct a community gun buy back program.
Minimum Amount.--Unless all applications submitted by any State or unit of local government pursuant to this Act have been funded, each qualifying State or unit of local government shall be allocated in each fiscal year pursuant to subsection (a) not less than 0.50 percent of the total amount appropriated for the fiscal year pursuant to this Act.
Maximum Amount.--During a fiscal year, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall not, under this Act, provide a qualifying State or unit of local government with more than 5 percent of the total amount appropriated for the fiscal year pursuant to this Act.
Matching Funds.--A grant made under this Act shall not be used to cover more than 50 percent of the cost of conducting a community gun buy back program, except to the extent that the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance waives such requirement, in whole or in part, after determining the existence of a fiscal hardship on the part of the grant recipient.
Preferential Consideration.--In awarding grants under this Act, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall give preferential consideration to an application from a jurisdiction which will conduct a community gun buy back program that will destroy all guns received by the program.
For purposes of the preceding sentence a community gun buy back program which will donate to a State or local museum for display any inoperable gun that is a curio or relic or that has historic significance shall be treated in the same manner as a community gun buy back program that will destroy all guns received by the program.
State Applications.--To request a grant under this Act, the chief executive of a State shall submit an application to the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, signed by the Attorney General of the State requesting the grant, in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Local Applications.--To request a grant under this Act, the chief executive of a unit of local government shall submit an application to the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, signed by the chief law enforcement officer of the unit of local government requesting the grant, in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Renewal.--A State or unit of local government shall be eligible to receive a grant under this Act annually.
Regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall promulgate regulations to implement this Act, which shall specify the information that must be included and the requirements that the States and units of local government must meet in submitting the applications for grants under this Act.
In this Act: (1) Community gun buy back program.--The term ``community gun buy back program'' means a program conducted by State or local law enforcement authorities under which such authorities purchase or accept donations of guns from persons desiring to dispose of them.
Gun.--The term ``gun'' means a firearm (as defined in section 921(a)(3) of title 18, United States Code).
Qualifying state or unit of local government.--The term ``qualifying State or unit of local government'' means a State or unit of local government whose application for a grant under this Act meets the applicable requirements prescribed by or under this Act.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.
LIMITATIONS ON AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.
For grants under this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance not more than $15,000,000 for each fiscal year.