This Act may be cited as the ``Judicially Enforceable Terrorism Subpoenas Act of 2004''.
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBPOENAS IN TERRORISM INVESTIGATIONS.
In General.--Chapter 113B of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2332f the following: ``Sec.
Judicially enforceable terrorism subpoenas ``(a) Authorization of Use.-- ``(1) In general.--In any investigation concerning a Federal crime of terrorism (as defined under section 2332b(g)(5)), the Attorney General may issue in writing and cause to be served a subpoena requiring the production of any records or other materials that the Attorney General finds relevant to the investigation, or requiring testimony by the custodian of the materials to be produced concerning the production and authenticity of those materials.
Contents.--A subpoena issued under paragraph (1) shall describe the records or items required to be produced and prescribe a return date within a reasonable period of time within which the records or items can be assembled and made available.
Attendance of witnesses and production of records.-- ``(A) In general.--The attendance of witnesses and the production of records may be required from any place in any State, or in any territory or other place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States at any designated place of hearing.
Limitation.--A witness shall not be required to appear at any hearing more than 500 miles distant from the place where he was served with a subpoena.
Reimbursement.--Witnesses summoned under this section shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid to witnesses in the courts of the United States.
Service.-- ``(1) In general.--A subpoena issued under this section may be served by any person designated in the subpoena as the agent of service.
Service of subpoena.-- ``(A) Natural person.--Service of a subpoena upon a natural person may be made by personal delivery of the subpoena to that person, or by certified mail with return receipt requested.
Business entities and associations.--Service of a subpoena may be made upon a domestic or foreign corporation, or upon a partnership or other unincorporated association that is subject to suit under a common name, by delivering the subpoena to an officer, to a managing or general agent, or to any other agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process.
Proof of service.--The affidavit of the person serving the subpoena entered by that person on a true copy thereof shall be sufficient proof of service.
Enforcement.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of the contumacy by, or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to, any person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United States within the jurisdiction of which the investigation is carried on, or the subpoenaed person resides, carries on business, or may be found, to compel compliance with the subpoena.
Order.--A court of the United States described under paragraph (1) may issue an order requiring the subpoenaed person, in accordance with the subpoena, to appear, to produce records, or to give testimony touching the matter under investigation.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as contempt thereof.
Service of process.--Any process under this subsection may be served in any judicial district in which the person may be found.
Nondisclosure requirement.-- ``(1) In general.--If the Attorney General certifies that otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the United States, no person shall disclose to any other person that a subpoena was received or records were provided pursuant to this section, other than to-- ``(A) those persons to whom such disclosure is necessary in order to comply with the subpoena; ``(B) an attorney to obtain legal advice with respect to testimony or the production of records in response to the subpoena; or ``(C) other persons as permitted by the Attorney General.
Notice of nondisclosure requirement.--The subpoena, or an officer, employee, or agency of the United States in writing, shall notify the person to whom the subpoena is directed of the nondisclosure requirements under paragraph (1).
Further applicability of nondisclosure requirements.--Any person who receives a disclosure under this subsection shall be subject to the same prohibitions on disclosure under paragraph (1).
Enforcement of nondisclosure requirement.--Whoever knowingly violates paragraphs (1) or (3) shall be imprisoned for not more than 1 year, and if the violation is committed with the intent to obstruct an investigation or judicial proceeding, shall be imprisoned for not more than 5 years.
Termination of nondisclosure requirement.--If the Attorney General concludes that a nondisclosure requirement no longer is justified by a danger to the national security of the United States, an officer, employee, or agency of the United States shall notify the relevant person that the prohibition of disclosure is no longer applicable.
Judicial Review.-- ``(1) In general.--At any time before the return date specified in a summons issued under this section, the person or entity summoned may, in the United States district court for the district in which that person or entity does business or resides, petition for an order modifying or setting aside the summons.
Modification of nondisclosure requirement.--Any court described under paragraph (1) may modify or set aside a nondisclosure requirement imposed under subsection (d) at the request of a person to whom a subpoena has been directed, unless there is reason to believe that the nondisclosure requirement is justified because otherwise there may result a danger to the national security of the United States.
Review of government submissions.--In all proceedings under this subsection, the court shall review the submission of the Federal Government, which may include classified information, ex parte and in camera.
Immunity From Civil Liability.--Any person, including officers, agents, and employees of a non-natural person, who in good faith produce the records or items requested in a subpoena, shall not be liable in any court of any State or the United States to any customer or other person for such production, or for nondisclosure of that production to the customer or other person.
Guidelines.--The Attorney General shall, by rule, establish such guidelines as are necessary to ensure the effective implementation of this section.''.
Amendment to Table of Sections.--The table of sections of chapter 113B of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2332f the following: ``2332g.
Judicially enforceable terrorism subpoenas.