SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Common Sense Middle Class Tax Relief Act of 1996''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
DEDUCTION FOR HIGHER EDUCATION EXPENSES.
Deduction Allowed.-- Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
HIGHER EDUCATION TUITION AND FEES.
Allowance of Deduction.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction the amount of qualified higher education expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Dollar limitation.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount allowed as a deduction under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed $10,000.
Phase-in.--In the case of taxable years beginning in 1996, subparagraph (A) shall be applied by substituting `$5,000' for `$10,000'.
Limitation based on modified adjusted gross income.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount allowed as a deduction under subsection (a) (after application of paragraph (1)) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount determined under subparagraph (B).
Amount of reduction.--The amount determined under this subparagraph equals the amount which bears the same ratio to the deduction (determined without regard to this paragraph) as-- ``(i) the excess of-- ``(I) the taxpayer's modified adjusted gross income for such taxable year, over ``(II) $60,000 ($80,000 in the case of a joint return), bears to ``(ii) $20,000.
Modified adjusted gross income.--The term `modified adjusted gross income' means the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year determined-- ``(i) without regard to this section and sections 911, 931, and 933, and ``(ii) after the application of sections 86, 135, 219 and 469.
For purposes of sections 86, 135, 219, and 469, adjusted gross income shall be determined without regard to the deduction allowed under this section.
Inflation adjustments.-- ``(i) In general.--In the case of a taxable year beginning after 1998, the $60,000 and $80,000 amounts described in subparagraph (B) shall each be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(I) such dollar amounts, multiplied by ``(II) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, determined by substituting `calendar year 1997' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Rounding.--If any amount as adjusted under clause (i) is not a multiple of $5,000, such amount shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple of $5,000.
Qualified Higher Education Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified higher education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means tuition and fees charged by an educational institution and required for the enrollment or attendance of-- ``(i) the taxpayer, ``(ii) the taxpayer's spouse, or ``(iii) any dependent of the taxpayer with respect to whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151, as an eligible student at an institution of higher education.
Exception for education involving sports, etc.--Such term does not include expenses with respect to any course or other education involving sports, games, or hobbies, unless such expenses-- ``(i) are part of a degree program, or ``(ii) are deductible under this chapter without regard to this section.
Exception for nonacademic fees.--Such term does not include any student activity fees, athletic fees, insurance expenses, or other expenses unrelated to a student's academic course of instruction.
Eligible student.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `eligible student' means a student who-- ``(i) meets the requirements of section 484(a)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1091(a)(1)), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section, and ``(ii)(I) is carrying at least one-half the normal full-time work load for the course of study the student is pursuing, as determined by the institution of higher education, or ``(II) is enrolled in a course which enables the student to improve the student's job skills or to acquire new job skills.
Identification requirement.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) to a taxpayer with respect to an eligible student unless the taxpayer includes the name, age, and taxpayer identification number of such eligible student on the return of tax for the taxable year.
Institution of higher education.--The term `institution of higher education' means an institution which-- ``(A) is described in section 481 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1088), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section, and ``(B) is eligible to participate in programs under title IV of such Act.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) No double benefit.-- ``(A) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for qualified higher education expenses with respect to which a deduction is allowable to the taxpayer under any other provision of this chapter unless the taxpayer irrevocably waives his right to the deduction of such expenses under such other provision.
Dependents.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) to any individual with respect to whom a deduction under section 151 is allowable to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Savings bond exclusion.--A deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for qualified higher education expenses only to the extent the amount of such expenses exceeds the amount excludable under section 135 for the taxable year.
Limitation on taxable year of deduction.-- ``(A) In general.--A deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year only to the extent the qualified higher education expenses are in connection with enrollment at an institution of higher education during the taxable year.
Certain prepayments allowed.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to qualified higher education expenses paid during a taxable year if such expenses are in connection with an academic term beginning during such taxable year or during the first 3 months of the next taxable year.
Adjustment for certain scholarships and veterans' benefits.--The amount of qualified higher education expenses otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to the education of an individual shall be reduced (before the application of subsection (b)) by the sum of the amounts received with respect to such individual for the taxable year as-- ``(A) a qualified scholarship which under section 117 is not includable in gross income, ``(B) an educational assistance allowance under chapter 30, 31, 32, 34, or 35 of title 38, United States Code, or ``(C) a payment (other than a gift, bequest, devise, or inheritance within the meaning of section 102(a)) for educational expenses, or attributable to enrollment at an eligible educational institution, which is exempt from income taxation by any law of the United States.
No deduction for married individuals filing separate returns.--If the taxpayer is a married individual (within the meaning of section 7703), this section shall apply only if the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse file a joint return for the taxable year.
Nonresident aliens.--If the taxpayer is a nonresident alien individual for any portion of the taxable year, this section shall apply only if such individual is treated as a resident alien of the United States for purposes of this chapter by reason of an election under subsection (g) or (h) of section 6013.
Regulations.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this section, including regulations requiring recordkeeping and information reporting.''
Deduction Allowed in Computing Adjusted Gross Income.--Section 62(a) is amended by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraph: ``(16) Higher education tuition and fees.--The deduction allowed by section 220.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 220 and inserting: ``Sec.
Higher education tuition and fees.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments made after December 31, 1995.
EXCLUSION FOR EMPLOYER-PROVIDED EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE MADE PERMANENT.
In General.--Section 127 (relating to exclusion for employer- provided educational assistance programs) is amended by striking subsection (d) and by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (d).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.