This Act may be cited as the ``Oil Region National Heritage Area Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The Oil Region of Northwestern Pennsylvania, with numerous sites and districts listed on the National Register of Historic Places, and designated by the Governor of Pennsylvania as one of the State Heritage Park Areas, is a region with tremendous physical and natural resources and possesses a story of State, national, and international significance.
The single event of Colonel Edwin Drake's drilling of the world's first successful oil well in 1859 has affected the industrial, natural, social, and political structures of the modern world.
Six national historic districts are located within the State Heritage Park boundary, in Emlenton, Franklin, Oil City, and Titusville, as well as 17 separate National Register sites.
The Allegheny River, which was designated as a component of the national wild and scenic rivers system in 1992 by Public Law 102-271, traverses the Oil Region and connects several of its major sites, as do some of the river's tributaries such as Oil Creek, French Creek, and Sandy Creek.
The unspoiled rural character of the Oil Region provides many natural and recreational resources, scenic vistas, and excellent water quality for people throughout the United States to enjoy.
Remnants of the oil industry, visible on the landscape to this day, provide a direct linkage to the past for visitors, as do the historic valley settlements, riverbed settlements, plateau developments, farmlands, and industrial landscapes.
The Oil Region also represents a cross-section of American history associated with Native Americans, frontier settlements, the French and Indian War, African-Americans and the Underground Railroad, and immigration of Swedish and Polish individuals, among others.
Involvement by the Federal Government will serve to enhance the efforts of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, local subdivisions of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, volunteer organizations, and private businesses, to promote the cultural, national, and recreational resources of the region in order to fulfill their full potential.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to enhance a cooperative management framework to assist the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania, its units of local government, and area citizens in retaining, enhancing, and interpreting the significant features of the lands, water, and structures of the Oil Region, in a manner consistent with positive economic impact and development for the benefit and inspiration of present and future generations in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and the United States.
OIL REGION NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the Oil Region National Heritage Area (in this Act referred to as the ``Heritage Area'').
Boundaries.--The Heritage Area shall be comprised of all or parts of the counties of Venango and Crawford in Pennsylvania, determined pursuant to the compact under section 4.
Management Entity.--The management entity for the Heritage Area shall be the Oil Heritage Region, Inc., the locally based private, nonprofit management corporation which will oversee the development of the Oil Region National Heritage Park, as described in the ``Plan for the Oil Region Heritage Park'', dated March 1994 (in this Act referred to as the ``management entity'').
To carry out the purposes of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall enter into a compact with the management entity.
The compact shall include information relating to the objectives and management of the area, including each of the following: (1) A delineation of the boundaries of the Heritage Area.
A discussion of the goals and objectives of the Heritage Area, including an explanation of the proposed approach to conservation and interpretation and a general outline of the protection measures committed to by the Secretary and management entity.
AUTHORITIES AND DUTIES OF MANAGEMENT ENTITY.
Authorities of the Management Entity.--The management entity may, for purposes of preparing and implementing the management plan developed under subsection (b), use funds made available through this Act for the following: (1) To make loans and grants to, and enter into cooperative agreements with States and their political subdivisions, private organizations, or any other person.
To hire and compensate staff.
Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--The management entity shall develop a management plan for the Heritage Area that-- (A) presents comprehensive recommendations for the Heritage Area's conservation, funding, management, and development; (B) takes into consideration existing State, county, and local plans and involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations working in the Heritage Area; (C) includes actions to be undertaken by units of government and private organizations to protect the resources of the Heritage Area; and (D) specifies the existing and potential sources of funding to protect, manage, and develop the Heritage Area.
Required provisions.--The management plan shall include the following: (A) An inventory of the resources contained in the Heritage Area, including a list of any property in the Heritage Area that is related to the themes of the Heritage Area and that should be preserved, restored, managed, developed, or maintained because of its natural, cultural, historic, recreational, or scenic significance.
A recommendation of policies for resource management which considers and details application of appropriate land and water management techniques, including, but not limited to, the development of intergovernmental and interagency cooperative agreements to protect the Heritage Area's historical, cultural, recreational, and natural resources in a manner consistent with supporting appropriate and compatible economic viability.
A program for implementation of the management plan by the management entity, including plans for restoration and construction, and specific commitments for that implementation that have been made by the management entity and any other persons for the first 5 years of implementation.
An analysis of ways in which local, State, and Federal programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of this Act.
An interpretation plan for the Heritage Area.
Deadline; termination of funding.-- (A) The management entity shall submit the management plan to the Secretary within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
If a management plan is not submitted to the Secretary in accordance with this subsection, the management entity shall not qualify for Federal assistance under this Act after the 1-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
Duties of Management Entity.--The management entity shall-- (1) give priority to implementing actions set forth in the compact and management plan, including actions to assist units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations in preserving the Heritage Area; (2) assist units of government, regional planning organizations, and nonprofit organizations in-- (A) establishing and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (B) developing recreational resources in the Heritage Area; (C) increasing public awareness of and appreciation for the natural, historical, and architectural resources and sites in the Heritage Area; (D) the restoration of any historic building relating to the themes of the Heritage Area; and (E) ensuring that clear, consistent, and environmentally appropriate signs identifying access points and sites of interest are put in place throughout the Heritage Area; (3) encourage by appropriate means economic viability in the Heritage Area consistent with the goals of the plan; (4) consider the interests of diverse governmental, business, and nonprofit groups within the Heritage Area; (5) conduct public meetings at least annually regarding the implementation of the management plan; (6) submit substantial changes (including any increase of more than 20 percent in the cost estimates for implementation) to the management plan to the Secretary for the Secretary's approval; (7) for any year in which Federal funds have been provided to implement the management plan under subsection (b)-- (A) submit an annual report to the Secretary setting forth its accomplishments, its expenses and income, and each person to which any loan or grant was made by the management entity in the year for which the report is made; and (B) require, for all agreements entered into by the management entity authorizing expenditure of Federal funds by any other person, that the person making the expenditure make available to the management entity for audit all records pertaining to the expenditure of such funds.
Prohibition on the Acquisition of Real Property.-- (1) In general.--The management entity may not use Federal funds received under this Act to acquire real property or an interest in real property.
Limitation.--Nothing in this Act shall preclude the management entity from using Federal funds from other sources for their authorized purposes.
DUTIES AND AUTHORITIES OF FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Technical and Financial Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may, upon request of the management entity, provide technical and, subject to the availability of appropriations, financial assistance to the management entity to develop and implement a management plan that is submitted under section 5(b) and approved by the Secretary.
Priority.--In assisting the management entity, the Secretary shall give priority to actions that in general assist in-- (A) conserving the significant natural, historic, and cultural resources that support the themes of the management plan; and (B) providing educational, interpretive, and recreational opportunities consistent with the resources and associated values of the Heritage Area.
Documentation of structures, etc.--The Secretary, acting through the Historic American Building Survey and the Historic American Engineering Record, shall conduct studies necessary to document the industrial, engineering, building, and architectural history of the Heritage Area.
Approval and Disapproval of Management Plans.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Governor of Pennsylvania, shall approve or disapprove a management plan submitted under this Act not later than 90 days after receiving such plan.
Action Following Disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves a management plan, the Secretary shall advise the management entity in writing of the reasons for the disapproval and shall make recommendations for revisions in the plan.
The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a proposed revision within 90 days after the date it is submitted.
Approving Changes.--The Secretary shall review amendments to the management plan under section 5(b) that make substantial changes required to be submitted under section 5(c)(6).
Funds appropriated under the authority of this Act may not be expended to implement such changes until the Secretary approves the amendments.
The Secretary may not make any grant or provide any assistance under this Act after the expiration of the 10-year period beginning on the date the Secretary approves a management plan submitted under section 5(b).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated under this Act-- (1) not more than $1,000,000 for any fiscal year; and (2) Not more than a total of $10,000,000.
50 Percent Match.--Financial assistance provided under this Act may not be used to pay more than 50 percent of the total cost of any activity carried out with that assistance.