SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR CERTAIN ENERGY-EFFICIENT PROPERTY.
Business Property.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (A) of section 48(a)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining energy property) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by adding ``or'' at the end of clause (ii), and by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause: ``(iii) energy-efficient building property,''.
Energy-Efficient Building Property.--Subsection (a) of section 48 of such Code is amended by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Energy-efficient building property.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `energy-efficient building property' means a fuel cell power plant that-- ``(i) generates electricity using an electrochemical process, ``(ii) has an electricity-only generation efficiency greater than 30 percent, and ``(iii) has a minimum generating capacity of 5 kilowatts.
Limitation.--In the case of energy-efficient building property placed in service during the taxable year, the credit under subsection (a) for such year may not exceed $500 for each kilowatt of capacity.
Fuel cell power plant.--The term `fuel cell power plant' means an integrated system comprised of a fuel cell stack assembly, a fuel processing unit, and associated balance of plant components that converts a fuel into electricity using electrochemical means.
Termination.--Such term shall not include any property placed in service after December 31, 2005.''
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2000, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
Nonbusiness Property.-- (1) In general.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
NONBUSINESS ENERGY-EFFICIENT BUILDING PROPERTY.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the nonbusiness energy-efficient building property expenditures which are paid or incurred during such year.
Nonbusiness Energy-Efficient Building Property Expenditures.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `nonbusiness energy-efficient building property expenditures' means expenditures made by the taxpayer for nonbusiness energy-efficient building property installed on or in connection with a dwelling unit-- ``(A) which is located in the United States, and ``(B) which is used by the taxpayer as a residence.
Such term includes expenditures for labor costs properly allocable to the onsite preparation, assembly, or original installation of the property.
Nonbusiness energy-efficient building property.--The term `nonbusiness energy-efficient building property' means energy-efficient building property (as defined in section 48(a)(4)) if-- ``(A) the original use of such property commences with the taxpayer, and ``(B) such property meets the standards (if any) applicable to such property under section 48(a)(3).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant- stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in such section), such individual shall be treated as having made his tenant- stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 216(b)(3)) of any expenditures of such corporation.
Condominiums.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who is a member of a condominium management association with respect to a condominium which he owns, such individual shall be treated as having made his proportionate share of any expenditures of such association.
Condominium management association.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium management association' means an organization which meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 528(c) (other than subparagraph (E) thereof) with respect to a condominium project substantially all of the units of which are used as residences.
Allocation in certain cases.--If less than 80 percent of the use of an item is for nonbusiness purposes, only that portion of the expenditures for such item which is properly allocable to use for nonbusiness purposes shall be taken into account.
When expenditure made; amount of expenditure.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), an expenditure with respect to an item shall be treated as made when the original installation of the item is completed.
Expenditures part of building construction.-- In the case of an expenditure in connection with the construction or reconstruction of a structure, such expenditure shall be treated as made when the original use of the constructed or reconstructed structure by the taxpayer begins.
Amount.--The amount of any expenditure shall be the cost thereof.
Property financed by subsidized energy financing.-- For purposes of determining the amount of nonbusiness energy- efficient building property expenditures made by any individual with respect to any dwelling unit, there shall not be taken in to account expenditures which are made from subsidized energy financing (as defined in section 48(a)(4)(A)).
Basis Adjustments.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to any property, the increase in the basis of such property which would (but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so allowed.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any expenditure made after December 31, 2005.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (A) Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (26), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (27) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(28) to the extent provided in section 25B(d), in the case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed under section 25B.''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Nonbusiness energy-efficient building property.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to expenditures made after December 31, 2000.