This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Kids and Cars Act of 2005''.
Incorporation of Child Dummies in Safety Tests.-- (1) Review process required.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration shall conduct a review process to increase utilization of child dummies, including Hybrid-III child dummies, in motor vehicle safety tests, including crash tests, conducted by the Administration.
Criteria.--In conducting the review process under subsection (a), the Administrator shall select motor vehicle safety tests in which the inclusion of child dummies will lead to-- (A) increased understanding of crash dynamics with respect to children; and (B) measurably improved child safety.
Public input.--The Secretary of Transportation shall solicit and consider input from the public regarding the review process under paragraph (1).
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish a report regarding the implementation of this section.
The report shall include information regarding the current status of the Hybrid- III 10 year old child test dummy.
Child Safety Information Programs.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall supplement ongoing consumer information programs relating to child safety with information regarding hazards to children in nontraffic, noncrash accident situations.
Activities to supplement information.--In supplementing such programs, the Secretary shall-- (A) utilize information collected in the database maintained under subsection (e) regarding nontraffic, noncrash injuries, as well as other relevant data from private organizations, to establish priorities for the program; (B) address ways in which parents can mitigate dangers to small children arising from preventable causes, including backover incidents, hyperthermia in closed vehicles, and accidental activation of power windows; (C) partner with national child safety research organizations and other interested organizations with respect to the delivery of program information; and (D) make information related to child safety available to the public via the Internet and other means.
Report on Vehicle Visibility.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall submit a report to Congress on the extent to which driver visibility of the area immediately surrounding light passenger vehicles and obstructions to such visibility affect pedestrian safety, including the safety of infants and small children, in nontraffic, noncrash situations.
Report on Enhanced Vehicle Safety Technologies.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall submit to Congress a report that describes, evaluates, and determines the relative effectiveness of-- (1) currently available and emerging technologies, including auto-reverse functions, that are designed to prevent and reduce the number of injuries and deaths to children left unattended inside parked motor vehicles, including injuries and deaths that result from hyperthermia or are related to power windows or power sunroofs; and (2) currently available and emerging technologies that are designed to prevent deaths and injuries to small children resulting from vehicle blind spots and backover incidents.
Database on Injuries and Deaths in Nontraffic, Noncrash Events.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Transportation shall maintain a database of, and regularly collect data regarding, injuries and deaths in nontraffic, noncrash events involving motor vehicles.
The database shall include information regarding-- (A) the number, types, and proximate causes of injuries and deaths resulting from such events; (B) the characteristics of motor vehicles involved in such events; (C) the characteristics of the motor vehicle operators and victims involved in such events; and (D) the presence or absence in motor vehicles involved in such events of advanced technologies designed to prevent such injuries and deaths.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe regulations regarding how to structure and compile the database.
The Secretary shall solicit and consider input from the public regarding data collection procedures and the structure of the database maintained under paragraph (1).
Deadlines.--The Secretary shall-- (A) complete the prescription of regulations and the consideration of public input under paragraph (2) not later than September 1, 2006; and (B) commence the collection of data under paragraph (1) not later than January 1, 2007.
Availability.--The Secretary shall make the database maintained under paragraph (1) available to the public.