This Act may be cited as the ``Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) Federal holdings in the State of Nevada constitute over 87 percent of the area of the State, and in 10 of the 17 counties the Federal Government controls at least 80 percent of the land; (2) the large amount of federally controlled land in Nevada and the lack of an adequate private land ownership base has had a negative impact on the overall economic development of rural counties and communities and severely degraded the ability of local governments to provide necessary services; (3) under general land laws less than 3 percent of the Federal land in Nevada has moved from Federal control to private ownership in the last 130 years; (4) in resource management plans, the Bureau of Land Management has identified for disposal land that is difficult and costly to manage and that would more appropriately be in non-Federal ownership; (5) implementation of Federal land management plans has been impaired by the lack of necessary funding to provide the needed improvements and the lack of land management programs to accomplish the goals and standards set out in the plans; and (6) the lack of a private land tax base prevents most local governments from providing the appropriate infrastructure to allow timely development of land that is disposed of by the Federal Government for community expansion and economic growth.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to provide for-- (1) the orderly disposal and use of certain Federal land in the State of Nevada that was not included in the Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-263; 112 United States Statutes at Large 2343); (2) the acquisition of environmentally sensitive land in the State; and (3) the implementation of projects and activities in the State to protect or restore important environmental and cultural resources.
In this Act: (1) Current land use plan.--The term ``current land use plan'', with respect to an administrative unit of the Bureau of Land Management, means the management framework plan or resource management plan applicable to the unit that was approved most recently before the date of enactment of this Act.
Environmentally sensitive land.--The term ``environmentally sensitive land'' means land or an interest in land, the acquisition of which the United States would, in the judgment of the Secretary or the Secretary of Agriculture-- (A) promote the preservation of natural, scientific, aesthetic, historical, cultural, watershed, wildlife, or other values that contribute to public enjoyment or biological diversity; (B) enhance recreational opportunities or public access; (C) provide the opportunity to achieve better management of public land through consolidation of Federal ownership; or (D) otherwise serve the public interest.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Special account.--The term ``Special Account'' means the account established by section 6.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Nevada.
Unit of local government.--The term ``unit of local government'' means the elected governing body of each city and county in the State except the cities of Las Vegas, Henderson, and North Las Vegas.
Disposal.--In accordance with this Act, the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes), and other applicable law and subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary may dispose of public land under current land use plans maintained under section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1713), other than land that is identified for disposal under the Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-263; 112 United States Statutes at Large 2343).
Recreation and Public Purpose Conveyances.-- (1) In general.--Not less than 30 days before offering land for sale or exchange under subsection (a), the State or the unit of local government in the jurisdiction of which the land is located may elect to obtain the land for local public purposes under the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize acquisition or use of public lands by States, counties, or municipalities for recreational purposes'', approved June 14, 1926 (commonly known as the ``Recreation and Public Purposes Act'') (43 United States Code 869 et sequentes).
Retention by secretary.--If the State or unit of local government elects to obtain the land, the Secretary shall retain the land for conveyance to the State or unit of local government in accordance with that Act.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal land selected for disposal under subsection (d)(1) is withdrawn from location and entry under the mining laws and from operation under the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws until the Secretary terminates the withdrawal or the land is patented.
Selection.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, the unit of local government that has jurisdiction over land identified for disposal under subsection (a), and the State shall jointly select land to be offered for sale or exchange under this section.
Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate land disposal activities with the unit of local government under the jurisdiction of which the land is located.
Local land use planning and zoning requirements.--The Secretary shall dispose of land under this section in a manner that is consistent with local land use planning and zoning requirements and recommendations.
Sales Offering, Price, Procedures, and Prohibitions.-- (1) Offering.--The Secretary shall make the first offering of land as soon as practicable after land has been selected under subsection (d).
Sale price.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall make all sales of land under this section at a price that is not less than the fair market value of the land, as determined by the Secretary.
Affordable housing.--Subparagraph (A) does not affect the authority of the Secretary to make land available at less than fair market value for affordable housing purposes under section 7(b) of the Southern Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-263; 112 United States Statutes at Large 2349).
Competitive bidding.-- (A) In general.--The sale of public land selected under subsection (d) shall be conducted in accordance with sections 203 and 209 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1713, 1719).
Exceptions.--The exceptions to competitive bidding requirements under section 203(f) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1713(f)) shall apply to sales under this Act in cases in which the Secretary determines that application of an exception is necessary and proper.
Notice of competitive bidding procedures.--The Secretary shall also ensure adequate notice of competitive bidding procedures to-- (i) owners of land adjoining the land proposed for sale; (ii) local governments in the vicinity of the land proposed for sale; and (iii) the State.
Prohibitions.--A sale of a tract of land selected under subsection (d) shall not be undertaken if the Federal costs of sale preparation and processing are estimated to exceed the proceeds of the sale.
Disposition of Proceeds.-- (1) Land sales.--Of the gross proceeds of sales of land under this section during a fiscal year-- (A) 5 percent shall be paid to the State for use in the general education program of the State; (B) 45 percent shall be paid directly to the local unit of government in the jurisdiction of which the land is located for use as determined by the unit of local government, with consideration given to use for support of health care delivery, law enforcement, and schools; and (C) 50 percent shall be deposited in the Special Account.
Land exchanges.-- (A) In general.--In a land exchange under this section, the non-Federal party shall provide direct payment to the unit of local government in the jurisdiction of which the land is located in an amount equal to 15 percent of the fair market value of the Federal land conveyed in the exchange.
Treatment of payments as cost incurred.--If any agreement to initiate the exchange so provides, a payment under subparagraph (A) shall be considered to be a cost incurred by the non-Federal party that shall be compensated by the Secretary.
Pending exchanges.--This Act, other than subsections (a) and (b) and this subsection, shall not apply to any land exchange for which an initial agreement to initiate an exchange was signed by an authorized representative of the exchange proponent and an authorized officer of the Bureau of Land Management before the date of enactment of this Act.
Additional Disposal Land.--Public land identified for disposal in the State under a replacement of or amendment to a current land use plan shall be subject to this Act.
ACQUISITION OF ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE LAND.
In General.--After consultation in accordance with subsection (c), the Secretary may use funds in the Special Account and any other funds that are made available by law to acquire environmentally sensitive land and interests in environmentally sensitive land.
Consent.--The Secretary may acquire environmentally sensitive land under this section only from willing sellers.
Permission.-- (1) In general.--Before initiating efforts to acquire environmentally sensitive land under this section, the Secretary or the Secretary of Agriculture shall consult and obtain consent from the State and units of local government under the jurisdiction of which the environmentally sensitive land is located (including appropriate planning and regulatory agencies) before they can acquire the land.
Information.--The Secretary or Secretary of Agriculture shall provide the State and units of local government with the following: (A) An explanation of why the acquisition is necessary.
An analysis of the potential impact of the acquisition on State and local government.
Information regarding other appropriate aspects of the acquisition.
Administration.--On acceptance of title by the United States, any environmentally sensitive land or interest in environmentally sensitive land acquired under this section that is within the boundaries of a unit of the National Forest System, the National Park System, the National Wildlife Refuge System, the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, the National Trails System, the National Wilderness Preservation System, any other system established by law, or any national conservation or recreation area established by law-- (1) shall become part of the unit or area without further action by the Secretary or Secretary of Agriculture; and (2) shall be managed in accordance with all laws (including regulations) and land use plans applicable to the unit or area.
Fair Market Value.--The fair market value of environmentally sensitive land or an interest in environmentally sensitive land to be acquired by the Secretary or the Secretary of Agriculture under this section shall be determined-- (1) under section 206 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1711) and other applicable requirements and standards; and (2) without regard to the presence of a species listed as a threatened species or endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
Payments in Lieu of Taxes.--Section 6901(1) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (G), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (H), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or ''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(I) acquired by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture under section 5 of the Nevada Public Land Management Act of 1999 that is not otherwise described in subparagraphs (A) through (G).''.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a separate account to be used in carrying out this Act.
Contents.--The Special Account shall consist of-- (1) amounts deposited in the Special Account under section 4(f)(1)(B); (2) donations to the Special Account; and (3) appropriations to the Special Account.
Use.-- (1) In general.--Amounts in the Special Account shall be available to the Secretary until expended, without further Act of appropriation, to pay-- (A) subject to paragraph (2), costs incurred by the Bureau of Land Management in arranging sales or exchanges under this Act, including the costs of land boundary surveys, compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et seq.
), appraisals, environmental and cultural clearances, and public notice; (B) the cost of acquisition of environmentally sensitive land or interest in such land in the State; (C) the cost of carrying out any necessary revision or amendment of a current land use plan of the Bureau of Land Management that relates to land sold, exchanged, or acquired under this Act; (D) the cost of projects or programs to restore or protect wetlands, riparian areas, or cultural, historic, prehistoric, or paleontological resources, including petroglyphs; (E) the cost of projects, programs, or land acquisition to stabilize or restore water quality and lake levels in Walker Lake; and (F) related costs determined by the Secretary.
Limitations.-- (A) Costs in arranging sales or exchanges.--Costs charged against the Special Account for the purposes described in paragraph (1)(A) shall not exceed the minimum amount practicable in view of the fair market value of the Federal land to be sold or exchanged.
Acquisition.--Not more than 50 percent of the amounts deposited in the Special Account in any fiscal year may be used in that fiscal year or any subsequent fiscal year for the purpose described in paragraph (1)(B).
Plan revisions and amendments.--The process of revising or amending a land use plan shall not cause delay or postponement in the implementation of this Act.
Interest.--All funds deposited in the Special Account shall earn interest in the amount determined by the Secretary of the Treasury on the basis of the current average market yield on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of comparable maturities.
Such interest shall be added to the principal of the account and expended in accordance with subsection 6(c).
Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate the use of the Special Account with the Secretary of Agriculture, the State, and units of local government in which land or an interest in land may be acquired, to ensure accountability and demonstrated results.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.
The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives a biennial report that describes each transaction that is carried out under this Act.