This Act may be cited as the ``IRS Customer Service Improvement Act''.
DEVELOPMENT AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PERSONAL SERVICE PLAN.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Internal Revenue Service shall develop and implement a plan to ensure that-- (1) each voice call to service telephone numbers of the Internal Revenue Service is answered personally and in a timely manner by an employee of the Internal Revenue Service; and (2) each letter and notification sent to a taxpayer by the Internal Revenue Service is signed by the Internal Revenue Service employee who can be contacted for additional information regarding such letter or notification.
INTEREST RATE FOR OVERPAYMENTS TO EQUAL RATE FOR UNDERPAYMENTS.
In General.--Section 6621(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to determination of rate of interest) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) General Rule.--The overpayment rate and the underpayment rate established under this section shall be the Federal short-term rate determined under subsection (b).''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 6621 of such Code (relating to determination of rate of interest) is amended by striking subsection (c).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply for purposes of determining interest to periods after the date of the enactment of this Act.
NOTICE OF ASSESSMENT ARISING OUT OF MATHEMATICAL OR CLERICAL ERRORS.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 6213(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to assessments arising out of mathematical or clerical errors) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Assessments arising out of mathematical or clerical errors.-- ``(A) Notice to taxpayer.--Not later than 6 months after the due date of a return (or, if applicable, the last day of any extension relating thereto), the Secretary shall notify the taxpayer by certified mail or registered mail if, on account of a mathematical or clerical error appearing on the return, an amount of tax in excess of that shown on the return is due, and an assessment of the tax has been or will be made on the basis of what would have been the correct amount of tax but for the mathematical or clerical error.
Required contents.--Each notice under this paragraph shall set forth the error alleged and an explanation thereof.
Not treated as notice of deficiency.--A notice under this paragraph shall not be considered as a notice of deficiency for the purposes of subsection (a) (prohibiting assessment and collection until notice of the deficiency has been mailed), or of section 6212(c)(1) (restricting further deficiency letters), or of section 6512(a) (prohibiting credits or refunds after petition to the Tax Court), and the taxpayer shall have no right to file a petition with the Tax Court based on such notice, nor shall such assessment or collection be prohibited by the provisions of subsection (a) of this section.
Failure to provide timely notice.--In the case of a failure by the Secretary to provide timely notice under this paragraph, see section 6404(d)(2) for waiver of certain interest amounts and penalties.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to returns filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.
FAIRNESS WHEN COLLECTING A TAX DUE TO MATHEMATICAL AND CLERICAL ERRORS.
In General.--Section 6404(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to abatements) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Abatement of Interest, Penalty, Additional Amount, and Addition to Tax Attributable to Certain Mathematical or Clerical Errors.-- ``(1) Prompt payment.--In the case of an assessment of additional tax attributable to a mathematical or clerical error (as defined in section 6213(g)(2)), the Secretary shall abate any interest, penalty, additional amount, and addition to tax with respect to such assessment if, within 60 days after notice of such assessment is sent under section 6213(b)(1), the taxpayer pays, or files a request for an abatement of, such assessment.
Failure of secretary to notify within 6 months.--In the case of an assessment of additional tax attributable to a mathematical or clerical error (as defined in section 6213(g)(2)) with respect to which the Secretary failed to notify the taxpayer within the 6-month period specified in section 6213(b)(1), the Secretary shall abate any interest, penalty, and additional amount with respect to such assessment.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to notices filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.
YEAR PERIOD OF LIMITATION ON CERTAIN ADDITIONAL ASSESSMENTS RELATING TO CERTAIN RETURNS.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 6501 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exceptions to limitations on assessment and collection) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(10) 1-year period for certain individual income tax taxpayers.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided by this subsection, in the case of a return described in subparagraph (B), subsection (a) shall be applied by substituting `1 year' for `3 years' both places it appears.
Return described.--A return is described in this subparagraph if the return is a return of tax imposed under section 1 for a taxable year of a taxpayer and if-- ``(i) the amount of taxable income shown on such return is equal to or exceeds the lowest amount of taxable income to which the 39.6 percent rate of tax applies, and ``(ii) the understatement of tax (if any) on such return is 25 percent or less of the tax required to be shown on the return for such taxable year.
For purposes of clause (ii), the term `understatement' has the meaning given such term by section 6662(d)(2)(A).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
EXCEPTION FOR SMALL BUSINESSES FROM REQUIRED USE OF ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER SYSTEM.
In General.--Subsection (h) of section 6302 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to use of electronic fund transfer system for collection of certain taxes) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following new paragraph: ``(3) Exception for small depositors.-- ``(A) In general.--A taxpayer who is a small depositor for any calendar year shall not be required to make deposits by electronic fund transfer for taxes attributable to payments made during the following calendar year.
Small depositor.--A taxpayer is a small depositor for any calendar year if the amount of employment taxes attributable to payments made by such taxpayer during such year is $50,000 or less.''
Required Percentages of Deposits Frozen at 1996 Level.-- (1) Subparagraph (B) of section 6302(h)(2) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``the applicable required percentage'' in clause (i) and inserting ``20.1 percent'', and (B) by striking ``the applicable required percentage'' in clause (ii) and inserting ``30 percent''.
Paragraph (2) of section 6302(h) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (C).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts otherwise required to be deposited after June 30, 1998.