Establishment.--In order to continue and expand the study of urotrauma conducted by the Secretary of Defense in 2011, subject to the availability of appropriations for such purpose, the Secretary shall establish a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Urotrauma'' (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary of Defense shall consult with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Duties.--The Commission shall conduct a study on urotrauma among members of the Armed Forces and veterans, including-- (1) an analysis of the incidence, duration, morbidity rate, and mortality rate of urotrauma; (2) an analysis of the social and economic costs and effects of urotrauma; (3) with respect to the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs, an evaluation of the facilities, access to private facilities, resources, personnel, and research activities that are related to the diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of urotrauma; (4) an evaluation of programs (including such biological, behavioral, environmental, and social programs) that improve the prevention or treatment of urotrauma; (5) a long-term plan for the use and organization of the resources of the Federal Government to improve the prevention and treatment of urotrauma; and (6) updates to any study on urotrauma conducted by the Secretary of Defense in 2011.
Membership.-- (1) Appointed members.--In addition to the ex officio members described in paragraph (2), the Committee shall be composed of 19 members as follows: (A) Sixteen members appointed by the Secretary of Defense.
One member appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services from among officers or employees of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases whose primary interest is in the field of urotrauma.
The Chief of the Department of Surgery of Walter Reed National Military Medical Center.
The Chief Medical Director of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Ex officio members.--The nonvoting, ex officio members of the Commission are as follows: (A) The Surgeon General of the Navy.
The Surgeon General of the Army.
The Surgeon General of the Air Force.
The Medical Officer of the Marine Corps.
The Director of the National Institutes of Health.
The Director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
The Director of the Division of Kidney, Urologic, and Hematologic Diseases of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Diseases.
The Director of the National Institute of Biomedical Imaging and Bioengineering.
Qualifications.--In appointing members under paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary of Defense shall appoint individuals with experience related to-- (A) studying or researching urotrauma; (B) preventing or treating urotrauma; or (C) suffering from urotrauma.
Term.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Pay.-- (A) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Except as provided in subparagraph (C), members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Secretary of Defense shall designate a member as the chairperson of the Committee.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
Staff.-- (1) Director.--The Commission shall have a director who shall be appointed by the chairperson.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the chairperson may appoint additional personnel as the chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The director and staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and consultants.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the chairperson may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff to federal agencies.--Upon request of the chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
Powers of Commission.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this section, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining official data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this section.
Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative support services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
Reports.-- (1) Interim report.--Not later than one year after the date on which the members are appointed under subsection (d)(1), the Commission shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees an interim report on the study conducted under subsection (c).
Final report.--Not later than two years after the date on which the members are appointed under subsection (d)(1), the Commission shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a final report on the study conducted under subsection (c), including any recommendations the Commission considers appropriate to improve the prevention and treatment of urotrauma among members of the Armed Forces and veterans.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 60 days after the date on which the Commission submits the final report under subsection (g)(2).
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committees on Armed Services of the House of Representatives and Senate; and (B) the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives and Senate.
The term ``urotrauma'' means injury to the urinary tract (including the kidneys, ureters, urinary bladder, urethra, and female and male genitalia) from a penetrating, blunt, blast, thermal, chemical, or biological cause.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2015.
Offset.--The amount otherwise authorized to be appropriated for operation and maintenance, Defense-wide, for the Office of the Secretary of Defense for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2015 is reduced by $1,000,000.