SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Stewardship Education, Recreation, and Volunteers for the Environment Act of 1999''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Findings, purposes, and definitions.
Use of volunteers to perform services to benefit Federal lands.
Cooperative agreements for stewardship of Federal lands.
FINDINGS, PURPOSES, AND DEFINITIONS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Lands owned by the United States and managed by the Federal land management agencies encompass extensive natural, cultural, educational, scientific, ecological, wilderness, recreational and other resources and values.
Proper stewardship of these resources and values is an important national priority.
Individual volunteers and organizations, working in partnership with Federal land management agencies, play an invaluable role in the stewardship of these resources and values.
It is in the national interest to encourage and properly recognize the contributions of these volunteers and organizations.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to encourage individual volunteers and partnership organizations to assist the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture in implementing programs for the stewardship of the resources, values, and facilities of the Federal lands managed by the Federal land management agencies; and (2) to authorize appropriate recognition for the role of volunteers and partnership organizations in providing such assistance.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Federal lands.--The term ``Federal lands'' means-- (A) lands owned by the United States and managed by Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture; and (B) lands owned by the United States and managed by a Federal land management agency of the Department of the Interior.
Federal land management agency.--The term ``Federal land management agency'' means the Bureau of Land Management, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the National Park Service, the Bureau of Reclamation, and the Forest Service.
Partnership organization.--the term ``partnership organization'' means an organization that-- (A) draws its membership from private individuals, organizations, corporations, academic institutions, or State and local governments; (B) is established to promote the understanding and conservation of the natural, recreational, and cultural resources of Federal lands and to promote education relating to these natural and cultural resources; and (C) is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of that Code.
Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' means the Secretary of the Interior with respect to the Federal lands described in paragraph (1)(B) and the Secretary of Agriculture with respect to the Federal lands described in paragraph (1)(A).
Volunteer.--The term ``volunteer'' means an individual or member of a partnership organization who performs volunteer services pursuant to section 3(a).
USE OF VOLUNTEERS TO PERFORM SERVICES TO BENEFIT FEDERAL LANDS.
Authority To Use Volunteers.--The Secretary concerned may recruit, train, and accept the services of individuals and partnership organizations, without compensation, as volunteers to supplement the work of employees of each Federal land management agency in performing activities for the benefit of Federal lands.
The Secretary concerned may recruit, train, and accept volunteers without regard to-- (1) the provisions of title 5, United States Code, relating to appointments in the competitive service; or (2) chapter 51 or subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates for employees.
General Status of Volunteers Under Federal Employment Law.-- Except as provided in subsection (c), a volunteer shall not-- (1) be considered to be a Federal employee; and (2) be subject to the provisions of law relating to Federal employment, including provisions relating to hours of work, rates of compensation, leave, unemployment compensation, and Federal employee benefits.
Limited Status of Volunteers as Federal Employees.-- (1) Federal tort claims act.--For purposes of chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, a volunteer (and the partnership organization, if any, that provided the volunteer) shall be considered to be an employee of the Government (as defined in section 2671 of that title) while performing volunteer services pursuant to subsection (a).
Compensation for work injuries.--For purposes of subchapter I of chapter 81 of title 5, United States Code, a volunteer shall be considered to be an employee (as defined in section 8101 of title 5, United States Code).
Volunteer Passports Program.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture, acting jointly, shall establish a program to be known as the ``Volunteer Passports Program'', to appropriately recognize the contributions of volunteers who complete specified hours of volunteer service for a Federal land management agency.
Uniformity.--The Volunteer Passports Program shall apply uniformly to each Federal land management agency.
Classes of Passports.-- (1) Award and purpose.--The Volunteer Passports Program shall provide for the award of various classes of Volunteer Passports to volunteers.
The passport shall entitle the volunteer to exemption, for a specified period of time, from one or more fees charged for access to or use of facilities on lands managed by one or more Federal land management agencies in one or more States.
Classes and benefits based on hours of volunteer services.--The award of a particular class of Volunteer Passport to a volunteer shall reflect completion by the volunteer of a specified number of hours of volunteer service, so that completion of additional hours shall result in exemption from additional fees.
Progress Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to Congress a report concerning the steps taken to implement this section and any steps remaining to be taken to complete its implementation.
COOPERATIVE AGREEMENTS FOR STEWARDSHIP OF FEDERAL LANDS.
Authority to Enter Into Agreements.--The Secretary concerned may enter into cooperative agreements (within the meaning of chapter 63 of title 31, United States Code) with any partnership organization, academic institution, or State or local government agency to carry out one or more projects or programs of cooperation with a Federal land management agency in accordance with this section.
Authorized Projects and Programs.--Subject to subsection (c), the Secretary concerned may carry out the following types of projects and programs for the Federal lands using a cooperative agreement under subsection (a): (1) Projects and programs that promote the stewardship of resources of Federal lands by volunteers.
Projects and programs that support the programs of a Federal land management agency through constructing, operating, maintaining, or improving educational and recreational facilities and services.
Projects and programs that increase awareness and understanding of Federal lands through the development, publication, or distribution of educational materials and products.
Projects and programs that advance education concerning the Federal lands and the missions of the Federal land management agencies through the use of the Federal lands as outdoor classrooms and development of other educational programs.
Projects and programs that contribute financial resources to the Federal lands, under terms that require that the net revenues be used exclusively for volunteer or educational programs at a particular field office, program, site, or project.
Conditions on Use of Authority.--The Secretary concerned may use a cooperative agreement under subsection (a) to carry out a project or program for the Federal lands only if the project or program-- (1) complies with all Federal laws and all Federal rules, regulations, and policies; (2) is consistent with the applicable management plan for the Federal lands involved; and (3) satisfies such other terms and conditions as the Secretary concerned determines to be appropriate.
Federal Funding and Ownership.-- (1) Matching.--Subject to the availability of appropriations and the requirements of applicable laws, the Secretary concerned may provide funds to match non-Federal funds (and the value of services or materials) donated under a cooperative agreement under this section.
With respect to each project, program, or site, the amount of funds provided by a Secretary may not exceed the amount of the non-Federal donations.
Use of federal funds.--Any Federal funds used to fund a project or program under a cooperative agreement may be used only for expenses directly related to the project or program and may not be used for operation or administration of any non- Federal entity.
Ownership of facilities.--Any new facility, improvement to an existing facility, or other permanent improvement to a Federal lands site or project constructed under this section shall be the property of the United States.
Treasury Account.--Amounts received by the Secretary concerned for use in connection with projects and programs conducted under the authority of this section shall be deposited in a separate account in the Treasury and shall be available for such use without further congressional action.
Amounts in the account that are attributable to activities at a particular field office or site shall be available to pay the costs of incidental expenses related to volunteer or educational activities and to carry out cooperative agreements for that office or site.
In implementing this Act and other applicable laws, each Federal land management agency shall seek to cooperate with States, local school districts, and other entities-- (1) to promote participation by students and other young people in volunteer programs of the Federal land management agencies; (2) to promote greater understanding by students and other young people of the resources and values of Federal lands and the importance of proper stewardship of those resources and values; and (3) to provide information and assistance to students and other young people with an interest in careers with a Federal land management agency or other organizations concerned with the management of natural or cultural resources.
After submission of the report required by section 4(d), the progress and results of all programs and activities authorized under this Act shall be reported through existing agency mechanisms, including budget-related documents.
There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act during fiscal years 2001 through 2005.