This Act may be cited as the ``Voting Restoration Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The right to vote is guaranteed in the United States Constitution for all citizens.
The right to vote in all governmental elections shall not be abridged or denied on the basis of race, sex, color, or previous conditions of servitude.
Congress has ultimate supervisory power over Federal elections, and this authority has been upheld by the United States Supreme Court on numerous occasions.
There is no uniform eligibility standard for participating in Federal elections.
Different States have different rules regarding the voting eligibility of ex-felons.
While 48 States and the District of Columbia prohibit the voting participation of inmates while serving their sentences, 13 States disenfranchise some or all ex-offenders who have completed their sentences.
Even in States that allow ex- offenders to vote, the process by which they regain that right makes it difficult for them to vote again.
For example, in 8 States, a pardon or order from the Governor is required.
In 2 States, the parole or pardon board must act.
In addition, in 16 States Federal offenders are not able to regain their right to vote via the State procedure.
Instead, those offenders must obtain a Presidential pardon.
An estimated 3,900,000 Americans, or approximately 2 percent of the adult population, currently are ineligible to vote as a result of felony conviction.
Three-fourths of the disqualified voters are on probation or parole, or are ex- offenders.
In recent years, the number of incarcerated individuals has grown exponentially, due in part to onerous drug policies enacted by this body.
Current studies point to the fact that 1 in 4 prison inmates in 1998 was incarcerated for a drug offense (compared to 1 in 10 in 1983), and that drug offenders constituted 58 percent of 1998 Federal prison inmates in 1998.
The harsh drug laws are not just affecting our men; more than one-third of the women in prison are incarcerated for a drug offense.
Overwhelmingly, these drug offenses are nonviolent.
Moreover, the racially disparate sentencing laws regarding crack and powder cocaine have resulted in African-Americans being 31 percent of those convicted for Federal drug charges, even though they are only 12 percent of the United States population and 15 percent of drug users.
Minorities are disproportionately impacted by laws that remove a felon or ex-felon's right to vote.
Currently 1,400,000, or 13 percent, of African-American men are barred from participating in Federal elections as a result of a felony conviction.
Congress should address these discrepancies and the impact they are having on minority communities.
All Americans should be afforded the right to vote in Federal election, under basic principles of fundamental fairness and equal protection.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to restore the eligibility to vote and register to vote in Federal elections to individuals who have completed sentences for criminal offenses and promote the participation of such individuals in the civic life of their communities.
PROTECTION OF RIGHT TO VOTE AND REGISTER TO VOTE IN FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
In General.--The right of any individual to vote in an election for Federal office or to register to vote in such an election may not be denied or abridged on the grounds that the individual has been convicted of a felony, except that a State may restrict the right of such an individual to vote or register to vote in such an election during any period in which the individual remains under the custody or supervision of the State or local jurisdiction (including supervision through parole or probation).
Enforcement.-- (1) Private right of action.-- (A) Declaratory or injunctive relief.--(i) A person who is aggrieved by a violation of this Act may provide written notice of the violation to the chief election official of the State involved.
If the violation is not corrected within 90 days after receipt of a notice under clause (i), or within 20 days after receipt of the notice if the violation occurred during the 120-day period which ends on the date of an election for Federal office, the aggrieved person may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court for declaratory or injunctive relief with respect to the violation.
If the violation occurred during the 30-day period which ends on the date of an election for Federal office, the aggrieved person shall not be required to provide notice to the chief election official under clause (i) as a condition of bringing a civil action under clause (ii).
Compensatory damages.--If a violation of this Act occurs during the 3-day period which ends on the date of an election for Federal office, a civil action brought under subparagraph (A)(ii) may include a request for compensatory damages with respect to the violation.
Action by attorney general.--The Attorney General may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court for such declaratory or injunctive relief as may be necessary to remedy a violation of this Act.
GRANT PROGRAM TO ASSIST STATES IN PROTECTING RIGHTS OF EX- FELONS TO VOTE AND REGISTER TO VOTE IN FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
Establishment of Program.-- (1) In general.--There is hereby established a program under which the Attorney General shall award grants to eligible States during each of the first 5 fiscal years which begin after the date of the enactment of this Act to carry out a program to protect the rights of individuals who have been convicted of felonies to vote and register to vote in elections for Federal office in the State by-- (A) providing information to individuals convicted of felonies regarding their eligibility (or lack thereof) to register to vote and vote in the State (in accordance with the requirements of subsection (b)); and (B) carrying out a program to increase voter registration rates among such individuals (in accordance with the requirements of subsection (c)).
Eligibility requirements.--A State is eligible to receive a grant under the program under this section if it submits to the Attorney General (at such time and in such form as the Attorney General may require) an application containing-- (A) information and assurances that the State will carry out the program described in paragraph (1); and (B) such other information and assurances as the Attorney General may require.
Amount of grant.--The amount of a grant awarded to a State under this section for a fiscal year shall be equal to the product of-- (A) the total amount appropriated for the year for grants under this section; and (B) the amount (expressed as a percentage) equal to-- (i) the number of individuals residing in the State who have been convicted of felonies (based on the most recent information available); and (ii) the total number of such individuals residing in all States eligible to receive a grant under this section for the year (based on the most recent information available).
Program To Provide Information to Felons Regarding Voter Registration and Voting Rights and Status.-- (1) Requirements of program.--Each State receiving a grant under the program under this Act shall provide information to individuals convicted of felonies by the State (or local jurisdictions in the State) regarding their eligibility (or lack thereof) to register to vote and vote in the State through a program which meets the following requirements: (A) The program shall include the establishment and maintenance of an index of individuals convicted of felonies by the State (or local jurisdictions in the State) who are under the custody or supervision of the State or local jurisdiction (including supervision through parole or probation), or who were released from the custody or supervision of the State or local jurisdiction during the previous 10 years, including information with respect to each such individual regarding whether the individual has the right to register to vote in the State and whether the individual has exercised that right.
The State shall inform each individual engaged in plea bargaining with a State or local prosecutor of the impact of any proposed plea bargain on the individual's right to register to vote and vote.
The State shall inform each individual convicted of a felony of the individual's eligibility (or lack thereof) to register to vote and vote upon conviction, upon release from the custody of the State or local government, and upon the completion of any State or local supervision of the individual required as part of the individual's sentence.
The State shall carry out appropriate activities to notify such individuals of their right to register to vote and vote (in addition to the information required to be provided under subparagraph (C)), including providing information through the media, the Internet, the mails, and through cooperative agreements with public or private entities providing services or otherwise having contact with convicted felons.
Report to attorney general.--Each State receiving a grant for a year under the program under this Act shall submit a report to the Attorney General not later than 30 days after the end of the year describing the activities carried out under the program described in this subsection, and shall include in the report the number and percentage of individuals subject to such program who have been directly informed of their right to register to vote (or lack thereof).
Reduction in number of felonies causing loss of voting rights.--Each State receiving a grant under the program under this Act is encouraged to reduce the number of felonies which may result in the temporary or permanent disenfranchisement of convicted felons.
Program To Increase Voter Registration Rates Among Individuals Convicted of Felonies.-- (1) Requirements of program.--Each State receiving a grant under the program under this Act shall carry out a program to increase voter registration rates among individuals in the State convicted of felonies using such methods as the State considers appropriate and effective, so long as the program meets the following requirements: (A) The program shall include the establishment and maintenance of an index of individuals convicted of felonies who are eligible to register to vote in the State, including information on the number of such individuals who are registered to vote.
Under the program, the State shall carry out such activities as it considers appropriate to increase the voter registration rates of individuals convicted of felonies, so long as the rate at which such individuals are registered to vote in the State increases by at least 50% during the 5-year period which begins with the first year for which a State receives a grant under the program under this Act.
Under the program, the State shall carry out such activities as it considers appropriate to increase the rate at which individuals convicted of felonies who are registered to vote in the State actually vote in elections.
Assistance of providers of services.--In carrying out the program required under this subsection, the State shall seek to enter into cooperative agreements with public and private entities which provide services in the State to individuals convicted of felonies and utilize information and other assistance provided by such entities to meet the requirements of this subsection.
Report to attorney general.--Each State receiving a grant under the program under this Act for a year shall submit a report to the Attorney General not later than 30 days after the end of the year describing the activities carried out under the program described in this subsection, and shall include in the report the number and percentage of individuals in the State convicted of felonies who are registered to vote and who voted in the most recent elections held in the State.
Technical Assistance.--The Attorney General shall provide technical assistance to States receiving grants under the program under this Act to help the States in carrying out the programs funded with the grants.
Annual Report.--Not later than 30 days after the end of each year for which grants are awarded under the program under this Act, the Attorney General shall submit a report to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and Senate on the activities carried out under the program, including the information provided to the Attorney General by the States participating in the program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for grants under this section for each of the first 5 fiscal years which begin after the date of the enactment of this Act.
RESPONSIBILITIES OF DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE REGARDING INDIVIDUALS CONVICTED OF FEDERAL FELONIES.
Index of Individuals Convicted.--The Attorney General, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, shall establish and maintain an index of individuals convicted of felonies by the Federal Government who are under the custody or supervision of the Federal Government (including supervision through parole or probation), or who were released from the custody or supervision of the Federal Government during the previous 10 years.
Notice Requirement.--The Attorney General shall inform-- (1) each individual engaged in plea bargaining with a Federal prosecutor of the impact of any proposed plea bargain on the individual's right to register to vote and vote; and (2) each individual convicted of a felony of the individual's right to register to vote and vote (or lack thereof) upon conviction, upon release from the custody of the Federal Government, and upon the completion of any Federal or other supervision of the individual required as part of the individual's sentence.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 30 days after the end of each year, the Attorney General shall submit a report to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and Senate describing the activities carried out pursuant to this section, and shall include in the report the number and percentage of the individuals described in this section who have been directly informed by the Attorney General of their right to register to vote and vote (or lack thereof).
In this Act-- (1) the term ``chief election official'' means (with respect to a State) the individual designated by the State under section 10 of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-8) to be responsible for coordination of the State's responsibilities under such Act; (2) the terms ``election'' and ``Federal office'' have the meanings given such terms in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431); and (3) the term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, and the Virgin Islands.
RELATION TO OTHER LAWS.
No Effect on Other Elections.--Nothing in this Act may be construed to affect the eligibility of any individual to vote or register to vote in any election other than an election for Federal office.
No Effect on Voting Rights Act and National Voter Registration Act.--The rights and remedies established by this Act shall be in addition to any other rights and remedies provided by law.
No provision of the Voting Rights Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 1973 et sequentes) or the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg et sequentes) shall be superseded, restricted, or otherwise limited by the rights and remedies established by this Act or any other provision of this Act.