TITLE I--CONSTRUCTION AUTHORIZATION SEC.
AUTHORIZATION OF MAJOR MEDICAL FACILITY PROJECTS.
Authorized Projects.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may carry out the following major medical facility projects, with each project to be carried out in the amount specified for that project: (1) Construction of an outpatient clinic in Brevard County, Florida, in the amount of $25,000,000.
Construction of an outpatient clinic at Travis Air Force Base in Fairfield, California, in the amount of $25,000,000.
Renovation of nursing home facilities at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Lebanon, Pennsylvania, in the amount of $9,000,000.
Environmental improvements at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Marion, Illinois, in the amount of $11,500,000.
Replacement of psychiatric beds at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Marion, Indiana, in the amount of $17,300,000.
Renovation of psychiatric wards at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Perry Point, Maryland, in the amount of $15,100,000.
Environmental enhancement at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Salisbury, North Carolina, in the amount of $17,200,000.
Construction of an ambulatory care addition at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Asheville, North Carolina, in the amount of $28,500,000.
Construction of an ambulatory care addition at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Temple, Texas, in the amount of $9,800,000.
Construction of an ambulatory care addition at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Tucson, Arizona, in the amount of $35,500,000.
Seismic corrections at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Palo Alto, California, in the amount of $36,800,000.
Seismic corrections at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Long Beach, California, in the amount of $20,200,000.
Limitation Concerning Outpatient Clinic Projects.--In the case of either of the projects for a new outpatient clinic authorized in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (a)-- (1) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may not obligate any funds for that project until the Secretary determines, and certifies to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives, the amount required for the project; and (2) the amount obligated for the project may not exceed the amount certified under paragraph (1) with respect to that project.
AUTHORIZATION OF MAJOR MEDICAL FACILITY LEASES.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may enter into leases for medical facilities as follows: (1) Lease of a satellite outpatient clinic in Fort Myers, Florida, in the amount of $1,736,000.
Lease of a National Footwear Center in New York, New York, in the amount of $1,054,000.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for fiscal year 1996-- (1) for the Construction, Major Projects, account, $250,900,000 for the projects authorized in section 101; (2) for the Construction, Major Projects, account $28,000,000, for construction of an ambulatory care addition at the Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Boston, Massachusetts, as authorized by section 201(b)(1)(A) of the Veterans Health Programs Extension Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-452; 108 United States Statutes at Large 4787); and (3) for the Medical Care account, $2,790,000 for the leases authorized in section 102.
Limitation.--The projects authorized in section 101, and the project referred to in subsection (a)(2), may only be carried out using-- (1) funds appropriated for fiscal year 1996 pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (a); (2) funds appropriated for Construction, Major Projects for a fiscal year before fiscal year 1996 that remain available for obligation; and (3) funds appropriated for Construction, Major Projects for fiscal year 1996 for a category of activity not specific to a project.
REPORT ON HEALTH CARE NEEDS OF VETERANS IN EAST CENTRAL FLORIDA.
Report Required.--Not later than March 1, 1996, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the health care needs of veterans in east central Florida.
In preparing the report, the Secretary shall consider the needs of such veterans for psychiatric and long-term care.
The Secretary shall include in the report the Secretary's views, based on the Secretary's determination of such needs, as to the best means of meeting such needs using the amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in this Act and Public Law 103-452 for projects to meet the health care needs of such veterans.
The Secretary may, subject to the availability of appropriations for such purpose, use an independent contractor to assist in the determination of such health care needs.
Limitation.--The Secretary may not obligate any funds, other than for design work, for the conversion of the former Orlando Naval Training Center Hospital in Orlando, Florida (now under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs), to a nursing home care unit until 15 days after the date on which the report required by subsection (a) is submitted.
TITLE II--STRATEGIC PLANNING FOR HEALTH CARE RESOURCES SEC.
Section 8107 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); (2) by striking out subsection (a) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new subsections: ``(a) In order to promote effective planning for the efficient provision of care to eligible veterans, the Secretary, based on the analysis and recommendations of the Under Secretary for Health, shall submit to each committee, not later than January 31 of each year, a report regarding long-range health planning of the Department.
Each report under subsection (a) shall include the following: ``(1) A five-year strategic plan for the provision of care under chapter 17 of this title to eligible veterans through coordinated networks of medical facilities operating within prescribed geographic service-delivery areas, such plan to include provision of services for the specialized treatment and rehabilitative needs of disabled veterans (including veterans with spinal cord dysfunction, blindness, amputations, and mental illness) through distinct programs or facilities of the Department dedicated to the specialized needs of those veterans.
A description of how planning for the networks will be coordinated.
A profile regarding each such network of medical facilities which identifies-- ``(A) the mission of each existing or proposed medical facility in the network; ``(B) any planned change in the mission for any such facility and the rationale for such planned change; ``(C) the population of veterans to be served by the network and anticipated changes over a five-year period and a ten-year period, respectively, in that population and in the health-care needs of that population; ``(D) information relevant to assessing progress toward the goal of achieving relative equivalency in the level of resources per patient distributed to each network, such information to include the plans for and progress toward lowering the cost of care-delivery in the network (by means such as changes in the mix in the network of physicians, nurses, physician assistants, and advance practice nurses); ``(E) the capacity of non-Federal facilities in the network to provide acute, long-term, and specialized treatment and rehabilitative services (described in section 7305 of this title), and determinations regarding the extent to which services to be provided in each service-delivery area and each facility in such area should be provided directly through facilities of the Department or through contract or other arrangements, including arrangements authorized under sections 8111 and 8153 of this title; and ``(F) a five-year plan for construction, replacement, or alteration projects in support of the approved mission of each facility in the network and a description of how those projects will improve access to care, or quality of care, for patients served in the network.
A status report for each facility on progress toward-- ``(A) instituting planned mission changes identified under paragraph (3)(B); ``(B) implementing principles of managed care of eligible veterans; and ``(C) developing and instituting cost-effective alternatives to provision of institutional care.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) The Secretary shall submit to each committee, not later than January 31 of each year, a report showing the current priorities of the Department for proposed major medical construction projects.
Each such report shall identify the 20 projects, from within all the projects in the Department's inventory of proposed projects, that have the highest priority and, for those 20 projects, the relative priority and rank scoring of each such project.
The 20 projects shall be compiled, and their relative rankings shall be shown, by category of project (including the categories of ambulatory care projects, nursing home care projects, and such other categories as the Secretary determines).
The Secretary shall include in each report, for each project listed, a description of the specific factors that account for the relative ranking of that project in relation to other projects within the same category.
In a case in which the relative ranking of a proposed project has changed since the last report under this subsection was submitted, the Secretary shall also include in the report a description of the reasons for the change in the ranking, including an explanation of any change in the scoring of the project under the Department's scoring system for proposed major medical construction projects.''.
REVISION TO PROSPECTUS REQUIREMENTS.
Additional Information.--Section 8104(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``shall include--'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``shall include the following:''; (2) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking out ``a detailed'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``A detailed''; and (B) by striking out the semicolon at the end and inserting in lieu thereof a period; (3) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking out ``an estimate'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``An estimate''; and (B) by striking out ``; and'' and inserting in lieu thereof a period; (4) in paragraph (3), by striking out ``an estimate'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``An estimate''; and (5) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(4) Demographic data applicable to the project, including information on projected changes in the population of veterans to be served by the project over a five-year period and a ten- year period.
Current and projected workload and utilization data.
Current and projected operating costs of the facility, to include both recurring and non-recurring costs.
The priority score assigned to the project under the Department's prioritization methodology and, if the project is being proposed for funding ahead of a project with a higher score, a specific explanation of the factors other than the priority that were considered and the basis on which the project is proposed for funding ahead of projects with higher priority scores.
A listing of each alternative to construction of the facility that has been considered.''.
Applicability.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to any prospectus submitted by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Definition of Major Medical Facility Project.--Paragraph (3)(A) of section 8104(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, and, in the case of a project which is principally for the alteration of a medical facility to provide additional space for provision of ambulatory care, such term means a project involving a total expenditure of more than $5,000,000''.
Applicability of Construction Authorization Requirement.--(1) Subsection (b) of section 301 of the Veterans' Medical Programs Amendments of 1992 (Public Law 102-405; 106 United States Statutes at Large 1984) is repealed.
The amendments made by subsection (a) of such section shall apply with respect to any major medical facility project or any major medical facility lease of the Department of Veterans Affairs, regardless of when funds are first appropriated for that project or lease, except that in the case of a project for which funds were first appropriated before October 9, 1992, such amendments shall not apply with respect to amounts appropriated for that project for a fiscal year before fiscal year 1997.
Limitation on Obligations for Advance Planning.--Section 8104 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) The Secretary may not obligate funds in an amount in excess of $500,000 from the Advance Planning Fund of the Department toward design or development of a major medical facility project until-- ``(1) the Secretary submits to the committees a report on the proposed obligation; and ``(2) a period of 30 days has passed after the date on which the report is received by the committees.''.
Definition of ``Construct''.--Section 8101(2) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``working drawings'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``construction documents''; and (2) by striking out ``preliminary plans'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``design development''.
Parking Facilities.--Section 8109(h)(3)(B) of such title is amended by striking out ``working drawings'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``construction documents''.
VETERANS HEALTH ADMINISTRATION HEADQUARTERS.
Repeal of Statutory Specification of Organizational Services.-- The text of section 7305 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) The Veterans Health Administration shall include the Office of the Under Secretary for Health and such professional and auxiliary services as the Secretary may find to be necessary to carry out the functions of the Administration.
In organizing, and appointing persons to positions in, the Office, the Under Secretary shall ensure that the Office is staffed so as to provide the Under Secretary with appropriate expertise, including expertise in-- ``(1) unique programs operated by the Administration to provide for the specialized treatment and rehabilitation of disabled veterans (including blind rehabilitation, spinal cord dysfunction, mental illness, and geriatrics and long-term care); and ``(2) appropriate clinical care disciplines.''.
Office of the Under Secretary.--Section 7306 of such title is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking out ``and who shall be a qualified doctor of medicine'' in paragraph (2); (B) by striking out paragraphs (5), (6), and (7); and (C) by redesignating the succeeding two paragraphs as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking out ``subsection (a)(3)'' and all that follows through ``two may be'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsection (a)(3), not more than two may be''; (B) by striking out the semicolon after ``dental medicines'' and inserting in lieu thereof a period; and (C) by striking out paragraphs (2) and (3).