This Act may be cited as the ``Grant's Tomb National Monument Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) Ulysses S. Grant has been heralded as a national hero by his contemporaries and by generations thereafter; (2) Ulysses S. Grant led the Union Army to victory, bringing to an end the Civil War in 1865, assuring the preservation of the United States, and ensuring the emancipation of United States slaves; (3) Ulysses S. Grant served as the 18th President of the United States from 1869 through 1877; (4) Ulysses S. Grant demonstrated his commitment to maintaining the rights of freed slaves by executing his authority as Commander in Chief to command Federal troops to protect the rights and freedoms of former slaves; and (5) Ulysses S. Grant demonstrated his commitment to rebuilding the United States and restoring unity among the people of the United States.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to recognize and pay tribute to Ulysses S. Grant, both as a general and as a former President of the United States; (2) to restore, complete, and preserve in perpetuity the Grant's Tomb National Monument and surrounding areas that are of national historical significance in a manner consistent with the architectural, historical, and educational value of the monument's original design and purpose; and (3) to educate present and future generations about the life of Ulysses S. Grant and his contributions to the United States.
In this Act: (1) Monument.--The term ``monument'' means the monument redesignated as Grant's Tomb National Monument under section 4(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tomb.--The term ``tomb'' means the tomb of Ulysses S. Grant.
REDESIGNATION OF MEMORIAL AND ADMINISTRATION OF GRANT'S TOMB NATIONAL MONUMENT.
Redesignation.--General Grant National Memorial, located at Riverside Drive and West 122d Street in New York, New York, is redesignated as Grant's Tomb National Monument.
Area Included.--The monument shall consist of the tomb and the surrounding plaza area, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Grant's Tomb National Monument'' and dated April 27, 1994.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
Administration.--The Secretary shall administer, repair, restore, preserve, maintain, and promote the monument in accordance with this Act and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes).
Visitors Center.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall design and construct a visitors center (including public restrooms) at the monument to aid in the interpretation and maintain the historical significance of the monument.
Consultation and design.--The visitors center shall-- (A) be established in consultation with the study commission established under section 5; and (B) be designed in a manner that-- (i) is consistent with the existing architectural and historical intent of the site; and (ii) does not detract from the historical interpretation and the scenic views of the monument and the existing park area.
LAND ACQUISITION; LEASE OR COOPERATIVE MANAGEMENT AGREEMENT.
Land Acquisition.--The Secretary shall acquire from the city of New York non-Federal lands, located within the monument as depicted on the map referred to in section 4(b), by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Lease or Cooperative Management Agreement.--To carry out the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may-- (1) lease non-Federal land located within the boundary of the monument; or (2) enter into a cooperative agreement for the management of non-Federal land located within the boundary of the monument.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a study commission of 7 persons, which shall be composed of-- (A) the president and at least 3 members of the executive committee of the Grant Monument Association; (B) representatives of the community surrounding the monument; and (C) citizens with a unique knowledge or expertise relating to the monument.
Government employees.--No officer or employee of the Federal Government or a State or local government is eligible for membership on the study commission.
Without pay.--Members of the study commission shall serve without pay.
Chair.--The members of the study commission shall designate a chair of the study commission.
Administrative support services.--On request of the study commission, the Secretary shall furnish on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services (including staff, supplies, and facilities) as are necessary for the study commission to carry out its duties under subsection (b).
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The study commission shall-- (A) review security and maintenance of the monument; (B) plan for interpretive programs of the monument; (C) plan for the complete restoration of the monument; (D) submit a study in accordance with paragraph (2); (E) monitor the progress of repairs being made to the tomb; and (F) submit reports to the Secretary and to Congress on the progress of any repairs being made to the tomb.
Study.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the study commission's first meeting, the study commission shall submit a written study of the monument to the Secretary, which shall include the following: (A) Proposed measures to improve security, maintenance, and interpretive programs of the monument, including such improvements as may be required to be carried out by April 27, 1999.
The proposed measures shall be based on the original plans of the architect of the tomb, John H. Duncan, and the plans of architect John Russell Pope, approved in 1928 by the Grant Monument Association.
An estimate of the capital costs and general operating costs of implementing the measures proposed under subparagraph (A).
Final Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the study is submitted to the Secretary under subsection (b)(2), the Secretary shall review and evaluate the study and submit to Congress a final plan for the projects at the monument to be fully completed by April 27, 1999.
Consistency with study.--The final plan shall be consistent with the study, except for any aspect of the study that the Secretary reports to Congress-- (A) is unreasonable; (B) is inconsistent with the existing architectural, historical, or educational intent of the site; (C) would detract from, distort, or otherwise compromise the historical interpretation or scenic views of the monument; or (D) would conflict with the purpose of this Act described in section 2(b).
Design.--The final plan shall contain a design for the site that-- (A) is consistent with the architectural and historical intent of the site; and (B) does not detract from or distort the historical interpretation or scenic views of the monument and the existing park area.
Meetings.-- (1) Open meetings.--All meetings of the study commission shall be open to the public.
Interested persons.--An interested person may attend a meeting of the study commission, appear before the study commission, or file a statement related to the purposes of this Act with the study commission.
FACA.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the study commission.
Termination.--The study commission shall terminate 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act.