SECTION 1. INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION.
The International Development Association Act (22 United States Code 284-284s) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor may agree on behalf of the United States to contribute $2,410,290,000 to the twelfth replenishment of the resources of the Association.
Subject to appropriations.--Any commitment made under paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For any contribution pursuant to a commitment made under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury $2,410,290,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
The African Development Bank Act (22 United States Code 290i-290i-10) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIPTION OF STOCK.
Subscription Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Bank may subscribe on behalf of the United States to 56,433 additional shares of the capital stock of the Bank.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the subscription authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury $680,800,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
The African Development Fund Act (22 United States Code 290g-290g-15) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Fund may contribute on behalf of the United States $300,000,000 to the eighth replenishment of the resources of the Fund.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury $300,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
INTER-AMERICAN INVESTMENT CORPORATION ACT.
The Inter-American Investment Corporation Act (22 United States Code 283aa- 283ii) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIPTIONS OF STOCK.
Subscription Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury may subscribe on behalf of the United States to additional shares of the capital stock of the Corporation.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the subscription authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated the Secretary of the Treasury $125,190,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
MULTILATERAL INVESTMENT GUARANTEE AGENCY.
The Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency Act (22 United States Code 290k- 290k-11) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ADDITIONAL SUBSCRIPTION OF STOCK.
Subscription Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury may subscribe on behalf of the United States to 15,648 additional shares of the capital stock of the Agency.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the subscription authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury $180,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES TRUST FUND.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) multilateral financial institutions lack sufficient resources to fund debt relief commitments that they have made to heavily indebted poor countries; (2) the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development has created and administers a trust fund, the HIPC Trust Fund, consisting of contributions from member countries, to help the multilateral financial institutions defray the cost of multilateral debt relief to eligible heavily indebted poor countries; (3) the HIPC Trust Fund is seriously in need of additional contributions; and (4) a United States contribution could help leverage contributions from other countries.
Contribution to the HIPC Trust Fund.--The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286-286mm) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTION TO THE HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES TRUST FUND.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury may pay $50,000,000 to the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries Trust Fund administered by the Bank.
Subject to appropriations.--The authority provided by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the payment authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury $50,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
ENHANCED STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT FACILITY/HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES TRUST FUND.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286 et sequentes) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
APPROVAL OF CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE ENHANCED STRUCTURAL ADJUSTMENT FACILITY/HEAVILY INDEBTED POOR COUNTRIES TRUST FUND.
``The Secretary of the Treasury may instruct the United States Executive Director of the Fund to vote-- ``(1) to approve the sale of up to 10,000,000 ounces of the gold of the Fund and the transfer of the earnings on the invested profits of such sale to the Trust for Special ESAF Operations for the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries and Interim ESAF Subsidy Operations (ESAF/HIPC Trust Fund); and ``(2) to support a decision that would make available to the ESAF/HIPC Trust Fund the resources in Special Contingency Account 2 (SCA-2) of the Fund derived from the extended burdensharing arrangements adopted pursuant to IMF Decision No.
9471 (90/98), as amended, including any funds attributable to the United States participation in such arrangements.