This Act may be cited as the ``Gulf State Community Renewal Commission Act''.
Whereas Hurricane Katrina's devastation is colossal in scope; Whereas it poses a massive national redevelopment obligation; and Whereas the expertise of America's professionals in the fields of city and regional planning, architecture, home building, and finance is required.
There is established the Gulf State Community Renewal Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The purposes of the Commission are to-- (1) examine, evaluate, and report on the rebuilding of communities in both urban and rural areas that were affected by Hurrican Katrina; (2) identify actions necessary for rebuilding such communities, and neighborhoods and town centers in such communities; (3) identify professions and resources available to such communities to assist in such rebuilding; and (4) create models and plans for such rebuilding that address-- (A) transportation needs; (B) economic development and job creation; (C) the tourism industry; (D) housing needs; (E) agriculture development; (F) environmental concerns; (G) natural disaster mitigation; and (H) any other areas of the public and private sectors determined relevant by the Commission.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
Members.--Subject to the requirements of subsection (b), the Commission shall be composed of 21 members, appointed by the President, who shall include-- (1) not less than 11 members who are experts in city or regional planning issues; (2) not less than 3 members who are historians or otherwise employed in academic institutions; (3) not less than 3 members who are hombuilders, architects, or contractors; (4) not less than 2 members who are experts in mortgage finance; and (5) not less than 2 members who are experts in small business issues.
Qualifications.-- (1) State representation.--The Commission shall include a total of 14 members from the States of Alabama, Mississippi, and Louisiana, and 7 members representative of other States.
Deadline for Appointment.--All members of the Commission shall be appointed on or before October 30, 2005.
Chairperson; Vice Chairpersons.--The Commission shall have a chairperson and two vice chairpersons, with a resident of each State referred to in subsection (b)(1) holding one of the three positions.
Initial Meeting.--The Commission shall meet and begin the operations of the Commission as soon as practicable after appointment of all the members.
Quorum; Vacancies.--After its initial meeting, the Commission shall meet upon the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
11 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
The functions of the Commission are-- (1) to hold such hearings and conduct such examinations and studies as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Commission under section 2; and (2) to submit to the President and Congress such reports as are required by section 10 containing such findings, conclusions, and recommendations as the Commission shall determine regarding actions, plans, and models for rebuilding neighborhoods and communities affected by Hurricane Katrina.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for purposes of carrying out this Act hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, receive evidence, and administer oaths.
Contracting.--The Commission may enter, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, into contracts to enable the Commission to discharge its duties under this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States any information related to any inquiry of the Commission conducted under this Act.
Each such department, agency, or instrumentality shall, to the extent authorized by law, furnish such information directly to the Commission upon request.
Assistance From Federal Agencies.-- (1) General services administration.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis administrative support and other services for the performance of the Commission's functions.
Other departments and agencies.--In addition to the assistance prescribed in paragraph (1), departments and agencies of the United States are authorized to provide to the Commission such services, funds, facilities, staff, and other support services as they may determine advisable and as may be authorized by law.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as departments and agencies of the United States.
Powers of Subcommittees, Members, and Agents.--Any subcommittee, member, or agent of the Commission may take, if authorized by the Commission, any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson.
Staff.--The Chairperson, in consultation with the Vice Chairpersons, may appoint additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its functions.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates; except that no rate of pay fixed under this subsection may exceed the equivalent of that payable for a position at level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Any individual appointed under subsection (a) or (b) shall be treated as an employee for purposes of chapters 63, 81, 83, 84, 85, 87, 89, and 90 of such title.
Detailees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement from the Commission, and such detailee shall retain the rights, status, and privileges of his or her regular employment without interruption.
Consultant Services.--The Commission is authorized to procure the services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates not to exceed the daily rate paid a person occupying a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
COMPENSATION AND TRAVEL EXPENSES.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission may be compensated at not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which that member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Initial Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress an initial report containing such findings, conclusions, and recommendations for the rebuilding of communities and neighborhoods affected by Hurricane Katrina as have been agreed to by a majority of Commission members.
Incremental Reports.--The Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress an incremental report containing such findings, conclusions, and recommendations for the rebuilding of communities and neighborhoods affected by Hurricane Katrina as have been agreed to by a majority of Commission members, at each of the following times: (1) Not later than 12 months after the submission of the initial report of the Commission.
Not later than 24 months after the submission of the initial report of the Commission.
Termination.-- (1) In general.--The Commission, and all the authorities of this Act, shall terminate 60 days after the date on which the second incremental report is submitted under subsection (b)(2).
Administrative activities before termination.--The Commission may use the 60-day period referred to in paragraph (1) for the purpose of concluding its activities, including providing testimony to committees of Congress concerning its reports.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission to carry out this Act $7,500,000.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.