This Act may be cited as the ``Arizona Land Exchange Facilitation Act of 2000''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) when the State of Arizona entered the Union, the State was granted more than 9,000,000 acres of State trust land to be held in permanent trust to be managed on behalf of the beneficiaries of the trust, primarily Arizona's schoolchildren; (2) the State is entitled to select additional land of a value that is approximately equal to the value of 15,234 acres of in lieu base land from vacant, unappropriated, and unreserved Federal land to fulfill the entitlement arising from the Act of June 20, 1910 (36 United States Statutes at Large 557, chapter 310), and the consent judgment known as the ``San Carlos Consent Judgment'' entered in State of Arizona v. Rogers C.B.
Morton, Court Document 74-696-PHX-WPC (D. Ariz. (1978)); (3) while the State has recognized that certain State trust land is of unique and significant value and ought to be conserved as open space to benefit future generations, while ensuring that there is a higher benefit to public schools and other trust beneficiaries, there is no mechanism currently available to the State to conserve such unique State trust land; and (4) an exchange of certain Federal and State land in Arizona will provide for improved land management by the Federal and State governments by exchanging certain State trust land that is of significant ecological value for permanent protection for certain Federal land that is suitable for the revenue generation mission of the State and other purposes identified by the State on behalf of its beneficiaries.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to improve manageability of Federal public land and State trust land in the State, to promote the conservation of unique natural areas, and to fulfill obligations to the beneficiaries of State trust land by providing for a land conveyance and a land exchange between the Federal and State governments under which-- (1) the Secretary of the Interior shall identify a pool of parcels of land that are vacant, unappropriated, unreserved, and suitable for disposal, so that the State may select Federal land that the Secretary shall convey to the State to fulfill the State's entitlement under the State's enabling act; and (2) the Secretary shall acquire certain State trust land in the State by eminent domain, with the consent of the State, in exchange for certain Federal land.
In this Act: (1) In lieu base land.--The term ``in lieu base land'' means land granted to the State under section 25 of the Act of June 20, 1910 (36 United States Statutes at Large 573).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Arizona.
State trust land.--The term ``State trust land'' means all right, title, and interest of the State on the date of enactment of this Act in and to-- (A) land (including the mineral estate) granted by the United States under sections 24 and 25 of the Act of June 20, 1910 (36 United States Statutes at Large 572, 573, chapter 310); and (B) land (including the mineral estate) owned by the State on the date of enactment of this Act that, under State law, is required to be managed for the benefit of the public school system or the institutions of the State designated under that Act.
FULFILLMENT OF ENTITLEMENT UNDER THE ENABLING ACT.
In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall identify land under the jurisdiction of the Secretary that-- (1) is vacant, unappropriated, and unreserved; and (2) is suitable for disposal under land management plans in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
Selection.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the State shall select land, identified by the Secretary under subsection (a), of approximately equal value (determined in accordance with section 6) to the 15,234 acres of in lieu base land identified as base land depicted on the map entitled ``Arizona State Trust Base Lands Not Compensated by the Federal Government'' and dated ________.
Conveyance.--On final agreement between the Secretary and the State under section 7(a), the Secretary shall convey to the State the land selected by the State under subsection (b).
Conveyance by the Secretary of Federal Land.-- (1) In general.--In exchange for the State trust land acquired by the Secretary under subsection (b), the Secretary shall convey to the State Federal land described in paragraph (2) that is of a value that is approximately equal to the value of the acquired State trust land, as determined under section 6.
Federal land.--The Federal land referred to in paragraph (1) is land under the jurisdiction of the Secretary and in the State that the Secretary determines is available for exchange under this Act.
Acquisition by the Secretary of State Trust Land.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall-- (A) on final agreement between the Secretary and the State under section 7(a), acquire by eminent domain the State designated trust land described in paragraph (2); and (B) manage the land in accordance with paragraph (3).
State trust land.--The State trust land referred to in paragraph (1) is land under the jurisdiction of the State that the State determines is available for exchange under this Act.
Management of land acquired by the secretary.-- (A) In general.--On acceptance of title by the United States, any land or interest in land acquired by the United States under this section that is located within the boundaries of a unit of the National Park System, the National Wildlife Refuge System, or any other system established by Act of Congress-- (i) shall become a part of the unit; and (ii) shall be subject to all laws (including regulations) applicable to the unit.
All other land.--Any land or interest in land acquired by the United States under this section (other than land or an interest in land described in subparagraph (A))-- (i) shall be administered by the Bureau of Land Management in accordance with laws (including regulations) applicable to the management of public land under the administration of the Bureau of Land Management; or (ii) where appropriate to protect land of unique ecological value, may be made subject to special management considerations, including a conservation easement, to-- (I) protect the land or interest in land from development; and (II) preserve open space.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all land acquired by the Secretary under this subsection is withdrawn from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws, from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws, and from operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws.
In General.--All exchanges authorized under this Act shall be for approximately equal value.
Appraisal Process.--The Secretary and the State shall jointly determine an independent appraisal process, which shall reflect nationally recognized appraisal standards, including, to the extent appropriate, the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions, to estimate values for the categories and groupings of land to be conveyed under section 4 and exchanged under section 5.
Dispute Resolution.--In the case of a dispute concerning an appraisal or appraisal issue that arises in the appraisal process, the appraisal or appraisal issue shall be resolved in accordance with section 206(d)(2) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(d)(2)).
Adjustment To Achieve Equal Value.--After the values of the parcels of land are determined, the Secretary and the State may-- (1) add or remove parcels to achieve a package of equally valued Federal land and State trust land; and (2) make public a list of the parcels included in the package.
Effect of Determination.--A determination of the value of a parcel of land under this section shall serve to establish the value of the parcel or interest in land in any eminent domain proceeding.
Costs.--The costs of carrying out this section shall be shared equally by the Secretary and the State.
Agreement.--The Secretary and the State shall enter into an agreement that specifies the terms under which land and interests in land shall be conveyed under sections 4 and 5, consistent with this section.
Conveyances by the United States.--All conveyances by the United States to the State under this Act shall be subject to valid existing rights and other interests held by third parties.
Conveyances by the State.--All conveyances by the State to the United States under this Act shall be subject only to such valid existing surface and mineral leases, grazing permits and leases, easements, rights-of-way, and other interests held by third parties as are determined to be acceptable under the title regulations of the Attorney General of the United States.
Timing.--The conveyance of all land and interests in land to be conveyed under this Act shall be made not later than 60 days after final agreement is reached between the Secretary and the State under subsection (a).
Form of Conveyance.--A conveyance of land or an interest in land by the State to the United States under this section shall be in such form as is determined to be acceptable under the title regulations of the Attorney General of the United States.
Hazardous Waste.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding the conveyance to the United States of land or an interest in land, the State shall continue to be responsible for all environmental remediation, waste management, and environmental compliance activities arising from ownership and control of the land or interest in land under applicable Federal and State laws with respect to conditions existing on the land on the date of conveyance.
Continuing responsibility.--Notwithstanding the conveyance to the State of land or an interest in land, the United States shall continue to be responsible for all environmental remediation, waste management, and environmental compliance activities arising from ownership and control of the land or interest in land under applicable Federal and State laws with respect to conditions existing on the land on the date of conveyance.
Costs.--The United States and the State shall each bear its own respective costs incurred in the implementation of this Act, except for the costs incurred under section 6.
Maps and Legal Descriptions.--The State and the Secretary shall each provide to the other the legal descriptions and maps of the parcels of land and interests in land under their respective jurisdictions that are to be exchanged under this Act.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the State, shall-- (1) conduct a study of land values of all State trust land within the exterior boundaries of the proposed conservation area under the Las Cienegas National Conservation Area Establishment Act of 1999, H.R.
2941, 106th Congress, in Pima County and Santa Cruz County, Arizona; and (2) submit to Congress a recommendation on whether any such land should be acquired by the Federal Government.
Contents.--The study shall include an examination of possible forms of compensation for the State trust land within the proposed Las Cienegas National Conservation Area, including-- (1) cash payments; (2) Federal administrative sites under the management of the Administrator of General Services; (3) water rights; and (4) relief from debt payment for the Central Arizona Water Conservation District.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
The authority of the Secretary to make the land conveyance under section 4 and the land exchange under section 5 expires on the date that is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.