This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Medical Services Support Act''.
In this Act, the term ``community-based emergency medical services'' means any regional, State, or local emergency medical services system.
FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
In General.--There is established a Federal Interagency Committee on Emergency Medical Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Interagency Committee on EMS'') which shall-- (1) assure coordination between the Federal agencies involved with State, local, and community-based emergency medical services; (2) identify community-based emergency medical services' needs; (3) create, or recommend, new or expanded grant programs for the purposes of improving community-based emergency medical services; (4) identify other ways to streamline the process through which Federal agencies support community-based emergency medical services; and (5) assist in priority setting based on discovered needs.
Membership.--The membership of the Interagency Committee on EMS shall consist of-- (1) a representative from the National Highway Transportation Administration of the Department of Transportation; (2) a representative of the Health Resources and Services Administration of the Department of Health and Human Services; (3) a representative of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention of the Department of Health and Human Services; (4) a representative of the United States Fire Administration of the Federal Emergency Management Agency; (5) a representative of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services; (6) a representative of the Department of Defense; (7) a representative of the Office of Emergency Preparedness of the Department of Health and Human Services; (8) a representative from the Wireless Telecom Bureau of the Federal Communications Commission; and (9) representatives of any other Federal agencies identified by the President as having a significant role in the purposes of the Interagency Committee on EMS.
Administration.--The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration shall provide administrative support to the Interagency Committee on EMS and the Advisory Council which shall include the scheduling of meetings, construction of an agenda, maintenance of minutes and records, report production, and reimbursement of advisory council members.
Leadership.--A chairperson of the Interagency Committee on EMS shall be selected annually by the members of the Interagency Committee on EMS.
Meetings.--The Interagency Committee on EMS shall meet as frequently as is determined by the Administrator of the National Highway Transportation Administration or on a quarter annual basis with the Advisory Council.
FEDERAL INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES ADVISORY COUNCIL.
Establishment.--There is established a Federal Interagency Committee on Emergency Medical Services Advisory Council (in this Act referred to as the ``Advisory Council'') which shall consist of not more than 13 individuals with an interest or expertise in emergency medical services selected by the Interagency Committee on EMS.
Membership.--The Interagency Committee on EMS shall assure representation from both urban and rural settings, and assure diverse representation from all sectors of the emergency medical services community on the panel.
Leadership.--A chairperson of the Advisory Council shall be selected annually by the Advisory Council members.
Compensation and Reimbursement.--The members of the Advisory Council shall serve without compensation except for the reimbursement of necessary expenses.
Meetings.--The Advisory Council shall meet on a quarter annual basis with the Interagency Committee on EMS.
The Interagency Committee on EMS and the Advisory Council shall each prepare an annual report to each House of Congress which shall include-- (1) a description of support currently being provided by the Committee or Council to community-based emergency medical services providers; (2) a description of how emergency medical services programs are being coordinated between the Federal agencies; (3) a needs assessment for improving community-based emergency medical services systems at State and local levels; (4) recommendations to Congress regarding the creation of new or the expansion of existing grants or other programs for improving community-based emergency medical services; and (5) recommendations about other measures that Congress can take to support community-based emergency medical services.