This Act may be cited as the ``Department of State Review Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF STATE REVIEW PANEL.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Department of State, established in 1789, is responsible for representing the worldwide interests of the United States and its citizens and for advancing the policies of the United States.
The Department operates 257 posts in more than 180 countries throughout the world, has approximately 21,500 full- time personnel, and has a budget of approximately $8,000,000,000.
There have been dramatic changes in the world in which the Department must function, including changes in technology, changes in religious, ethnic, and regional conflicts, and changes in economic, political, and military relationships.
Moreover, the world has witnessed the spread of weapons of mass destruction and the spread of terrorism.
Yet, there has been little change in the organization and structure of the Department or its posts throughout the world.
The Department and all United States diplomatic efforts should be the subject of a comprehensive review by an independent panel to assess how the Department can best fulfill its mission in the 21st century and meet the challenges of a rapidly changing world.
Establishment.--Not later than September 1, 2004, there shall be established a nonpartisan independent panel to be known as the Department of State Review Panel (in this section referred to as the ``Panel'').
The Panel shall have the duties set forth in this section.
Membership.-- (1) Composition and qualifications.--The Panel shall be composed of ten members who are individuals in the private sector who are recognized experts in matters relating to foreign affairs and the national security of the United States.
Appointment.--Members of the Panel shall be appointed as follows: (A) Three members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Three members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Two members appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Two members appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Chairperson.--The Panel shall have a chairperson who shall be selected by the members of the panel from among the members.
Report.--Not later than 12 months after the appointment of the last member to the Panel, the Panel shall prepare and submit to the Congress a comprehensive report.
The report shall include the following: (1) A review of current structures of the Department of State and related agencies, including the organization and operation of the embassies and consulates of the United States abroad, to determine how best to efficiently and effectively-- (A) represent the interests of the United States throughout the world; (B) advance the policies of the United States; (C) cooperate and integrate with other government agencies and departments, including the Department of Defense, the Department of Homeland Security, the Department of the Treasury, the Department of Commerce, the Office of the United States Trade Representative, the Agency for International Development, the Drug Enforcement Agency, and the intelligence agencies of the United States; and (D) meet the anticipated roles and missions of such entities in the future.
Recommendations on any structural reorganization at the Department of State and United States embassies and consulates, including the following: (A) Whether any geographical desks should be added, combined, or eliminated, including an examination of whether an ``American Affairs'' desk should be established within the Office of the Under Secretary for Political Affairs.
Whether any of the positions of Under or Assistant Secretary of State should be combined or eliminated, or any additional positions of Under or Assistant Secretary of State should be created, including an examination of whether a senior level position should be established to analyze and assess future challenges for the Department, and if needed, whether the position should be an Under or Assistant Secretary of State.
Whether a military attache should be stationed at each embassy and whether a member of any other Federal agency should be stationed at all or specific embassies worldwide.
Suggestions for changes in organization and process to ensure that the efforts of the United States to communicate effectively with other governments and engage in public diplomacy are successful.
Suggestions for changes in structures to better formulate and implement the foreign policy of the United States.
An independent assessment of the challenges the Department of State may face through the year 2020 and beyond.
A comprehensive review of how the Department of State, the embassies and consulates of the United States, and diplomatic and other personnel and delegations are organized to handle efficiently future risks, including any recommended structural or internal changes that may be necessary to meet future challenges to the national interest of the United States.
The planning assumptions used in the review conducted by the Panel, including assumptions relating to cooperation, communication with allies, levels of risk, real-time situational awareness, and instantaneous communication.
An examination of the forward presence and pre- positioning necessary by the Department of State for negotiation and conflict deterrence in response to anticipated threats and conflicts.
An examination of the current information infrastructure and technologies at the Department of State and recommendations on how these technologies should be updated, changed, or replaced for optimum utilization by the year 2008 and beyond.
An examination of ways the Department of State develops scenarios that may require a Department response, and recommendations for improving this process to incorporate nontraditional threat planning scenarios and input from other Federal agencies and nongovernmental organizations.
Recommendations regarding future personnel policies of the Department of State, including the following: (A) Whether an anticipated need exists for additional personnel who possess certain language skills, functional skills, and educational background.
Whether the Department of State should examine nontraditional recruitment and training efforts, including policies related to lateral transfers of personnel from other government agencies or the private sector, to meet Department of State needs.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Panel may secure directly from the Department of State and from any other Federal agency such information as the Panel considers necessary to carry out its duties under this section.
The head of the agency concerned shall ensure that information requested by the Panel under this subsection is promptly provided.
Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Panel shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Panel.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Panel shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Panel.
Executive director and staff.--Without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, the chairperson of the Panel may appoint and terminate an executive director and a staff of not more than four additional individuals, none of whom may be current employees of the Department of State or members of the Foreign Service, if the Panel determines that an executive director and staff are necessary in order for the Panel to perform its duties effectively.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Panel.
Compensation of executive director.--The chairperson may fix the compensation of the executive director without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Panel without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil or foreign service status or privilege.
The Secretary shall ensure that sufficient personnel are detailed to the Panel to enable the Panel to carry out its duties effectively.
Travel conditions.--To the maximum extent practicable, the members and employees of the Panel shall travel on government aircraft, ships, vehicles, or other conveyances when travel is necessary in the performance of a duty of the Panel, except that no such aircraft, ship, vehicle, or other conveyance may be scheduled primarily for the transportation of any such member or employee when the cost of commercial transportation is less expensive.
Administrative Provisions.-- (1) Use of mail.--The Panel may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Administrative and support services.--The Secretary of State shall furnish the Panel any administrative and support services requested by the Panel.
Gifts and donations.--The Panel may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Contractual authority.--The Panel may enter into such contracts as necessary for technical support and analysis, provided that the duration of such contracts does not exceed 120 days and that the total amount spent on all such contracts does not exceed $500,000.
Payment of Panel Expenses.--The compensation, travel expenses, and per diem allowances of members and employees of the Panel shall be paid out of funds available to the Department of State for the payment of compensation, travel allowances, and per diem allowances, respectively, of civilian employees of the Department.
The other expenses of the Panel shall be paid out of funds available to the Department for the payment of similar expenses incurred by the Department.
Sunset Provision.--The Panel shall terminate six months after the submission of a final report to the Congress under subsection (d).