This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Safety and Health Act of 1993''.
COVERAGE OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
The Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 668) is amended by redesignating sections 20 through 34 as sections 21 through 35, respectively, and by adding after section 19 the following: ``coverage of the house of representatives ``Sec.
Each employing authority and instrumentality of Congress shall comply with section 5, with the occupational safety and health standards issued under section 6, and with the requirements and regulations issued under section 8.
The Secretary shall conduct random inspections of places of employment under the jurisdiction or control of employing authorities and the instrumentalities of Congress.
Such inspections shall be conducted at least once during each Congress.
The Secretary shall also respond to any request that meets the conditions of section 8(f).
Such inspections shall identify each condition which the Secretary believes is a violation of a requirement under section 5, of an occupational safety and health standard issued under section 6, or of a regulation issued under section 8.
Upon completion of such inspection, the Secretary shall report all such conditions to the Director of Non- Legislative and Financial Services of the House of Representatives.
The Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services of the House of Representatives, shall, as soon after the receipt of a report under subsection (b) as is practicable, appoint a special counsel to seek abatement of any conditions identified in such report as not in compliance with the requirements of section 5, 6, or 8 and to assess appropriate penalties against the employing authority or instrumentality of Congress for noncompliance with such requirements.
Section 17 shall apply in any enforcement procedures brought under this subsection.
Any employing authority or instrumentality of Congress which is assessed a penalty under subsection (c) may appeal the assessment to the Office of Fair Employment Practices which shall afford an opportunity for a hearing and shall thereafter issue a decision based on findings of fact which affirms, modifies, or vacates the actions of the special counsel appointed under subsection (c).
Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by the decision of the Office of Fair Employment Practices may obtain review of such decision by the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which such violation is alleged to have occurred or by the Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit under the standards and conditions for review of orders by the Commission in section 11.
(1) No person shall discharge or in any manner discriminate against any employee because such employee has filed any complaint or instituted or caused to be instituted under or related to this section or has testified or is about to testify in any such proceeding or because of the exercise by such employee on behalf of such employee or others of any right afforded by this section.
Any employee who believes that such employee has been discharged or otherwise discriminated against by any such person in violation of paragraph (1) may, within 30 days after such violation occurs, file a complaint with the Director of Non-Legislative and Financial Services.
Upon receipt of such complaint the Director shall cause such investigation to be made as the Director deems appropriate.
If upon such investigation, the Director determines that paragraph (1) has been violated, the Director shall bring an action in any appropriate United States district court against such person.
In any such action the United States district courts shall have jurisdiction for cause shown to restrain violations of paragraph (1) and order all appropriate relief, including rehiring or reinstatement of the employee to the employee's former position with back pay.
Within 90 days of the receipt of a complaint filed under paragraph (2), the Director, shall notify the complainant of the Director's determination under paragraph (2).
For purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `employing authority' has the meaning given such term in the Fair Employment Practices Resolution (House Resolution 558 of the One Hundredth Congress, as adopted October 4, 1988, and incorporated into rule LI of the Rules of the House of Representatives of the One Hundred and Second Congress); and ``(2) the term `instrumentalities of the Congress' includes the Architect of the Capitol, the Library of Congress, the Congressional Budget Office, the General Accounting Office, the Government Printing Office, the Office of Technology Assessment, and the United States Botanic Garden.