This Act may be cited as the ``Protecting America's Children Against Terrorism Act''.
AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
Public Health Measures To Protect Against Terrorism.--Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 319G, the following: ``SEC.
PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES TO PROTECT AGAINST TERRORISM.
National Task Force on Children and Bioterrorism.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a National Task Force on Children and Bioterrorism (referred to in this subsection as the `Task Force').
Membership.--The Task Force shall be composed of-- ``(A) the Secretary and other officials of the Department determined appropriate by the Secretary; ``(B) the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency; ``(C) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; ``(D) the Secretary of Education; ``(E) child health experts on infectious disease, environmental health, and toxicology, who shall be appointed by the Secretary; ``(F) representatives of national children's health organizations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics and the National Association of Children's Hospitals, who shall be appointed by the Secretary; and ``(G) representatives of other relevant organizations determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Recommendations.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Task Force shall make recommendations to the Secretary concerning-- ``(A) an assessment of the preparedness of the health care system of the United States to respond to bioterrorism aimed at children and youth, including the readiness of public health institutions, providers of health care, and other emergency service personnel to detect, diagnose and respond to bioterrorist attacks affecting large numbers of children and youth; ``(B) needed changes to the health care and emergency medical services systems, including recommendations on research, training of health personnel, and changes to the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile Program to include the medical needs of children; and ``(C) national, regional, and local health care and emergency medical services protocols for dealing with mass casualties of children and youth resulting from bioterrorism.
Children and Terrorism Information Network.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall establish a Children and Terrorism Information Network to collect and disseminate to health providers (including children's hospitals and pediatric units of hospitals), community centers (including poison control centers), and schools (including school-based health clinics) up-to-date information on how to prepare for a biological or chemical terrorist attack and the steps that should be taken to ensure that children get the health care they need in the event of such an attack.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.
National Pharmaceutical Stockpile Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall provide for the inclusion of supplies, equipment, and instructions as are appropriate for use with respect to children in push packs and Vendor Management Inventories under the National Pharmaceutical Stockpile Program.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.
Securing Our Social Services Infrastructure To Support Children and Families.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to implement, develop, expand or increase the capacity of 2-1-1 call centers, or other universal hotlines, in order to connect the public to all available information hotlines, or call centers, developed in response to disaster and recovery efforts, as well as to connect the public to existing social services to provide needed help and support to children and families in crisis.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), an entity shall-- ``(A) be a non-profit organization working to implement, develop, expand, or increase the capacity of 2-1-1 call centers, or other universal hotlines in their State, region or locality; and ``(B) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.''.
Pediatric Studies.--Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 409C (relating to clinical research) and the second section 409D (relating to enhancement awards) as sections 409G and 409H, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 409H (as so redesignated), the following: ``SEC.
PEDIATRIC STUDIES OF DRUGS AND BIOLOGICS, INCLUDING VACCINES, USED TO PREVENT AND TREAT ILLNESSES AND INJURY CAUSED BY BIOLOGICAL OR CHEMICAL AGENTS USED IN WARFARE AND TERRORISM.
Publication of List.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall develop and maintain a secure and confidential list of drugs and biologics, including vaccines, that may be used to prevent and treat illnesses and injury caused by biological or chemical agents used in acts of warfare or terrorism and which require pediatric testing.
Testing Plan.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall develop a plan to-- ``(1) provide for the timely pediatric testing and labeling of the agents on the list developed under subsection (a) for the year involved; and ``(2) coordinate such testing and labeling program with activities conducted under existing laws and regulations concerning pediatric testing of drugs and biologics.
Contracts.--The Secretary may award contracts to entities that have the expertise to conduct pediatric clinical trials (including qualified universities, hospitals, laboratories, contract research organizations, federally funded programs such as pediatric pharmacology research units, other public or private institutions or, individuals) to enable such entities to conduct pediatric studies concerning drugs and biologics, including vaccines, that are used to prevent and treat illnesses and injuries caused by biological or chemical agents used in acts of warfare or terrorism.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.''.
Training.--Subpart 2 of part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 295 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 770(a), by inserting ``other than section 770A,'' after ``subpart,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
TRAINING FOR PEDIATRIC ISSUES SURROUNDING BIOLOGICAL AND CHEMICAL AGENTS USED IN WARFARE AND TERRORISM.
Grants.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to-- ``(1) provide for the education and training of clinicians (including nurses) in the pediatric consequences, systems, and treatment of biological and chemical agents; and ``(2) assist in the development and distribution of accurate educational materials on the pediatric consequences, symptoms and treatment of biological or chemical agents.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), an entity shall-- ``(1) be a children hospital, a pediatric unit of a hospital, a professional organization, or any other entity that the Secretary determines to be appropriate; and ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION ACT OF 1965.
Subpart 2 of part A of title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7131 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
SCHOOL EVACUATIONS, SAFE PLACES AND PARENTAL NOTIFICATIONS.
Recommendations and Models.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall develop recommendations and models to assist communities in developing-- ``(1) school evacuation plans; ``(2) safe places for children to go in case of an attack on a school or individuals in the school; ``(3) partnerships with the medical community to ensure that children get the immediate care they need in the event of such an attack; and ``(4) procedures for notifying parents of evacuation plans and providing information on how and where to find their child or children in the event of such an attack.
Dissemination.--The Secretary shall ensure that the recommendations and models developed under subsection (a) are disseminated to local school districts throughout the United States, and, in coordination with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, to the health provider and public health communities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.
MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES FOR CHILDREN AND THEIR CAREGIVERS.
Grants.--The Secretary, jointly with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to develop and implement a plan for the provision of comprehensive mental health services for children, school faculty, and child care providers who are affected by terrorist attacks, times of war, or other major crisis.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), an entity shall-- ``(1) be a local educational agency, a community-based organization, a community mental health organization, a professional organization, or a partnership of such entities; and ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall remain available to carry out this section until expended.''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE ROBERT T. STAFFORD DISASTER RELIEF AND EMERGENCY ASSISTANCE ACT.
Title IV of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5170 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 410, the following: ``SEC.
Children's Coordinating Officer.--Upon a determination by the President that children have lost their custodial parent or parents in an area declared a disaster area by the President under this Act, the President shall appoint an individual to serve as a Children's Coordinating Officer for the area.
Such Officer shall provide necessary support and assistance for such children to ensure their immediate care and transition to a permanent and loving family.
Functions.--A Children's Coordinating Officer appointed under subsection (a) shall partner with relevant Federal, State and local governmental agencies, and coordinate all efforts by community-based organizations, foundations, funds, or other organizations, to direct and coordinate the provision of assistance to children described in subsection (a).
Services.--A Children's Coordinating Officer appointed under subsection (a) shall ensure that children and their caregivers are provided with-- ``(1) immediate temporary care services; ``(2) counseling on long-term permanency planning; ``(3) legal services for guardianships and adoptions; ``(4) information on available services and assistance for the victims of the disaster; and ``(5) mental health services.