This Act may be cited as the ``United States Postal Service Commission Act of 2002''.
Establishment.--There is established the Presidential Commission on the United States Postal Service (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members appointed by the President, of whom-- (A) 1 shall be designated by the President as chairperson of the Commission; (B) at least 1 shall not be a Federal officer or employee; and (C) at least 1 shall be a union representative.
Prohibition.--No member of the Commission appointed under paragraph (1) may be a stakeholder.
Definition of stakeholder--In this Act the term ``stakeholder'' means any individual who-- (A) has close ties to the United States Postal Service, including-- (i) any employee or officer of, or any competitor with, the United States Postal Service; and (ii) any member of a labor organization representing any unit of the United States Postal Service or any entity in competition with the United States Postal Service; or (B) is an employee of the Postal Rate Commission.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.--The Commission shall study matters relating to-- (1) the mission and role of the United States Postal Service, including the scope of competition with the private sector, the extent of the monopoly of the United States Postal Service on letter mail, and the extent to which the United States Postal Service should engage in any postal-related activity, rate setting, and price flexibilities; (2) the best structure of the United States Postal Service to ensure its future financial viability, including proposals that would restructure the United States Postal Service as a private entity, Government agency, or commercial Government entity and examine the human capital issues of the United States Postal Service; (3) infrastructure, including post offices and mail processing centers; (4) the regulatory and governance structure of the United States Postal Service, including the Postal Rate Commission and the Board of Governors; (5) the transparency and accountability of United States Postal Service operations; (6) security of United States Postal Service employees and customers; (7) increasing the efficiency of the United States Postal Service, including cost-cutting measures, productivity, and technology implementation; and (8) other issues that the Commission determines are relevant to ensuring the long term viability and increased efficiency of the United States Postal Service.
Report.--Not later than the date that is the earlier of the date occurring 1 year after the initial meeting of the Commission or 15 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to the President, the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and the Committee on Governmental Reform of the House of Representatives that includes-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission addressing the matters studied under subsection (a); and (2) the recommendations of the Commission for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or executive agency and from the United States Postal Service and the Postal Rate Commission such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Information request.--Upon request of the chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish the information under paragraph (1) to the Commission.
United States Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Appointment and termination.--The chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Approval of executive director.--The employment of an executive director under subparagraph (A) shall be subject to approval by the Commission.
Compensation.--The chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Personnel as federal employees.-- (A) In general.--The executive director and any personnel of the Commission who are employees shall be employees under section 2105 of title 5, United States Code, for purposes of chapters 63, 81, 83, 84, 85, 87, 89, and 90 of that title.
Members of commission.--Subparagraph (A) shall not be construed to apply to members of the Commission.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 60 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 3.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.