This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness in the Workplace Commission Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Workers are not achieving wage and benefit increases commensurate with corporate profits and sustained economic expansion.
While the median wage for workers fell 8 percent in real terms during the business cycle peaks from 1979 through 1996, after-tax corporate profit rates grew 66 percent.
The wage gap between men and women has increased in the last 4 years, reversing a 20 year trend in which that gap had narrowed.
Despite a significant degree of closing the education gap between minority and white Americans, wage gaps between these groups persist and for some minority groups have been expanded.
Over the period of 1979 through 1996, workers have experienced a heightened sense of job insecurity due to corporate downsizing, deregulation of key industries, new technology, and foreign competition.
The last decade has seen a growth in the use of part- time and temporary workers.
Insufficient research has been done to determine the extent and the impact of the use of part-time workers and the failure of wages, especially for female workers, to keep pace with economic growth and corporate profits.
In General.--There is established the National Commission on Fairness in the Workplace (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Member Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this Act.
Chairperson, Vice Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be designated by the President at the time of appointment.
The Vice Chairperson shall be elected by the members of the Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson and the vice Chairperson shall be the life of the Commission.
Termination.--The Commission shall cease to exist upon the expiration of 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--The Commission shall examine-- (1) the growing corporate practice of providing wages and benefit levels for part-time and temporary employees which are lower than the wage and benefit levels provided to full-time employees who perform essentially identical work; (2) how the use of part-time and temporary employees has affected wage and benefit levels, employee job insecurity, and employee productivity; (3) the reasons that workers' wages have not kept pace with corporate profits and economic growth; (4) the reasons for the widening median wage gap between working men and working women; and (5) the reasons for the consistent discrepancy in the average wage of minority populations in comparison to the average wage of white Americans.
At the conclusion of the examination, the Commission shall develop policy options for the Congress to address the problems identified in the examination.
Scope.--The Commission shall conduct its examination with respect to the States and Guam, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands.
Definition.--As used in section 2 and this section, the term ``minority populations'' means Blacks (not of Hispanic origin), Hispanics, Asians, Pacific Islanders, American Indians, and Alaskan natives.
Appointment.--Within 60 days of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall be composed of 14 members appointed as follows: (1) 6 members appointed by the President of which 2 shall be from the executive branch and 4 representatives from either labor, business management, or academia.
2 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate of which one shall be a member of the Senate and one shall be from private life.
2 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate of which one shall be a member of the Senate and one shall be from private life.
2 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives of which one shall be a member of the House of Representatives and one shall be from private life.
2 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives of which one shall be a member of the House of Representatives and one shall be from private life.
The Secretary of Labor shall be an ex-officio member of the Commission.
Waiver of Limitation on Executive Schedule Positions.-- Appointments may be made under subsection (a) without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Rates of pay.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members shall each be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay for GS-15 of the General Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of members and federal employees.--Members of the Commission who are Members of the Senate or the House of Representatives or full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
GENERAL AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet monthly or at the call of the chairperson or a majority of its members.
Staff.--The Commission shall appoint a staff.
Experts and Consultants.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for research and other services without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Service of process.--All process of any court to which application is to be made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
The Commission shall report its findings and policy options developed under section 4 to the Congress not later than 30 days after the termination date of the Commission, together with its recommendations for legislation and administrative actions the Commission considers appropriate.