This Act may be cited as the ``No More Terror in New York Act of 2002''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Yasser Arafat, in a letter sent to then Israeli Prime Minister Rabin on September 9, 1993, stated that the PLO ``renounces the use of terrorism and other acts of violence and will assume responsibility over all PLO elements and personnel in order to assure their compliance, prevent violations, and discipline violators''.
During the last 18 months of the ``Intifada'' hundreds of Israelis have been killed in numerous terrorist attacks committed by terrorists belonging to Palestinian extremist organizations.
The Department of State report of April 2001 on Palestinian compliance with the Oslo Accords details the involvement of the PLO's Fatah faction and Tanzim militant units in terrorism and violent incitement, stating ``Elements of Fatah, a PLO faction, and members of the PA's [Palestinian Authority's] security forces instigated and directly participated in anti-Israel violence.
According to the Israeli Government, more than 70 percent of terrorist attacks in Israel have been committed by the Fatah, Tanzim and its military brigades, and by Force 17, Yasser Arafat's Presidential Guard.
The PLO recently attempted to smuggle more than 50 tons of arms from Iran into PLO-controlled territory.
President Bush said ``Ordering up weapons that were intercepted on a boat headed for that part of the world is not part of fighting terror [.
CONGRESSIONAL STATEMENT REGARDING UNITED STATES POLICY.
The Congress-- (1) finds that the PLO is in violation of the Oslo Accords under which the organization made a commitment to abandon and renounce terrorism; (2) urges the President to withdraw or terminate any waiver by the President of the requirements of section 1003 of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989; (3) urges the Secretary of State to designate the PLO, appropriate constituent groups (including Fatah and Tanzim), and appropriate groups operating as arms of the Palestinian Authority (including Force 17) as a foreign terrorist organization under section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act; (4) urges the President to direct the United States Representative to the United Nations to take all appropriate measures to ensure termination of the permanent observer status of the PLO at the United Nations; (5) calls upon the United Nations General Assembly to revoke the permanent observer status of the PLO; and (6) calls upon the United Nations General Assembly to revoke any status relating to the United Nations under which the PLO is able to maintain an office in New York City.
RESTRICTIONS ON TRAVEL BY MEMBERS OF PLO UNITED NATIONS MISSION.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any alien admitted to the United States with diplomatic status as a representive of the PLO shall be subject to restrictions on travel while in the United States under this section.
Restricted Travel Area.--PLO representatives in the United States shall be restricted to travel within a 25 mile radius of the United Nations Headquarters Building.
Prior Approval Required for Other Travel.--PLO representatives shall submit a written request to the Department of State concerning travel in the United States outside of the area designated under subsection (b).
Each request shall be accompanied by such information as the Secretary of State shall require.
PLO representatives must obtain approval of travel not later than 48 hours prior to the initiation of travel.
Any necessary tickets for transportation and accommodations during such travel shall be arranged through the Office of Foreign Missions of the Department of State.
PLO Involvement With Terrorism.--Beginning 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and every 6 months thereafter, the Secretary of State shall submit a report on the PLO's involvement with acts of terror and terrorist groups to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
PLO Travel.--Beginning 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and every 6 months thereafter, the Secretary of State shall submit a report on travel by PLO diplomatic representatives in the United States outside of the restricted travel area to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Oslo Accords'' means all agreements signed between the Government of Israel and the Palestine Liberation Organization or Palestinian Authority since September 13, 1993.
The term ``PLO'' means Palestine Liberation Organization.