This Act may be cited as the ``After School Education and Safety Act of 1997''.
The purpose of this Act is to improve academic and social outcomes for students by providing productive activities during after school hours.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Today's youth face far greater social risks than did their parents and grandparents.
Students spend more of their waking hours alone, without supervision, companionship, or activity than the students spend in school.
Law enforcement statistics show that youth who are ages 12 through 17 are most at risk of committing violent acts and being victims of violent acts between 3 p.m. and 6 p.m. (4) Greater numbers of students are failing in school and the consequences of academic failure are more dire in 1997 than ever before.
The goals of this Act are as follows: (1) To increase the academic success of students.
To improve the intellectual, social, physical, and cultural skills of students.
To promote safe and healthy environments for students.
To prepare students for workforce participation.
To provide alternatives to drug, alcohol, tobacco, and gang, activity.
In this Act: (1) School.--The term ``school'' means a public kindergarten, or a public elementary school or secondary school, as defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The Secretary is authorized to carry out a program under which the Secretary awards grants to schools to enable the schools to carry out the activities described in section 7(a).
Authorized Activities.-- (1) Required.--Each school receiving a grant under this Act shall carry out at least 2 of the following activities: (A) Mentoring programs.
Permissive.--Each school receiving a grant under this Act may carry out any of the following activities: (A) Drug, alcohol, and gang, prevention activities.
Health and nutrition counseling.
Job skills preparation activities.
Time.--A school shall provide the activities described in subsection (a) only after regular school hours during the school year.
Special Rule.--Each school receiving a grant under this Act shall carry out activities described in subsection (a) in a manner that reflects the specific needs of the population, students, and community to be served.
Location.--A school shall carry out the activities described in subsection (a) in a school building or other public facility designated by the school.
Administration.--In carrying out the activities described in subsection (a), a school is encouraged-- (1) to request volunteers from the business and academic communities to serve as mentors or to assist in other ways; (2) to request donations of computer equipment; and (3) to work with State and local park and recreation agencies so that activities that are described in subsection (a) and carried out prior to the date of enactment of this Act are not duplicated by activities assisted under this Act.
Each school desiring a grant under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Each such application shall-- (1) identify how the goals set forth in section 4 shall be met by the activities assisted under this Act; (2) provide evidence of collaborative efforts by students, parents, teachers, site administrators, and community members in the planning and administration of the activities; (3) contain a description of how the activities will be administered; (4) demonstrate how the activities will utilize or cooperate with publicly or privately funded programs in order to avoid duplication of activities in the community to be served; (5) contain a description of the funding sources and in- kind contributions that will support the activities; and (6) contain a plan for obtaining non-Federal funding for the activities.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2002.