This Act may be cited as the ``International Disability and Victims of Landmines, Civil Strife and Warfare Assistance Act of 2001''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the World Health Organization (WHO), between 7 percent and 10 percent of the world's population, or almost 500,000,000 people, live with disabilities.
About 80 percent of these individuals live in developing countries, where only 1 percent to 2 percent have access to the necessary rehabilitation services, and many face numerous physical and social barriers that inhibit their full participation in their communities.
Factors contributing to the number of individuals with disabilities include war and other forms of violence, inadequate medical care, and natural and other disasters.
(A) According to the International Committee of the Red Cross, there are tens of millions of landmines in over 60 countries around the world, and it has estimated that as many as 24,000 people are maimed or killed each year by landmines, mostly civilians, resulting in amputations and disabilities of various kinds.
While the United States Government invests more than $100,000,000 in mine action programs annually, including funding for mine awareness and demining training programs, only about ten percent of these funds go to directly aid landmine victims.
The Patrick Leahy War Victims Fund, administered by the United States Agency for International Development, has provided essential prosthetics and rehabilitation for landmine and other war victims in developing countries who are disabled and has provided long-term sustainable improvements in quality of life for victims of civil strife and warfare, addressing such issues as barrier-free accessibility, reduction of social stigmatization, and increasing economic opportunities.
Enhanced coordination is needed among Federal agencies that carry out assistance programs in foreign countries for victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare to make better use of interagency expertise and resources.
According to a review of Poverty and Disability commissioned by the World Bank, ``disabled people have lower education and income levels than the rest of the population.
They are more likely to have incomes below poverty level than the non-disabled population, and they are less likely to have savings and other assets .
he links between poverty and disability go two ways--not only does disability add to the risk of poverty, but conditions of poverty add to the risk of disability.''.
Numerous international human rights conventions and declarations recognize the need to protect the rights of individuals regardless of their status, including those individuals with disabilities, through the principles of equality and non-discrimination.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to authorize assistance for individuals with disabilities, including victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare.
INTERNATIONAL DISABILITIES AND WAR VICTIMS ASSISTANCE.
The Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 134 the following: ``SEC.
135. INTERNATIONAL DISABILITIES AND WAR VICTIMS ASSISTANCE.
Authorization.--The President, acting through the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development, is authorized to furnish assistance to individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare, in foreign countries.
Activities.--The programs established pursuant to subsection (a) may include activities such as the following: ``(1) Development of local capacity to provide medical and rehabilitation services for individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare, in foreign countries, such as-- ``(A) support for and training of medical professionals, including surgeons, nurses, and physical therapists, to provide effective emergency and other medical care and for the development of training manuals relating to first aid and other medical treatment; ``(B) support for sustainable prosthetic and orthotic services; and ``(C) psychological and social rehabilitation of such individuals, together with their families as appropriate, for the reintegration of such individuals into local communities.
Support for policy reform and advocacy efforts related to the needs and abilities of individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare.
Coordination of programs established pursuant to subsection (a) with existing programs for individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare.
Support for establishment of appropriate entities in foreign countries to coordinate programs, projects, and activities related to assistance for individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare.
Support for primary, secondary, and vocational education, public awareness and training programs and other activities that help prevent war-related injuries and assist individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare, with their reintegration into society and their ability to make sustained social and economic contributions to society.
Priority.--To the maximum extent feasible, assistance under this section shall be provided through nongovernmental organizations, and, as appropriate, through governments to establish appropriate norms, standards, and policies related to rehabilitation and issues affecting individuals with disabilities, including victims of civil strife and warfare.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $15,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 and 2003.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under the preceding sentence are authorized to be provided notwithstanding any other provision of law.''.
RESEARCH, PREVENTION, AND ASSISTANCE RELATED TO INTERNATIONAL DISABILITIES AND LANDMINE AND OTHER WAR VICTIMS.
Authorization.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, is authorized-- (A) to conduct programs in foreign countries related to individuals with disabilities, including victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare; and (B) to provide grants to nongovernmental organizations for the purpose of carrying out research, prevention, public awareness and assistance programs in foreign countries related to individuals with disabilities, including victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare.
Approval of secretary of state.--Activities under programs established pursuant to paragraph (1) may be carried out in foreign countries only after consultation with the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development, and upon approval for such activities in such countries by the Secretary of State.
Activities.--Programs established pursuant to subsection (a) may include the following activities: (1) Research on trauma, physical, psychological, and social rehabilitation, and continuing medical care related to individuals with disabilities, including victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare, including-- (A) conducting research on psychological and social factors that lead to successful recovery; (B) developing, testing, and evaluating model interventions that reduce post-traumatic stress and promote health and well-being; (C) developing basic instruction tools for initial medical response to traumatic injuries; and (D) developing basic instruction manuals for patients and healthcare providers, including for emergency and follow-up care, proper amputation procedures, and reconstructive surgery.
Facilitation of peer support networks for individuals with disabilities, including victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare, in foreign countries, including-- (A) establishment of organizations at the local level, administered by such individuals, to assess and address the physical, psychological, economic and social rehabilitation and other needs of such individuals, together with their families as appropriate, for the purpose of economic and social reintegration into local communities; and (B) training related to the implementation of such peer support networks, including training of outreach workers to assist in the establishment of organizations such as those described in subparagraph (A) and assistance to facilitate the use of the networks by such individuals.
Sharing of expertise from limb-loss and disability research centers in the United States with similar centers and facilities in war-affected countries, including promoting increased health for individuals with limb loss and limb deficiency and epidemiological research on secondary medical conditions related to limb loss and limb deficiency.
Developing a database of best practices to address the needs of the war-related disabled through comprehensive examination of support activities related to such disability and access to medical care and supplies.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2004.
EXPERTISE OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs is authorized-- (1) to provide advice and expertise on prosthetics, orthotics, physical and psychological rehabilitation and treatment, and disability assistance to other Federal departments and agencies, including providing for temporary assignment on a non-reimbursable basis of appropriate Department of Veterans Affairs personnel, with respect to the implementation of programs to provide assistance to victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare in foreign countries and landmine research and health-related programs, including programs established pursuant to section 135 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (as added by section 3 of this Act) and programs established pursuant to section 4 of this Act; and (2) to provide technical assistance to private voluntary organizations on a reimbursable basis with respect to the planning, development, operation, and evaluation of such landmine assistance, research, and prevention programs.
Establishment.--The Secretary of State shall establish and chair an interagency group to ensure coordination of all Federal programs that furnish assistance to victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare, and conduct landmine research, demining and prevention programs.
Other Members.--Members of the interagency group shall include, but not be limited to, representatives from-- (1) the United States Agency for International Development; (2) the Department of Health and Human Services; (3) the Department of Education; (4) the Department of Defense; and (5) the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Public Meetings.--At least once each calendar year, the interagency group should hold a public meeting in order to afford an opportunity for any person to present views regarding the activities of the United States Government with respect to assistance to victims of landmines and other victims of civil strife and warfare and related programs.
The Secretary of State shall maintain a record of each meeting and shall make the record available to the public.