Section 104(k) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9604(k)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (12) as paragraphs (5) through (13); (2) in paragraph (3) by striking ``paragraphs (4) and (5)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (5) and (6)''; (3) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following: ``(4) Grants for waterfront brownfields revitalization.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (5) and (6), the President shall establish a program to provide grants to eligible entities or nonprofit organizations to be used at one or more waterfront brownfield sites.
Use of funds.--Such grants may be used for reuse planning, site characterization and assessment, or remediation at waterfront brownfields sites, including the integration of activities related to the design and implementation of water quality improvements, low impact development approaches, green infrastructure, remediation and management of sediments, or flood damage prevention associated with brownfields remediation and reuse.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `waterfront brownfield site' means a brownfield site any part of which is adjacent to a body of water.
''; (4) in paragraph (5)(A) (as redesignated by paragraph (1) of this section) by inserting after clause (ii) the following: ``(iii) Waterfront brownfields revitalization.--A grant made to an eligible entity or nonprofit organization under paragraph (4) may not exceed $500,000''; and (5) in paragraph (7)(A) (as redesignated by paragraph (1) of this section) by inserting ``waterfront brownfields revitalization'' after ``community involvement''; and (6) by striking paragraph (13) (as redesignated by paragraph (1) of this section) and inserting the following: ``(13) Funding.-- ``(A) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection $220,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012.
Use of certain funds.--Of the amount made available under subparagraph (A) $55,000,000, or, if the amount made available is less than $220,000,000, 25 percent of the amount made available, shall be used for site characterization, assessment, and remediation of facilities described in section 101(39)(D)(ii)(II); and ``(C) Waterfront brownfields revitalization.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for waterfront brownfields revitalization grants under paragraph (4).''.
Establishment.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall establish and serve as chairperson of a task force on waterfront brownfields revitalization.
Membership.--Members of the task force shall include representatives who have expertise in waterfronts or brownfields revitalization, including representatives from the following: (1) The Environmental Protection Agency.
The National Oceanographic and Atmospheric Administration.
The Army Corps of Engineers.
The Department of Transportation.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The Economic Development Administration.
The Fish and Wildlife Service.
State and Local governments.
Community-based organizations and other interested parties.
Any additional members the Administrator chooses to include.
Duties.--The task force shall identify-- (1) current and potential funding and technical assistance resources for waterfront brownfields revitalization; (2) barriers to and solutions for waterfront brownfields revitalization; and (3) methods to coordinate interagency efforts for waterfront brownfields revitalization.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall submit a report detailing the findings of the task force in improving waterfront brownfields revitalization to the appropriate committees of Congress.