This Act may be cited as the ``Indian Employment and Training Improvement Act of 1997''.
The third sentence of section 7 of the Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3406) is amended by striking ``shall have the authority to waive any'' and inserting ``shall waive any statutory requirement,''.
Section 8 of the Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3407) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``(including any request for a waiver that is made as part of the plan submitted by the tribal government)''; and (2) in the second sentence, by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, including reconsidering the disapproval of any waiver requested by the Indian tribe''.
Section 9 of the Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3408) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``The plan submitted''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Employment Opportunities.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, including any requirement of a program that is integrated under a plan under this Act, a tribal government may use a percentage of the funds made available under this Act (as determined under paragraph (2)) for the creation of employment opportunities, including providing private sector training placement under section 10.
Determination of percentage.--The percentage of funds that a tribal government may use under this subsection is the greater of-- ``(A) the rate of unemployment in the area subject to the jurisdiction of the tribal government; or ``(B) 10 percent.''.
In General.--Section 11(a) of the Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3410(a)) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``Bureau of Indian Affairs'' and inserting ``Office of Self- Governance of the Department of the Interior''; (2) in paragraph (4), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(5) ensuring an orderly transition with respect to the administration of the programs integrated under the project in such manner as to eliminate any potential adverse effects of the project on any Indian tribe that-- ``(A) has entered into a self-determination contract (as that term is defined in section 4(j) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(j))); or ``(B) receives funding under this Act.''.
Personnel.--In carrying out the amendment made by subsection (a)(1), the Secretary of the Interior shall transfer from the Bureau of Indian Affairs to the Office of Self-Governance of the Department of the Interior such personnel and resources as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
ASSIGNMENT OF FEDERAL PERSONNEL TO STATE INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
Section 18 of the Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3417) is amended-- (1) by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``SEC.
ASSIGNMENT OF FEDERAL PERSONNEL TO INDIAN ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
''; and (2) by inserting ``or Indian tribe'' after ``State'' each place it appears.
The Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3401 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The head of each Federal agency specified in section 4 that otherwise has jurisdiction over a program that is integrated under this Act (in accordance with a plan under section 6) shall permit a tribal government that carries out that plan to establish a consolidated advisory committee to carry out the duties of each advisory committee that would otherwise be required under applicable law (including any council or commission relating to private industry) to carry out the programs integrated under the plan.
Waivers.--As necessary to carry out paragraph (1), each agency head referred to in that paragraph shall waive any statutory requirement, regulation, or policy requiring the establishment of an advisory committee (including any advisory commission or council).''.
The Indian Employment, Training and Related Services Demonstration Act of 1992 (25 United States Code 3401 et sequentes), as amended by section 7 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, subject to subsection (b), the Secretary shall permit a regional consortium of Alaska Native villages or regional or village corporations (as defined in or established under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes)) to carry out a project under a plan that meets the requirements of this Act through a resolution adopted by the governing body of each such entity.
Withdrawal.--Nothing in subsection (a) is intended to prohibit an Alaska Native village or regional or village corporation from withdrawing from participation in any portion of a program conducted pursuant to that subsection at any time after the plan for the program is implemented.