This Act may be cited as the ``Jena Band of Choctaw Indians of Louisiana Confirmation Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) In 1903 and 1904, after presenting testimony before the Dawes Commission, ancestors of the Jena Band of Choctaw were identified as ``Fullblood Mississippi Choctaw Indians''.
More than 60 percent of the membership on the Jena Band of Choctaw roll dated December 1, 1984, and later submitted to the Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs, on May 2, 1985, can document possessing one-half or more Choctaw Indian blood quantum based on descent from individuals listed as ``Mississippi Choctaw'' by the Dawes Commission or as ``Choctaw'' on the Indian Schedules of the 1900 Federal Population Census.
High blood degree such as that demonstrated and documented by the Jena Band of Choctaw, although not a requirement for maintaining a Federal tribal relationship provides exceptional evidence which supports confirmation of that relationship outside the normal administrative process, because a group cannot maintain a high blood degree without a continuity of close and significant social relationships which in themselves demonstrate distinct social community.
The Jena Band of Choctaw has retained a distinct dialect of the Choctaw language on a continuous basis since historic times, thus, providing supporting evidence that the Jena Band has maintained itself as a separate and distinct historic band of Choctaw.
The Jena Band's Choctaw ancestors resided in close proximity in historic Catahoula Parish, the predecessor to modern Catahoula and La Salle Parishes, according to the 1880, 1900 and 1910 Federal population censuses; Federal documents place the members of the Tribe in this same area in the 1930's and 1950's; 72 percent of the Tribe's current membership still resides in La Salle, and neighboring Grant and Rapides Parishes, thus providing supporting evidence for continuity of membership and location.
The Jena Band of Choctaw can document and identify traditional leaders by name from 1850 to 1968 and elected leaders from 1974 to the present, which in the historical context of their community provides supporting evidence for continuity of political influence.
Confirmation of the Federal relationship with the Tribe is supported by all the federally recognized tribes in Louisiana and by the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Tribe'' means the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians of Louisiana.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Interim Council'' means the Board of Directors of the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians of Louisiana.
The term ``member'' means an individual who is enrolled on the membership roll of the Tribe.
The term ``State'' means the State of Louisiana.
CONFIRMATION OF FEDERAL RELATIONSHIP.
Federal Recognition as a Tribe is hereby confirmed with regard to the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians of Louisiana.
All Federal laws of general application to Indians and Indian tribes, including the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 United States Statutes at Large 984; 25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), popularly known as the ``Indian Reorganization Act'', shall apply with respect to the Tribe and to the members.
Existing Rights of Tribe.--Nothing in this Act may be construed to diminish any rights or privileges of the Tribe, or of its members, that existed prior to the date of the enactment of this Act.
Existing Rights and Obligations.--Except as otherwise specifically provided in this Act, nothing in this Act may be construed as altering or affecting-- (1) any rights or obligations with respect to property, (2) any rights or obligations under any contract, (3) any hunting, fishing, trapping, gathering, or water rights of the Tribe or its members, or (4) any obligation to pay a tax levied before the date of enactment of this Act.
FEDERAL SERVICES AND BENEFITS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, and without regard to the existence of a reservation, the Tribe and its members shall be eligible, on and after the date of enactment of this Act, for all Federal services and benefits furnished to federally recognized Indian tribes or their members.
In the case of Federal services available to members of federally recognized tribes residing on a reservation, members of the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians of Louisiana residing in La Salle, Rapides, and Grant Parishes, Louisiana, shall be deemed to be residing on a reservation.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Tribe shall be considered an Indian tribe for the purpose of the Indian Tribal Government Tax Status Act (26 United States Code 7871).
Plan for Economic Development.--The Secretary shall-- (1) enter into negotiations with the governing body of the Tribe with respect to establishing a plan for economic development for this Tribe; (2) in accordance with this section and not later than 2 years after the adoption of a tribal constitution as provided in section 10, develop such a plan; and (3) upon the approval of such plan by the governing body of the Tribe, submit such plan to the Congress.
Restrictions To Be Contained in Plan.--Any proposed transfer of real property contained in the plan developed by the Secretary under subsection (a) shall be consistent with the requirements of section 11 of this Act.
Until such time as a constitution for the Tribe is adopted in accordance with section 10(a), the Tribe shall be governed by the Interim Council.
Base Roll.--The Jena Band of Choctaw membership list dated December 1, 1984, and submitted to the Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs, on May 2, 1985, shall constitute the base roll of the Tribe subject to the review and approval of the Secretary.
Eligibility.--(1) Until a tribal constitution is adopted, a person shall be placed on the Jena membership roll, if the individual is living, possesses at least one-fourth or more Choctaw Indian blood quantum derived directly from those Choctaw who lived in the historic Catahoula Parish, and is not an enrolled member of another federally recognized tribe, and if-- (A) that individual's name is listed on the Jena Band of Choctaw membership list dated December 1, 1984, submitted to the Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs, on May 2, 1985; (B) that individual is not listed on but meets the requirements established by the Jena Band of Choctaw Indians of Louisiana in its Articles of Incorporation, filed and recorded in the State of Louisiana on May 22, 1974, which had to be met to be included on the Jena Band's list dated December 1, 1984; or (C) that individual is a lineal descendant of an individual, living or dead, identified by subparagraph (A) or (B).
After adoption of a tribal constitution, such constitution shall govern membership in the Tribe.
In addition to meeting any other criteria imposed in such tribal constitution, any person added to the roll must be of Choctaw ancestry derived directly from those Choctaw who lived in the historic Catahoula Parish and cannot be a member of another federally recognized Indian tribe.
In General.--Upon the written request of the Interim Council, the Secretary shall conduct, by secret ballot, an election to adopt a constitution for the Tribe which is consistent with this Act.
Such constitution shall be submitted by the Interim Council to the Secretary no later than 1 year following the date of enactment of this Act.
Absentee balloting shall be permitted regardless of voter residence.
The election shall be conducted in accordance with section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 United States Statutes at Large 987; 25 United States Code 476), as amended.
Election of Tribal Officials.--Not later than 120 days after the Tribe adopts a tribal constitution, the Secretary shall conduct an election by secret ballot for the purpose of electing tribal officials as provided in the constitution.
Such election shall be conducted according to the procedures stated in subsection (a) except to the extent that such procedures conflict with the tribal constitution.
Tribal Government.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the governing body of the Tribe established under the constitution adopted under subsection (a), shall be treated as an Indian tribal government for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and all other Federal laws of general application to Indians and Indian tribes, including the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 United States Statutes at Large 984; 25 United States Code 461 et seq.
Subject to Existing Rights and Obligations.--Any real property taken in trust by the Secretary shall be subject to-- (1) all legal rights and interests in such lands existing at the time of acquisition of such land by the Secretary, including any lien, mortgage, or previously levied and outstanding State or local tax; (2) foreclosure or sale in accordance with the laws of the State of Louisiana pursuant to the terms of any valid obligation in existence at the time of the acquisition of such land by the Secretary; and (3) the provisions of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 United States Code 2701 et sequentes).
Tax Exemption.--Any real property held in trust by the Secretary pursuant to this Act shall be exempt from Federal, State, and local taxation on and after the date such property is accepted by the Secretary.
Passed the Senate August 5 (legislative day, June 30), 1993.
Attest: WALTER J. STEWART, Secretary.