This Act may be cited as the ``Kenneth Starr Corrections Act of 1999''.
TESTIMONIAL PRIVILEGES IN FEDERAL, CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS.
Rule 501 of the Federal Rules of Evidence (28 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in the 1st sentence by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Except'', (2) in the 2d sentence by striking ``However, in'' and inserting the following: ``(d) Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, in'', and (3) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``(b)(1) A witness may not be compelled to testify against a child or parent of the witness.
A witness may not be compelled to disclose the content of a confidential communication with a child or parent of the witness.
For purposes of this subdivision, `child' means, with respect to an individual, a birth, adoptive, or step-child of the individual, and any person (such as a foster child or a relative of whom the individual has long-term custody) with respect to whom the court recognizes the individual as having a right to act as a parent.
The privileges provided in this subdivision shall be governed by principles of the common law, as they may be interpreted by the courts of the United States in the light of reason and experience, that are similar to the principles that apply to the similar privileges of a witness with respect to a spouse of the witness.
A member of the United States Secret Service may not be compelled to testify with respect to any conversation of the President heard by such member while such member is on duty.''.
RESTRICTIONS ON PROSECUTORIAL CONDUCT.
Amendment.--Part II of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``CHAPTER 237--RESTRICTIONS ``Sec.
Restrictions on prosecutorial conduct.
Restrictions on prosecutorial conduct ``(a) Perjury Prosecutions Based on Grand Jury Testimony.--A criminal proceeding for perjury or false statement may not be brought against a witness based on a statement made by the witness to the grand jury if-- ``(1) such statement is made in response to a question that-- ``(A) is asked by the prosecutor or a member of the grand jury; and ``(B) arises from or has any basis in physical nontestimonial evidence available, and then known, to the prosecutor; and ``(2) the prosecutor fails-- ``(A) to provide such evidence to the witness before the conclusion of the testimony of the witness; or ``(B) to allow the witness, after receiving such evidence, to explain or modify any testimony given by the witness to the grand jury.
Perjury Prosecutions Based on Certain Affidavits in Civil Cases.--A criminal proceeding may not be commenced by an officer or employee of the United States against an individual for making a false statement that relates to adultery or to sexual activity that is not unlawful under Federal law, in an affidavit filed in a noncriminal proceeding.
Limitation on Power To Authorize Certain Recordings.--An officer or employee of an agency of the United States may not authorize any person to make an audio or video record of a private communication that such officer, such employee, or such person reasonably expects will relate to adultery or to sexual activity that is not unlawful under Federal law.''.
Conforming Amendments.--The table of chapters of part II of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 235 the following: ``237.
LIMITATIONS APPLICABLE TO PROCEEDINGS BEFORE THE GRAND JURY.
Rule 6 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure (18 United States Code App.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Photographic Records.--A photographic record may not be made of a witness who testifies before a grand jury for the purpose of recording the testimony such witness gives before the grand jury.''.
IMMUNITY FOR CERTAIN GRAND JURY WITNESSES.
Section 6003 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) An individual who is a target of an investigation of a violation of a law of the United States may not be compelled to appear before a grand jury except under the terms of an order that is effective as provided in section 6002 of this title.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS.
Effective Date.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Application of Amendments.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply only with respect to conduct occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.