SHORT TITLE AND DEFINITION.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Park Revitalization Act''.
Definition.--As used in this Act, the term ``National Park Service Concessions Policy Act'' means the Act entitled ``An Act relating to the establishment of concession policies in the areas administered by National Park Service and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 20-20g).
Maximum Period; Requirements.--Section 3(a) of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act (16 United States Code 20b(a)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; (2) in paragraph (1) (as designated by paragraph (1) of this subsection), by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Except as provided in paragraph (3), the period of a contract entered into under this Act may not exceed 10 years.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(2) Contracts entered into under this Act after the date of enactment of this paragraph shall-- ``(A) be consistent with the laws relating to the National Park System and the unit concerned; ``(B) be implemented in accordance with the purposes of the National Park System and the general management plan for the unit of the National Park System concerned; ``(C) to the maximum extent practicable, contain similar terms and conditions in order to facilitate administration; ``(D) to the extent applicable, provide for acquisition of the possessory interest of a concessioner in a manner consistent with the objective of section 6(c); and ``(E) shall be transferable or assignable only upon the consent of the Secretary after reconsideration and possible redetermination of the contract terms, including the franchise fee.
The period of a contract may be for a period greater than 10 years if the Secretary finds that a longer period is necessary for the acquisition of possessory interest under section 6(c); except that in no event may the period be greater than 15 years.
In entering contracts under this Act, consideration of revenue to the United States shall be subordinate to the objectives of protecting and preserving areas administered by the National Park Service and of providing adequate and appropriate services for visitors at reasonable rates.''.
Repeal of Obligation of United States to Compensate for Loss of Investment.--Paragraph (1) of section 3(a) of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act (16 United States Code 20b(a)) (as amended by subsection (a)) is further amended by striking the last sentence and inserting the following: ``Effective with respect to contracts entered into, renewed, transferred, assigned, or renegotiated under this Act after the date of enactment of this sentence, the United States shall not be obligated to compensate the concessioner for such structures, fixtures, or improvements.''.
Franchise Fees.--Section 3(d) of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act (16 United States Code 20b(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Franchise fees, however stated, shall be based on annual gross receipts from the concession and shall not be less than 22.5 percent of the annual gross receipts from that concession.
Provision shall be made for reconsideration and possible readjustment of franchise fees at least every 5 years unless the contract period is for a lesser period of time.''.
Utility Costs.--(1) Section 3 of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act (16 United States Code 20b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) The concessioner shall be responsible for all utility costs incurred by the concessioner in the operation of the concession under contracts entered into, renewed, transferred, assigned, or renegotiated under this Act after the date of enactment of this subsection.''.
Paragraph 4 of the first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to facilitate the management of the National Park System and miscellaneous areas administered in connection with that System, and for other purposes'' (16 United States Code 1b(4)) is amended by striking ``concessioners,''.
REPEAL OF PREFERENTIAL RIGHTS AND POSSESSORY INTEREST.
Additional Contracts.--Section 4 of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act (16 United States Code 20c) is amended by striking ``and may grant to such concessioner a preferential right to provide such new or additional accommodations, facilities, or services''.
Renewal of Contracts.--(1) The first sentence of section 5 of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act is amended by striking ``giving preference in the renewal of contracts or permits and in the negotiation of new contracts or permits to the''.
Section 5 of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary may not give a preference in the renewal of contracts or permits under this Act.''.
Possessory Interests.--Section 6 of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
6''; (2) by inserting at the end of subsection (a) (as designated by paragraph (1)) the following: ``This subsection shall not apply to contracts entered into, renewed, transferred, assigned, or renegotiated after the date of enactment of this sentence.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Effective with respect to contracts entered into, renewed, transferred, assigned, or renegotiated under this Act after the date of enactment of this subsection, all right, title, and interest to any structure, fixture, or improvement acquired or constructed on land owned by the United States within an area administered by the National Park Service shall vest in the United States.
The Secretary shall acquire any possessory interest established before the date of enactment of this subsection relating to any contract subject to subsection (a) with funds made available by section 10(2).
Possessory interests relating to a concession shall be acquired before the end of the first contract period beginning after the date of enactment of this subsection that relates to that concession.
Except as provided in section 11 of the Act entitled `An Act to establish the National Park Foundation', approved December 18, 1967, the Secretary may not approve the direct or indirect transfer of the possessory interest relating to a contract subject to this Act.''.
AVAILABILITY OF AUDIT INFORMATION.
The first undesignated paragraph of section 9 of the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act (16 United States Code 20g) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A record of each audit under this section shall be available to the public in a manner that does not reveal trade secrets and commercial or financial information that is privileged or confidential.''.
USE OF FRANCHISE FEES.
In General.--The National Park Service Concessions Policy Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
USE OF FRANCHISE FEES.
``All receipts from franchise fees, however stated, collected pursuant to this Act after September 30, 1991, shall be covered into a special account established in the Treasury of the United States.
Amounts covered into the account in a fiscal year shall be available without further appropriation after the end of the fiscal year as follows: ``(1) 2.5 percent of such receipts shall be available for the purposes of section 3 of the National Park System Visitor Facilities Fund Act.
77.5 percent of the receipts shall be allocated among the units of the National Park System in the same proportion as franchise fees from a unit bears to the total amount collected from all units under this section and shall be for capital and resource management, interpretation, and conservation needs and acquisition of possessory interest under section 6.
The remaining 20 percent shall be allocated among the units of the National Park System on the basis of capital and resource management, interpretation, and conservation need as determined by the Director.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 3 of the National Park System Visitor Facilities Fund Act (16 United States Code 19bb) is amended by striking ``all National Park System concession fees, including franchise fees and building user fees,'' and inserting ``2.5 percent of all National Park System concession franchise fees and all National Park System concession building user fees''.
National Park Foundation.--The Act entitled ``An Act to establish the National Park Foundation'' (16 United States Code 19c-19n) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
The Foundation is authorized to acquire the possessory interest relating to a concession if that possessory interest, upon acquisition by the Foundation, is transferred to the United States.
For the purpose of this section, the term `possessory interest' has the meaning given such term under section 6 of the Act entitled `An Act relating to the establishment of concession policies in the areas administered by National Park Service and for other purposes', approved October 9, 1965.