This Act may be cited as the ``George C. Marshall Commemorative Coin Act''.
Denominations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins in commemoration of the 50th anniversary of the Marshall Plan and George Catlett Marshall: (1) One dollar silver coins.--Not more than 700,000 one dollar coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar clad coins.--Not more than 500,000 half dollar coins each of which shall-- (A) weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the 50th anniversary of the Marshall Plan, which gave Europe's war-ravaged countries the economic strength by which they might choose freedom, and George C. Marshall, the author of the plan.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``1997''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Obverse side.--The obverse side of each coin minted under this Act shall bear the likeness of George C. Marshall.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the George C. Marshall Foundation, the Friends of George C. Marshall, and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning January 1, 1997.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 1997.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $12 per coin for the one dollar coin; and (2) $4 per coin for the half dollar coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary in equal portions to-- (1) the George C. Marshall Foundation for the purpose of supporting the Foundation's educational and outreach programs to promote the ideals and values of George C. Marshall; and (2) the Friends of George C. Marshall for the sole purpose of constructing and operating the George C. Marshall Memorial and Visitor Center in Uniontown, Pennsylvania.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the George C. Marshall Foundation and the Friends of George C. Marshall as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (a).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration.