CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the Defense Intelligence Agency, the People's Liberation Army of China owns and operates a number of enterprises which produce both civilian and military products.
The General Staff Department of the People's Liberation Army owns and operates Polytechnologies, which is the weapons trading arm of the People's Liberation Army and has a representative office in the United States.
The General Logistics Department of the People's Liberation Army owns and operates a large international conglomerate known as Xinxing Corporation, which also has a representative office in the United States.
The People's Armed Police, which is partially controlled by the People's Liberation Army, is responsible for the occupation and suppression of dissent in Tibet and the execution of prisoners throughout China, and provides guards for the forced labor camp system in Laogai, China, owns and operates China Jingan Equipment Import and Export, which also has a representative office in the United States.
These and other enterprises owned by the People's Liberation Army regularly export a great variety of products to the United States, including, but not limited to, clothing, toys, shoes, hand tools, fish, minerals, and chemicals.
The export of products allows the People's Liberation Army to earn hard currency directly, which in turn can be used to modernize its forces.
The average consumer in the United States is unaware that products they are purchasing were produced by the People's Liberation Army.
Trade with the People's Liberation Army effectively is a subsidy of military operations of the People's Republic of China.
The China National Nuclear Corporation exported illicit nuclear technology to Pakistan in contravention of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons and the Arms Export Control Act, thereby contributing to the threat of nuclear war on the Indian Subcontinent.
Naval units of the People's Liberation Army have committed aggression against the Republic of the Philippines and threatened the United States Navy's right of free passage in the South China Sea.
Chinese defense industrial trading companies have transferred cruise missiles to Iran, thereby threatening the safety of United States military personnel in the region.
Representatives of China North Industries Corporation, a Chinese Government organization, have been indicted by the United States Federal Government for smuggling of firearms and conspiracy related thereto, importation of firearms without a license, importation and sale of firearms with obliterated serial numbers, and transfer and possession of machine guns in violation of the laws of the United States.
Representatives of Poly Group, a Chinese Government organization, have also been indicted by the United States Federal Government for engaging in the unlawful activities described in paragraph (12).
Representatives of China North Industries Corporation attempted to sell solid rocket fuel to Iraq in the fall of 1990, contrary to a number of actions by the United Nations Security Council.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to prohibit the importation into the United States of goods that are produced, manufactured, or exported by the People's Liberation Army or Chinese defense industrial trading companies.
PROHIBITION ON CERTAIN IMPORTS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no good that is produced, manufactured, or exported by the People's Liberation Army or a Chinese defense industrial trading company may be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, into the customs territory of the United States.
Determination of Chinese Defense Industrial Trading Companies.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall determine which persons are Chinese defense industrial trading companies for purposes of this Act.
The Secretary shall publish a list of such persons in the Federal Register.
Public hearing.-- (A) General rule.--Before making the determination and publishing the list required by paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury shall hold a public hearing for the purpose of receiving oral and written testimony regarding the persons to be included on the list.
Additions and deletions.--The Secretary of the Treasury may add or delete persons from the list based on information available to the Secretary or upon receipt of a request containing sufficient information to take such action.
Chinese defense industrial trading company.--For purposes of making the determination required by paragraph (1), the term ``Chinese defense industrial trading company''-- (A) means a person that is-- (i) engaged in manufacturing, producing, or exporting, and (ii) affiliated with or owned, controlled, or subsidized by the People's Liberation Army, and (B) includes any person identified in the United States Defense Intelligence Agency publication numbered VP-1920-271-90, dated September 1990, or PC-1921-57-95, dated October 1995.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to goods entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, on or after the 45th day after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``People's Liberation Army'' means any branch or division of the land, naval, or air military service or the police of the Government of the People's Republic of China.