ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION ON THE ROLES AND CAPABILITIES OF THE UNITED STATES INTELLIGENCE COMMUNITY.
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Commission on the roles and capabilities of the United States intelligence community (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission'').
For purposes of this section the term ``intelligence community'' shall have the same meaning as set forth in section 401a(4) of title 50, United States Code.
The Commission shall be composed of eleven members, seven of whom shall be private United States citizens appointed by the President; two of whom shall be Members of the United States Senate, one of whom shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate and one of whom shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate, in consultation with the chairman and vice chairman, respectively, of the Select Committee on Intelligence; and two of whom shall be Members of the United States House of Representatives, one of whom shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and one of whom shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the chairman and ranking minority member, respectively, of the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence.
The private members of the Commission shall be appointed from among persons of demonstrated ability and accomplishment in government, business, law, academe, journalism, or other profession, a majority of whom shall not have previously held senior leadership positions in the intelligence community.
The President shall designate a private member as Chairman of the Commission.
PERIOD OF APPOINTMENT; VACANCIES.
Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointments.
The appointments required by section 2 shall be made within 45 days after the effective date of this Act.
Appropriate security clearances shall be required for members of the Commission who are private United States citizens.
Such clearances shall be processed and completed on an expedited basis by appropriate elements of the executive branch, and shall in any case be completed within 45 days of the date such members are appointed.
The Commission shall convene its first meeting within four months of the effective date of this Act.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In general, it shall be the duty of the Commission to review the efficacy and appropriateness of the activities of the United States intelligence community in the post-cold war global environment and to issue a report which sets forth the Commission's recommendations with respect to the roles and capabilities which are required by the United States for the foreseeable future.
In carrying out the mandate of subsection (a), the Commission shall specifically consider the following: (1) What should be the roles and missions of the intelligence community in terms of providing support to the defense and foreign policy establishments.
Whether the roles and missions of the intelligence community should extend beyond the traditional areas of providing support to the defense and foreign policy establishments, and, if so, what areas should be considered legitimate for intelligence-gathering and analysis, for example, economic issues, environmental issues, health issues.
What functions, if any, should continue to be assigned the Central Intelligence Agency and what capabilities should it retain for the future.
Whether the existing organization and management framework of the Central Intelligence Agency provide the optimal structure for the accomplishment of its mission.
Whether existing principles and strategies governing the acquisition and maintenance of intelligence collection capabilities should be retained and what collection capabilities should the Government retain to meet future contingencies.
Whether intelligence analysis, as it is currently structured and executed, adds sufficient value to information otherwise available to the Government to justify its continuation, and, if so, at what level of resources.
Whether the existing decentralized system of intelligence analysis results in significant waste or duplication, and, if so, what can be done to correct these deficiencies.
Whether the existing arrangements for allocating available resources to accomplish the roles and missions assigned to intelligence agencies are adequate.
Whether the existing framework for coordinating intelligence collection and analysis among elements of the intelligence community and for coordinating other activities of intelligence agencies, for example, training, operational activity, et cetera, provides an optimal structure for such coordination.
Whether current personnel policies and practices of intelligence agencies provide an optimal work force to satisfy the needs of intelligence consumers.
Whether resources for intelligence activities should continue to be allocated as part of the defense budget or be treated by the President and Congress as a separate budgetary program.
Whether the existing levels of resources allocated for intelligence-gathering or intelligence analysis, or to provide a capability to conduct covert actions, are seriously at variance with United States needs.
Whether there are areas of redundant or overlapping activity or areas where there is evidence of serious waste, duplication, or mismanagement.
To what extent, if any, should the budget for United States intelligence activities be publicly disclosed.
To what extent, if any, should United States intelligence collect information bearing upon private commercial activity and how should such information be controlled and disseminated.
Whether counterintelligence policies and practices are adequate to ensure that employees of intelligence agencies are sensitive to security problems, and whether intelligence agencies themselves have adequate authority and capability to address perceived security problems.
How the size, missions, capabilities, and resources of the United States intelligence community compare to those of the Governments of the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, France, Israel, Russia, and Germany.
Whether existing collaborative arrangements between the United States and other countries in the area of intelligence cooperation should be maintained and whether such arrangements should be expanded to provide for increased burdensharing.
Whether existing arrangements for sharing intelligence with multinational organizations in support of mutually-shared objectives are adequate.
Not later than two months after the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall transmit to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives a report setting forth its plan for the work of the Commission.
The Commission, not later than December 31, 1996, shall submit to the President and to the two committees named in subsection (1) a report setting forth the activities, findings, and recommendations of the Commission, including any recommendations for legislation that the Commission considers advisable.
To the extent feasible, such report shall be unclassified and made available to the public.
This report shall be supplemented as necessary by a classified report or annex which shall be provided separately to the recipients named herein.
The Commission or, at its direction, any panel or member of the Commission, may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this section, hold hearings sit and act at times and places, take testimony, receive evidence, and administer oaths to the extent that the Commission or any panel or member considers advisable.
The Commission may secure directly from the departments or agencies within the intelligence community and from any other Federal department or agency any information that the Commission considers necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information expeditiously to the Commission.
The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings, take testimony, or receive evidence.
The Commission shall act by resolution agreed to by a majority of the members of the Commission.
The Commission may establish panels composed of less than the full membership of the Commission for the purpose of carrying out the Commission's duties.
The actions of each such panel shall be subject to the review and control of the Commission.
Any findings and determinations made by such a panel shall not be considered the findings and determinations of the Commission unless approved by the Commission.
AUTHORITY OF INDIVIDUALS TO ACT FOR COMMISSION.
Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take under this section.
Each member of the Commission who is a private United States citizen shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are Members of the Congress shall serve without pay.
Each member of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service appoint a staff director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The appointment of a staff director shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
No member of the staff shall be a current officer or employee of the intelligence community.
The Chairman of the Commission may fix the pay of the staff director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay fixed under this paragraph for the staff director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title and the rate of pay for other personnel may not exceed the maximum rate payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a non-reimbursable basis, any personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its administrative and clerical functions, except that no personnel shall be detailed to the staff of the Commission who currently are officers or employees of an agency within the intelligence community.
The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
The Commission may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
The Director of Central Intelligence shall furnish the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, any administrative and support services requested by the Commission consistent with this section.
PAYMENT OF COMMISSION EXPENSES.
The compensation, travel expenses, per diem allowances of members and employees of the Commission, and other expenses of the Commission shall be paid out of funds available to the Director of Central Intelligence for the payment of compensation, travel allowances, and per diem allowances, respectively, of employees of the Central Intelligence Agency.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate one month after the date of the submission of the report required by subsection (6)(b), or on January 31, 1997, whichever is later.
S 2258 IS----2 S 2258 IS----3