This Act may be cited as the ``Clinical Research Enhancement Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Clinical research is critical to the advancement of scientific knowledge and to the development of cures and improved treatment for disease.
Tremendous advances in biology are opening doors to new insights into human physiology, pathophysiology and disease, creating extraordinary opportunities for clinical research.
Clinical research includes translational research which is an integral part of the research process leading to general human applications.
It is the bridge between the laboratory and new methods of diagnosis, treatment, and prevention and is thus essential to progress against cancer and other diseases.
The United States will spend more than $1 trillion on health care in 1997, but the Federal budget for health research at the National Institutes of Health was $12.7 billion, only 1 percent of that total.
Studies at the Institute of Medicine, the National Research Council, and the National Academy of Sciences have all addressed the current problems in clinical research.
The Director of the National Institutes of Health has recognized the current problems in clinical research and has through the use of an advisory committee begun to evaluate these problems.
The current level of training and support for health professionals in clinical research is fragmented, frequently undervalued, and potentially underfunded.
Young investigators are not only apprentices for future positions but a crucial source of energy, enthusiasm, and ideas in the day-to-day research that constitutes the scientific enterprise.
Serious questions about the future of life-science research are raised by the following: (A) The number of young investigators applying for grants dropped by 54 percent between 1985 and 1993.
The number of federally funded research (R01) grants awarded to persons under the age of 36 have decreased by 70 percent from 1985 to 1993.
Newly independent life-scientists are expected to raise funds to support their new research programs and a substantial proportion of their own salaries.
The following have been cited as reasons for the decline in the number of active clinical researchers, and those choosing this career path: (A) A medical school graduate incurs an average debt of $80,000, as reported in the Medical School Graduation Questionnaire by the American Association of Medical Colleges (AAMC).
The prolonged period of clinical training required increases the accumulated debt burden.
The decreasing number of mentors and role models.
The perceived instability of funding from the National Institutes of Health and other Federal agencies.
The almost complete absence of clinical research training in the curriculum of training grant awardees.
Academic Medical Centers are experiencing difficulties in maintaining a proper environment for research in a highly competitive health care marketplace, which are compounded by the decreased willingness of third party payers to cover health care costs for patients engaged in research studies and research procedures.
In 1960, general clinical research centers were established under the Office of the Director of the National Institutes of Health with an initial appropriation of $3,000,000.
Appropriations for general clinical research centers in fiscal year 1997 equaled $153,000,000.
In fiscal year 1997, there were 74 general clinical research centers in operation, supplying patients in the areas in which such centers operate with access to the most modern clinical research and clinical research facilities and technologies.
The average annual amount allocated for each general clinical research center is $1,900,000, establishing a current funding level of 75 percent of the amounts approved by the Advisory Council of the National Center for Research Resources.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide additional support for and to expand clinical research programs.
INCREASING THE INVOLVEMENT OF THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH IN CLINICAL RESEARCH.
Section 402 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 282) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(l)(1) The Director of NIH shall undertake activities to support and expand the involvement of the National Institutes of Health in clinical research.
In carrying out paragraph (1), the Director of NIH shall-- ``(A) design test pilot projects and implement the recommendations of the Division of Research Grants Clinical Research Study Group and other recommendations for enhancing clinical research, where applicable; and ``(B) establish an intramural clinical research fellowship program and a continuing education clinical research training program at NIH.
The Director of NIH, in cooperation with the Directors of the Institutes, Centers, and Divisions of the National Institutes of Health, shall support and expand the resources available for the diverse needs of the clinical research community, including inpatient, outpatient, and critical care clinical research.
The Director of NIH shall establish peer review mechanisms to evaluate applications for-- ``(A) clinical research career enhancement awards; ``(B) innovative medical science awards; ``(C) graduate training in clinical investigation awards; ``(D) intramural clinical research fellowships.
Such review mechanisms shall include individuals who are exceptionally qualified to appraise the merits of potential clinical research training and research grant proposals.''.
GENERAL CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTERS.
Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284 et sequentes) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
GENERAL CLINICAL RESEARCH CENTERS.
Grants.--The Director of the National Center for Research Resources shall award grants for the establishment of general clinical research centers to provide the infrastructure for clinical research including clinical research training and career enhancement.
Such centers shall support clinical studies and career development in all settings of the hospital or academic medical center involved.
Activities.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Director of NIH shall expand the activities of the general clinical research centers through the increased use of telecommunications and telemedicine initiatives.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be necessary.
Clinical Research Career Enhancement Award.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the National Center for Research Resources shall make grants (to be referred to as `clinical research career enhancement awards') to support individual careers in clinical research at general clinical research centers or at other institutions that have the infrastructure and resources deemed appropriate for conducting patient-oriented clinical research.
The Director of the National Center for Research Resources shall, where practicable, collaborate or consult with other Institute Directors in making awards under this subsection.
Applications.--An application for a grant under this subsection shall be submitted by an individual scientist at such time as the Director may require.
Limitations.--The amount of a grant under this subsection shall not exceed $125,000 per year per grant.
Grants shall be for terms of 5 years.
The Director shall award not more than 20 grants in the first fiscal year, and not more than 40 grants in the second fiscal year, in which grants are awarded under this subsection.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to make grants under paragraph (1), $3,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Innovative Medical Science Award.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the National Center for Research Resources shall make grants (to be referred to as `innovative medical science awards') to support individual clinical research projects at general clinical research centers or at other institutions that have the infrastructure and resources deemed appropriate for conducting patient-oriented clinical research.
The Director of the National Center for Research Resources shall, where practicable, collaborate or consult with other Institute Directors in making awards under this subsection.
Applications.--An application for a grant under this subsection shall be submitted by an individual scientist at such time as the Director requires.
Limitations.--The amount of a grant under this subsection shall not exceed $175,000 per year per grant.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to make grants under this subsection, $52,500,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
Graduate Training in Clinical Investigation Award.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the National Center for Research Resources shall make grants (to be referred to as `graduate training in clinical investigation awards') to support individuals pursuing master's or doctoral degrees in clinical investigation.
Applications.--An application for a grant under this subsection shall be submitted by an individual scientist at such time as the Director may require.
Limitations.--The amount of a grant under this subsection shall not exceed $75,000 per year per grant.
Grants shall be for terms of 2 years or more and will provide stipend, tuition, and institutional support for individual advanced degree programs in clinical investigation.
Definition.--As used in this subsection, the term `advanced degree programs in clinical investigation' means programs that award a master's or Ph.D. degree after 2 or more years of training in areas such as the following: ``(A) Analytical methods, biostatistics, and study design.
Principles of clinical pharmacology and pharmacokinetics.
Computer data management and medical informatics.
Ethical and regulatory issues.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to make grants under this subsection, $3,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.''.
National Research Service Awards.--Section 487(a)(1)(C) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 288(a)(1)(C)) is amended by striking ``50 such'' and inserting ``100 such''.
Loan Repayment Program.--Section 487E of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 288-5) is amended-- (1) in the section heading, by striking ``from disadvantaged backgrounds''; (2) in subsection (a)(1)-- (A) by striking ``who are from disadvantaged backgrounds''; and (B) by striking ``as employees of the National Institutes of Health'' and inserting ``as part of a clinical research training position''; (3) in subsection (a), by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(3) Applicability of certain provisions regarding obligated service.--With respect to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established under subpart III of part D of title III, the provisions of such subpart shall, except as inconsistent with this section, apply to the program established in this section in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to such loan repayment program.
''; (4) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking ``Amounts'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--Amounts''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Disadvantaged backgrounds set-aside.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall ensure that not less than 50 percent of the contracts involve those appropriately qualified health professionals who are from disadvantaged backgrounds.
''; and (5) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Definition.--As used in subsection (a)(1), the term `clinical research training position' means an individual serving in a general clinical research center or in clinical research at the National Institutes of Health, or a physician receiving a clinical research career enhancement award, an innovative medical science award, or a graduate training in clinical investigation award.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year.''.
Section 409 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284d) is amended-- (1) by striking ``For purposes'' and inserting ``(a) Health Service Research.--For purposes''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Clinical Research.--As used in this title, the term `clinical research' means patient oriented clinical research conducted with human subjects, or research on the causes and consequences of disease in human populations involving material of human origin (such as tissue specimens and cognitive phenomena) for which an investigator or colleague directly interacts with human subjects in an outpatient or inpatient setting to clarify a problem in human physiology, pathophysiology, or disease; or epidemiologic or behavioral studies, outcomes research, or health services research, or developing new technologies or therapeutic interventions.