This Act may be cited as the ``Mortgage Fairness Act''.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT OBLIGATIONS OF MORTGAGE BANKS.
In General.--Each mortgage bank shall have an ongoing responsibility to meet the credit needs of all the communities in which such bank makes a significant number of extensions of credit or extends a significant amount of credit, including extensions of credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods of such communities.
Definitions.--For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Mortgage bank.--The term ``mortgage bank'' means any lender who does not accept deposits and originates housing related loans.
Office.--The term ``Office'' means the Office of Mortgage Bank and Insurance Supervision established by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development pursuant to section 3.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF MORTGAGE BANK AND INSURANCE SUPERVISION.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall establish within the Department of Housing and Urban Development an office to be known as the Office of Mortgage Bank and Insurance Supervision to evaluate the community support performance of mortgage banks and mortgage insurance companies.
MORTGAGE BANK COMMUNITY SUPPORT STATEMENTS.
In General.--The Office shall, on a biennial basis, require each mortgage bank to submit to the Office a community support statement, detailing the efforts of such bank at meeting the housing credit needs of each community in which the bank makes a significant number of extensions of credit or extends a significant amount of credit, including extensions of credit in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods of such communities.
Contents.--The statement submitted by each mortgage bank under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) the data required to be maintained and disclosed by the lender under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 for the previous 2 years, in a format which the Office shall establish; (2) underwriting criteria employed by the bank for all of the bank's housing loan products; (3) descriptions of any activity the bank has undertaken over the period under review to ascertain and meet identified credit needs in low- and moderate-income neighborhoods within communities in which the bank makes a significant number of extensions of credit or extends a significant amount of credit, including any partnerships formed with community-based organizations, nonprofit developers of affordable housing, or agencies of State or local government; (4) details of any findings of technical or substantive violations of the Equal Credit Opportunity Act or the Fair Housing Act, and any settlements or judgments arising from any such findings; and (5) any other information the Office may require.
MORTGAGE BANK COMMUNITY SUPPORT EVALUATION.
The Office shall determine whether a mortgage bank is maintaining an adequate community support performance, based on-- (1) community support performance statements received from mortgage banks; (2) an analysis of the data required to be maintained and disclosed by the lender under the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act of 1975 for the previous 2 years with respect to metropolitan statistical areas in which the bank originates a significant number of home loans, which shall emphasize-- (A) the institution's market share in neighborhoods of different racial and income characteristics; (B) the number of applications received from minorities and low- and moderate-income persons; and (C) the rate at which the institutions rejects applications from minority and white applicants; (3) any evidence of illegal discriminatory credit practices, including prescreening, or offering less favorable loan products to applicants of different racial backgrounds; and (4) public comment, which shall be received by the agency for not less than 90 days after the Office actively solicits comment solicitations of comment through notice in the Federal Register and regular communications with community based organizations.
PENALTIES FOR FINDING OF INADEQUATE COMMUNITY SUPPORT PERFORMANCE BY MORTGAGE BANKS.
Remedial Action.--If the Secretary finds that a mortgage bank is maintaining an inadequate level of community support, the Secretary may issue an order-- (1) requiring the bank to file a community support action plan with the Office not more than 90 days after the finding, which shall include concrete goals and timetables for correcting identified deficiencies; and (2) prohibiting the bank from using any program or product administered by the Secretary until all identified deficiencies are met.
Cease and Desist Orders.-- (1) Issuance of order.-- (A) In general.--If the Secretary determines that there is reasonable cause to believe that a mortgage bank is violating, has violated, or is about to violate an order under subsection (a) or a community support action plan filed pursuant to such an order, the Secretary may issue an order requiring the mortgage bank to-- (i) cease and desist from any such violation; and (ii) take such affirmative action to prevent the occurrence or the continuance of such violation as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Notice of charges.--An order issued under this paragraph shall include a notice of the charges on which the order is based and a statement of the facts constituting the alleged violation.
Effective period.--An order issued under this paragraph shall-- (i) become effective upon service to the mortgagee; and (ii) remain effective and enforceable pursuant to the terms of the order unless modified or rescinded by the Secretary or pursuant to an order of a court under paragraph (3) or in connection with the court's review of any administrative proceedings with respect to the order issued under this subsection.
Hearing.--Any mortgage bank which receives an order under paragraph (1) shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing on the record by the Secretary as soon as practicable but not later than 20 days after the order has been served.
Judicial hearing.--Within 10 days after a mortgage bank has been served with a cease-and-desist order under this subsection, the bank may apply to the United States district court for the judicial district in which the home office of the bank is located, or the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, for an injunction setting aside, limiting, or suspending the enforcement, operation, or effectiveness of such order pending the completion of the administrative proceedings pursuant to the notice of charges served upon the bank, and such court shall have jurisdiction to issue such injunction.
Judicial enforcement.--The Secretary may apply to the United States district court, or the United States court of any territory, within the jurisdiction of which the home office of the mortgagee is located, for an injunction to enforce any effective and outstanding order issued under this subsection and, if the court determines that there has been a violation or threatened violation of such order, the court shall issue such injunction.
Civil Money Penalty.-- (1) Imposition of penalty.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may impose a civil money penalty on any mortgage bank, and any director, officer or employee of a mortgage bank, who violates any order issued under subsection (a) or (b).
Amount of penalty.--The amount of the penalty, as determined by the Secretary, may not exceed-- (i) in the case of a violation of an order issued under subsection (a), $10,000 for each month during which such violation occurs; and (ii) in the case of a violation of an order issued under subsection (b), $10,000 for each day during which such violation continues.
Notification to attorney general.--Before taking action to impose a civil money penalty for a violation under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall inform the Attorney General of the United States.
Assessment.-- (A) Written notice.--Any penalty imposed under paragraph (1) may be assessed and collected by the Secretary by written notice.
Finality of assessment.--If, with respect to any assessment under subparagraph (A), a hearing is not requested pursuant to paragraph (5) within the period of time allowed under such paragraph, the assessment shall constitute a final and unappealable order.
Authority to modify or remit penalty.--The Secretary may compromise, modify, or remit any penalty which the Secretary may assess or already has assessed under paragraph (1).
Mitigating factors.--In determining the amount of a penalty under paragraph (1) with respect to any person, the Secretary shall take into account the appropriateness of the penalty with respect to-- (A) the gravity of the offense; (B) any history of previous violations by the person; (C) the ability of the person to pay the penalty; (D) injury to the public; (E) benefits received by the person as a result of the violation; (F) the deterrent effect of the penalty on future violations by such person and other persons; and (G) such other factors as the Secretary may determine in regulations to be appropriate.
Hearing.--The person against whom a civil money penalty is assessed under paragraph (1) shall be afforded an opportunity for a hearing on the record, if such person submits a request for such hearing within 20 days after the issuance of the notice of the assessment.
Collection.-- (A) Referral.--If any person fails to pay an assessment after any penalty assessed under this subsection has become final, the Secretary shall notify the Attorney General who shall recover the amount assessed in the appropriate United States district court.
Appropriateness of penalty not reviewable.--In any civil action under subparagraph (A), the validity and appropriateness of the penalty shall not be subject to review.
Disbursement.--All penalties collected pursuant to this subsection shall be deposited into the Treasury of the United States.
Agency procedures--The Secretary shall, by regulation, establish standards and procedures for carrying out this subsection.
COMMUNITY SUPPORT REQUIREMENTS FOR MORTGAGE INSURANCE COMPANIES.
In General.--Each mortgage insurance company shall-- (1) report to the Office the number and total dollar amount of each mortgage insurance policy written by the company, by census tract, the race, gender, and income of applicants for mortgage insurance, and the disposition of each application for mortgage insurance; (2) demonstrate to the Secretary adequate support for community credit needs; and (3) make public to any person the underwriting criteria for any mortgage insurance the company offers.
2-Year Reporting Requirement.--At least once during each 2-year period beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, each mortgage insurance company shall submit a report to the Office containing the following information: (1) Adequacy of availability of mortgage insurance.--The extent to which adequate mortgage insurance is available in low- and moderate-income and minority neighborhoods within areas in which the company writes a significant number of mortgage insurance policies.
Underwriting guidelines.--The extent to which underwriting guidelines used by the company do not unreasonably restrict access to low- and moderate-income families within areas in which the company writes a significant number of mortgage insurance policies.
Duties of the Office.--The Office shall conduct biennial community support reviews of mortgage insurance companies including analysis of the following: (1) The data collected by the Agency on the distribution of the mortgage insurance company's policies by census tract and data on the disparate treatment of applicants for mortgage insurance based on the applicants' race, gender, and income.
The underwriting criteria employed by the company and the extent to which such criteria do not unreasonably restrict access to credit for low- and moderate-income and minority persons or neighborhoods.
Community support statements received from the mortgage insurance company.
Any other information the Secretary may require mortgage insurance companies to submit.
Any comments received from the public on the community support performance of the mortgage insurance company during the period covered by the review under this paragraph.
Duties of the Secretary.--The Secretary shall-- (1) solicit and accept public comment for no fewer than 90 days before issuing a finding in connection with the review of a mortgage insurance company under subsection (c)(2); and (2) review the community support performance of each mortgage insurance company and determine whether the company is providing an adequate level of community support in the areas in which such company writes a significant number of mortgage insurance policies.
Performance Statement.--If, after reviewing any evidence, the Secretary concludes that a mortgage insurance company is not meeting the requirements of this section, the Secretary may require such company to submit a statement indicating how the company expects to improve its record of providing community support.