TEACHER PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTES.
Title II of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1021 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART C--TEACHER PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT INSTITUTES ``SEC.
``This part may be cited as the `Teacher Professional Development Institutes Act'.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: ``(1) The ongoing professional development of teachers in the subjects the teachers teach is essential for improved student learning.
Attaining the goal of the No Child Left Behind Act of 2001, of having a teacher who is highly qualified in every core subject classroom, will require innovative and effective approaches to improving the quality of teaching.
The Teachers Institute Model is an innovative approach that encourages a collaboration between urban school teachers and university faculty.
The Teachers Institute Model focuses on the continuing academic preparation of school teachers and the application of what the teachers study to their classrooms and potentially to the classrooms of other teachers.
The Teachers Institute Model has also been successfully demonstrated over a 3-year period in a National Demonstration Project (hereafter in this part referred to as the `National Demonstration Project') in several cities.
Purpose.--The purpose of this part is to provide Federal assistance to support the establishment and operation of Teachers Institutes for local educational agencies that serve significant low- income populations in States throughout the Nation-- ``(1) to improve student learning; and ``(2) to enhance the quality of teaching by strengthening the subject matter mastery of current teachers through continuing teacher preparation.
``In this part: ``(1) Poverty line.--The term `poverty line' means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act) applicable to a family of the size involved.
Significant low-income population.--The term `significant low-income population' means a student population of which not less than 25 percent are from families with incomes below the poverty line.
State.--The term `State' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
Teachers institute.--The term `Teachers Institute' means a partnership or joint venture between or among 1 or more institutions of higher education, and 1 or more local educational agencies serving a significant low-income population, which partnership or joint venture-- ``(A) is entered into for the purpose of improving the quality of teaching and learning through collaborative seminars designed to enhance both the subject matter and the pedagogical resources of the seminar participants; and ``(B) works in collaboration to determine the direction and content of the collaborative seminars.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized-- ``(1) to award grants to Teachers Institutes to encourage the establishment and operation of Teachers Institutes; and ``(2) to provide technical assistance, either directly or through existing Teachers Institutes, to assist local educational agencies and institutions of higher education in preparing to establish and in operating Teachers Institutes.
Selection Criteria.--In selecting a Teachers Institute for a grant under this part, the Secretary shall consider-- ``(1) the extent to which the proposed Teachers Institute will serve a community with a significant low-income population; ``(2) the extent to which the proposed Teachers Institute will follow the Understandings and Necessary Procedures that have been developed following the National Demonstration Project; ``(3) the extent to which the local educational agency participating in the proposed Teachers Institute has a high percentage of teachers who are unprepared or under prepared to teach the core academic subjects the teachers are assigned to teach; and ``(4) the extent to which the proposed Teachers Institute will receive a level of support from the community and other sources that will ensure the requisite long-term commitment for the success of a Teachers Institute.
Consultation.-- ``(1) In general.--In evaluating applications under subsection (b), the Secretary may request the advice and assistance of existing Teachers Institutes.
State agencies.--If the Secretary receives 2 or more applications for new Teachers Institutes that propose serving the same State, the Secretary shall consult with the State educational agency regarding the applications.
Fiscal Agent.--For the purpose of this part, an institution of higher education participating in a Teachers Institute shall serve as the fiscal agent for the receipt of grant funds under this part.
Limitations.--A grant under this part-- ``(1) shall be awarded for a period not to exceed 5 years; and ``(2) shall not exceed 50 percent of the total costs of the eligible activities, as determined by the Secretary.
In General.--Grant funds awarded under this part may be used-- ``(1) for the planning and development of applications for the establishment of Teachers Institutes; ``(2) to provide assistance to the Teachers Institutes established during the National Demonstration Project to enable the Teachers Institutes-- ``(A) to develop further the Teachers Institutes; or ``(B) to support the planning and development of applications for new Teachers Institutes; ``(3) for the salary and necessary expenses of a full-time director to plan and manage the Teachers Institute and to act as liaison between the local educational agency and the institution of higher education participating in the Teachers Institute; ``(4) to provide suitable office space, staff, equipment, and supplies, and to pay other operating expenses, for the Teachers Institute; ``(5) to provide a stipend for teachers participating in collaborative seminars in the sciences and humanities, and to provide remuneration for those members of the faculty of the institution of higher education participating in the Teachers Institute who lead the seminars; and ``(6) to provide for the dissemination through print and electronic means of curriculum units prepared in the seminars conducted by the Teachers Institute.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may use not more than 50 percent of the funds appropriated to carry out this part to provide technical assistance to facilitate the establishment and operation of Teachers Institutes.
For the purpose of this subsection, the Secretary may contract with existing Teachers Institutes to provide all or a part of the technical assistance under this subsection.
APPLICATION, APPROVAL, AND AGREEMENT.
In General.--To receive a grant under this part, a Teachers Institute shall submit an application to the Secretary that-- ``(1) meets the requirement of this part and any regulations under this part; ``(2) includes a description of how the Teachers Institute intends to use funds provided under the grant; ``(3) includes such information as the Secretary may require to apply the criteria described in section 244(b); ``(4) includes measurable objectives for the use of the funds provided under the grant; and ``(5) contains such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require.
Approval.--The Secretary shall-- ``(1) promptly evaluate an application received for a grant under this part; and ``(2) notify the applicant within 90 days of the receipt of a completed application of the Secretary's approval or disapproval of the application.
Agreement.--Upon approval of an application, the Secretary and the Teachers Institute shall enter into a comprehensive agreement covering the entire period of the grant.
Report.--Each Teachers Institute receiving a grant under this part shall report annually on the progress of the Teachers Institute in achieving the purpose of this part and the purposes of the grant.
Evaluation and Dissemination.-- ``(1) Evaluation.--The Secretary shall evaluate the activities funded under this part and submit an annual report regarding the activities to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives.
Dissemination.--The Secretary shall broadly disseminate successful practices developed by Teachers Institutes.
Revocation.--If the Secretary determines that a Teachers Institute is not making substantial progress in achieving the purpose of this part and the purposes of the grant by the end of the second year of the grant under this part, the Secretary may take appropriate action, including revocation of further payments under the grant, to ensure that the funds available under this part are used in the most effective manner.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part-- ``(1) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; ``(2) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2006; ``(3) $6,000,000 for fiscal year 2007; ``(4) $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2008; and ``(5) $8,000,000 for fiscal year 2009.