This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Facilities Clean Water Compliance Act of 1997''.
APPLICATION OF CERTAIN PROVISIONS TO FEDERAL FACILITIES.
Section 313 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1323) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (d); and (2) by striking the section heading and all that follows through subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``SEC.
FEDERAL FACILITIES POLLUTION CONTROL.
In General.--Each department, agency, and instrumentality of the executive, legislative, and judicial branches of the Federal Government (1) having jurisdiction over any property or facility, or (2) engaged in any activity resulting, or which may result, in the discharge or runoff of pollutants shall be subject to, and comply with, all Federal, State, interstate, and local requirements, both substantive and procedural (including any requirement for permits or reporting or any provisions for injunctive relief and such sanctions as may be imposed by a court to enforce such relief), respecting the control and abatement of water pollution and management in the same manner, and to the same extent, as any person is subject to such requirements, including the payment of reasonable service charges.
The Federal, State, interstate, and local substantive and procedural requirements, administrative authority, and process and sanctions referred to in this subsection include, but are not limited to, all administrative orders and all civil and administrative penalties and fines, regardless of whether such penalties or fines are punitive or coercive in nature or are imposed for isolated, intermittent, or continuing violations.
The United States hereby expressly waives any immunity otherwise applicable to the United States with respect to any such substantive or procedural requirement (including, but not limited to, any injunctive relief, administrative order, or civil or administrative penalty or fine referred to in the preceding sentence, or reasonable service charge).
The reasonable service charges referred to in this subsection include, but are not limited to, fees or charges assessed in connection with the processing and issuance of permits, renewal of permits, amendments to permits, review of plans, studies, and other documents, and inspection and monitoring of facilities, as well as any other nondiscriminatory charges that are assessed in connection with a Federal, State, interstate, or local water pollution regulatory program.
Neither the United States, nor any agent, employee, or officer thereof, shall be immune or exempt from any process or sanction of any State or Federal court with respect to the enforcement of any such injunctive relief.
No agent, employee, or officer of the United States shall be personally liable for any civil penalty under any Federal, State, interstate, or local water pollution law with respect to any act or omission within the scope of the official duties of the agent, employee, or officer.
An agent, employee, or officer of the United States shall be subject to any criminal sanction (including, but not limited to, any fine or imprisonment) under any Federal or State water pollution law, but no department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Federal Government shall be subject to any such sanction.
Administrative Enforcement Actions.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, the Secretary of the Army, and the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating may commence an administrative enforcement action against any department, agency, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative, or judicial branch of the Federal Government pursuant to the enforcement authorities contained in this Act.
The Administrator or Secretary, as applicable, shall initiate an administrative enforcement action against such a department, agency, or instrumentality in the same manner and under the same circumstances as an action would be initiated against another person.
Any voluntary resolution or settlement of such an action shall be set forth in a consent order.
Opportunity to confer.--No administrative order issued to such a department, agency, or instrumentality shall become final until such department, agency, or instrumentality has had the opportunity to confer with the Administrator or Secretary, as applicable.
Limitation on State Use of Funds Collected From Federal Government.--Unless a State law in effect on the date of the enactment of this subsection or a State constitution requires the funds to be used in a different manner, all funds collected by a State from the Federal Government from penalties and fines imposed for violation of any substantive or procedural requirement referred to in subsection (a) shall be used by the State only for projects designed to improve or protect the environment or to defray the costs of environmental protection or enforcement.''.
General Definitions.--Section 502(5) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1362(5)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``and includes any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States''.
Oil and Hazardous Substance Liability Program.--Section 311(a)(7) of such Act (33 United States Code 1321(a)(7)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``and any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States''.