This Act may be cited as the ``Job Corps Youth Sentencing Alternative for Vocational Education and Training Act'' or the ``YOUTHSAVE Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Over 1,000,000 offenders are incarcerated in the Nation's prisons and jails, and Federal and State correctional systems face severe prison overcrowding.
The annual costs of incarceration range as high as $36,000 per inmate and represent one of the fastest growing expenses facing States.
Most juvenile offenders, regardless of the seriousness of their crimes, are released at the age of 21, and are poorly educated, unskilled, and unprepared to enter the workforce.
Research on crime prevention shows that early intervention directed at first-time offenders is essential to helping them avoid a lifetime of crime.
Studies have shown that inmates who receive job training in prison are 3 times less likely to return to jail after being released than their counterparts who do not receive job training.
The current system of juvenile incarceration usually serves to warehouse offenders without providing effective counseling, education, and job training necessary to reorient youth inmates away from crime.
Successful efforts to educate and train convicted youths could result in substantial cost savings in terms of reduced crime, incarceration, public assistance, and in higher payroll tax revenues.
The Job Corps program, authorized under part B of title IV of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1691 et seq.
), is the Nation's only residential education and vocational training program targeted to serve low-income youth who face multiple barriers to becoming economically self- sufficient.
The Job Corps program has a documented record of success during its 29 years of operation, including a 75 percent placement rate of successfully helping graduates obtain permanent employment, return to school, or enter the armed services, and such program returns $1.46 on every $1.00 invested in the program.
Eligibility requirements of the Job Corps program limit the participation of youths with certain behavioral problems and youths who are being adjudicated or have been convicted of crimes.
Under section 433(a)(3) of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1703(a)(3)), the Secretary of Labor is authorized to undertake one or more pilot projects designed to involve youths who have a history of behavioral problems in order to provide these youths with the education, job training, and counseling services that have proved so successful among regular Job Corps participants.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to establish separate Job Corps Youthsave centers for youths who have been convicted of nonviolent criminal offenses which shall be an alternative sentencing option for such youths; (2) to provide youth offenders at such centers with intensive counseling, education, and job training in order to help them become self-sufficient members of society; and (3) to provide a disciplined environment at such centers in which youth offenders can receive maximum benefit from regular Job Corps services and other services geared specifically to the needs of such offenders.
ESTABLISHMENT OF JOB CORPS YOUTHSAVE PROGRAM.
In General.--Part B of title IV of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1691 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 433A the following new section: ``SEC.
JOB CORPS YOUTHSAVE PROGRAM.
Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to make agreements in accordance with section 427 with entities described in such section for the purpose of establishing and operating up to 10 Job Corps Youthsave centers to provide comprehensive education and training services to eligible youths described in subsection (b).
Such Youthsave centers shall be established and operated separately from the Job Corps centers established and operated pursuant to section 427.
Eligible Youths.--A youth shall be eligible to become an enrollee in the Job Corps at a center established and operated under subsection (a) only if-- ``(1) the youth meets the eligibility requirements described in section 423 (except the requirements described in paragraph (4) of such section); and ``(2) the youth has been convicted of a non-violent criminal offense under Federal or State law and the sentence of such offense is active at the time of enrollment.
Screening and Selection.-- ``(1) In general.--(A) The Secretary, in consultation with the individuals and entities described in subparagraph (B), shall develop regulations for the screening and selection of applicants for the Job Corps at centers established and operated under subsection (a).
The individuals and entities described in this subparagraph include the Attorney General, State attorneys general, and appropriate individuals and entities such as community action agencies, community-based organizations, public employment agencies, individuals and entities administering programs under title II, professional organizations, labor organizations, and agencies and individuals having contact with youths over a substantial period of time and able to offer reliable information as to the needs and problems of such youths.
Interviewing requirements.--The Secretary shall ensure that the regulations described in paragraph (1) provide for the interviewing of each applicant for the purpose of-- ``(A) ensuring that the applicant understands that enrollment in the Job Corps at a center established and operated under subsection (a) is 1 sentencing option available to such applicant; ``(B) ensuring that the applicant chooses such option freely and for the purpose of receiving education and job training services; ``(C) ensuring that the applicant understands the Job Corps program and what will be expected of the applicant in the event of acceptance; ``(D) obtaining from the applicant pertinent data relating to background and needs of such applicant; and ``(E) determining whether the applicant's educational and vocational needs can be met through the Job Corps at a center established and operated under subsection (a).
Special limitation.--The requirements described in section 425(a) shall apply with respect to the screening and selection of applicants for the Job Corps at centers established and operated under subsection (a).
Dissemination.--The Secretary shall disseminate the regulations developed under paragraph (1) to appropriate individuals and organizations, including Federal and State courts, probation officers, parole officers, appropriate social service entities providing services to juvenile offenders, and other law enforcement authorities and personnel.
Education and Training Services.--The Secretary may not enter into an agreement with an entity described in section 427 for the purpose of establishing and operating a center under subsection (a) unless the entity agrees that it will provide enrollees with a comprehensive program of education, vocational training, work experience, planned vocational activities, physical rehabilitation and development, and counseling.
Project Agreement.--Each center established and operated under subsection (a) shall provide services and facilities under a project agreement with 1 or more State or local agencies that-- ``(1) requires such State and local agencies to provide, in the aggregate, not less than 30 percent of the cost attributable to operating such center; and ``(2) contains or is accompanied by such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require.
Instructor Training.--The Secretary shall ensure that each center established and operated under subsection (a) is staffed with instructors who have received appropriate training in techniques in dealing with youth offenders.
Maintenance of Information.--The Secretary shall maintain information, separate from regular Job Corps statistics, on the performance of the centers established and operated under subsection (a) and the enrollees served by such centers, including placement statistics and other related tracking information on the performance of such enrollees.
Outreach.--The Secretary shall disseminate information regarding the centers established and operated under subsection (a) to appropriate Federal and State judges, juvenile delinquency prevention personnel, attorneys, community-based organizations, and other interested individuals and organizations for the purpose of increasing awareness of and referrals to such centers.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--In addition to amounts authorized to be appropriated under section 3(d) for a fiscal year, there are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subsection (a) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2004.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of the Job Training Partnership Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 433A the following new item: ``Sec.
Job Corps Youthsave Program.