This Act may be cited as the ``United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) Funding Act of 1999''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The renewed commitment of the world community to the formulation of government policies that contribute to global population stabilization and to improvements in the status of women owes much to the efforts of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and organizations, particularly the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA).
Over one-half of the UNFPA's assistance is devoted to maternal and child health programs, including the provision of family planning services, and it is a major supplier of modern methods of contraception.
UNFPA also supports efforts aimed at preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and other sexually- transmitted diseases and activities aimed specifically at enhancing the status of women.
UNFPA does not fund abortion services, rather, UNFPA seeks to reduce the incidence of abortion by improving access to contraceptive services and to reduce deaths and injuries related to unsafe abortion by supporting treatment of women suffering from its complications.
Operating in over 160 nations in all regions of the world and as a politically neutral source of funds, UNFPA complements the important work of the United States Agency for International Development population assistance program.
As a result of the withdrawal of the United States contribution to UNFPA as of 1999, it is estimated that 870,000 women in the developing world will be deprived of effective modern contraception, leading to 500,000 unintended pregnancies, 234,000 births, 200,000 abortions, and thousands of maternal and child deaths.
Many global environmental problems, including water shortages, pollution, tropical deforestation, and the loss of wildlife habitat are linked to rapid population growth.
UNFPA has assisted countries around the world plan for and slow population growth, therefore reducing its effects on the environment.
Assistance provided by UNFPA conforms to the principle, affirmed at the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development by 180 nations, including the United States, that ``all couples and individuals have the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education, and means to do so.''.
UNFPA opposes coercion in any form.
All of UNFPA's programs are designed in conformity with universally recognized human rights principles.
An appropriate way to express the legitimate concerns of the United States Government about the population policies of the People's Republic of China is by placing those concerns on the bilateral agenda along with other important human rights issues, not by singling out a United Nations agency by withholding all funding thereby punishing the women and families around the world who depend on its humanitarian aid.
UNFPA can and should play a constructive role in helping to reduce the incidence of coercive practices in China through its new country program that aims to expand voluntarism and contraceptive method choice, to strengthen a broader range of reproductive health services, and to enhance the status of women.
RESTORATION OF THE UNITED STATES VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION TO THE UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND.
In addition to amounts otherwise available to carry out the purposes of chapter 3 of part 1 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, there are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 to be available only for United States voluntary contributions to the United Nations Population Fund.
LIMITATION ON THE UNITED STATES VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTION TO THE UNITED NATIONS POPULATION FUND.
Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, of the funds appropriated for voluntary contributions to the United Nations Population Fund for each of the fiscal years 2000 and 2001, an amount equal to the amount allocated by the United Nations Population Fund for the country program in the People's Republic of China during each fiscal year shall be withheld from obligation and expenditure unless during such fiscal year, the President submits to the appropriate congressional committees the certification described in subsection (b).
Certification.--The President shall certify that the country program of the United Nations Population Fund in the People's Republic of China-- (1) focuses on improving the delivery of voluntary family planning information and services; (2) is designed in conformity with the human rights principles affirmed at the International Conference on Population and Development with the support of 180 nations including the United States; (3) is implemented only in counties of the People's Republic of China where all quotas and targets for the recruitment of program participants have been abolished and the use of coercive measures has been eliminated; (4) is carried out in consultation with and under the oversight and approval of the UNFPA executive board, including the United States representative; (5) is subject to regular, independent monitoring to ensure compliance with the principles of informed consent and voluntary participation; and (6) suspends operations in project counties found to be in violation of program guidelines.