TITLE I--SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS SEC.
SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Retirement Savings and Security Act''.
Table of Contents.-- TITLE I--SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE II--ADDITIONAL RETIREMENT PARTICIPATION AND PAYMENT OPTIONS FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES Sec.
Immediate participation in the Thrift Savings Plan for Federal employees.
Deferred annuities for surviving spouses of Federal employees.
Payment of lump-sum credit for former spouses of Federal employees.
TITLE II--ADDITIONAL RETIREMENT PARTICIPATION AND PAYMENT OPTIONS FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES SEC.
IMMEDIATE PARTICIPATION IN THE THRIFT SAVINGS PLAN FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.
Elimination of Certain Waiting Periods for Purposes of Employee Contributions.--Paragraph (4) of section 8432(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(4) The Executive Director shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the following: ``(A) Notwithstanding subparagraph (A) of paragraph (2), an employee or Member described in such subparagraph shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to first make an election under this subsection beginning on the date of commencing service or, if that is not administratively feasible, beginning on the earliest date thereafter that such an election becomes administratively feasible, as determined by the Executive Director.
An employee or Member described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (2) shall be afforded a reasonable opportunity to first make an election under this subsection (based on the appointment or election described in such subparagraph) beginning on the date of commencing service pursuant to such appointment or election or, if that is not administratively feasible, beginning on the earliest date thereafter that such an election becomes administratively feasible, as determined by the Executive Director.
Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this paragraph, contributions under paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (c) shall not be payable with respect to any pay period before the earliest pay period for which such contributions would otherwise be allowable under this subsection if this paragraph had not been enacted.
Sections 8351(a)(2), 8440a(a)(2), 8440b(a)(2), 8440c(a)(2), and 8440d(a)(2) shall be applied in a manner consistent with the purposes of subparagraphs (A) and (B), to the extent those subparagraphs can be applied with respect thereto.
Nothing in this paragraph shall affect paragraph (3).''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8432(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in the first sentence by striking ``(b)(1)'' and inserting ``(b)''; and (B) by amending the second sentence to read as follows: ``Contributions under this subsection pursuant to such an election shall, with respect to each pay period for which such election remains in effect, be made in accordance with a program of regular contributions provided in regulations prescribed by the Executive Director.''.
Section 8432(b)(1)(B) of such title is amended by inserting ``(or any election allowable by virtue of paragraph (4))'' after ``subparagraph (A)''.
Section 8432(b)(3) of such title is amended by striking ``Notwithstanding paragraph (2)(A), an'' and inserting ``An''.
Section 8432(i)(1)(B)(ii) of such title is amended by striking ``either elected to terminate individual contributions to the Thrift Savings Fund within 2 months before commencing military service or''.
Section 8439(a)(1) of such title is amended by inserting ``who makes contributions or'' after ``for each individual'' and by striking ``section 8432(c)(1)'' and inserting ``section 8432''.
Section 8439(c)(2) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Nothing in this paragraph shall be considered to limit the dissemination of information only to the times required under the preceding sentence.''.
Sections 8440a(a)(2) and 8440d(a)(2) of such title are amended by striking all after ``subject to'' and inserting ``subject to this chapter.''.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act or such earlier date as the Executive Director may by regulation prescribe.
DEFERRED ANNUITIES FOR SURVIVING SPOUSES OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.
In General.--Section 8341 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (h)(1) by striking ``section 8338(b) of this title'' and inserting ``section 8338(b), and a former spouse of a deceased former employee who separated from the service with title to a deferred annuity under section 8338 (if they were married to one another prior to the date of separation),''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(j)(1) If a former employee dies after having separated from the service with title to a deferred annuity under section 8338 but before having established a valid claim for annuity, and is survived by a spouse to whom married on the date of separation, the surviving spouse may elect to receive-- ``(A) an annuity, commencing on what would have been the former employee's 62d birthday, equal to 55 percent of the former employee's deferred annuity; ``(B) an annuity, commencing on the day after the date of death of the former employee, such that, to the extent practicable, the present value of the future payments of the annuity would be actuarially equivalent to the present value of the future payments under subparagraph (A) as of the day after the former employee's death; or ``(C) the lump-sum credit, if the surviving spouse is the individual who would be entitled to the lump-sum credit and if such surviving spouse files application therefor.
An annuity under this subsection and the right thereto terminate on the last day of the month before the surviving spouse remarries before becoming 55 years of age, or dies.''.
Corresponding Amendment for FERS.--Section 8445(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``(or of a former employee or'' and inserting ``(or of a former''; and (2) by striking ``annuity)'' and inserting ``annuity, or of a former employee who dies after having separated from the service with title to a deferred annuity under section 8413 but before having established a valid claim for annuity (if such former spouse was married to such former employee prior to the date of separation))''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to surviving spouses and former spouses (whose marriage, in the case of the amendments made by subsection (a), terminated after May 6, 1985) of former employees who die after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PAYMENT OF LUMP-SUM CREDIT FOR FORMER SPOUSES OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.
In General.--Title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in section 8342(c) by striking ``Lump-sum'' and inserting ``Except as provided in section 8345(j), lump-sum''; (2) in section 8345(j)-- (A) in paragraph (1) by inserting after ``that individual'' the following: ``, or be made under section 8342(d) through (f) to an individual entitled under section 8342(c),''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Any payment under this subsection to a person bars recovery by any other person.
''; (3) in section 8424(d) by striking ``Lump-sum'' and inserting ``Except as provided in section 8467(a), lump-sum''; and (4) in section 8467-- (A) in subsection (a) by inserting after ``that individual'' the following: ``, or be made under section 8424(e) through (g) to an individual entitled under section 8424(d),''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Any payment under this section to a person bars recovery by any other person.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to any death occurring after the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act.