This Act may be cited as the ``Citizens' Choice Act''.
DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES GENERAL ELECTION TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to returns and records) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO BE USED FOR THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES GENERAL ELECTION TRUST FUND.
In General.--Every individual whose adjusted income tax liability for the taxable year is $5 or more may designate that $5 shall be paid over to the House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund.
The first page of the return of the taxpayer, or the page bearing the taxpayer's signature, shall include a place for designating the Democratic Party, the Republican Party, or, as written in by the taxpayer, any other political party as recipient of the amount designated.
Adjusted Income Tax Liability.--For purposes of this section, the adjusted income tax liability of an individual is the tax liability of such individual (as determined under subsection (b) of section 6096) for the taxable year reduced by the amount designated under section 6096 (relating to designation of income tax payments to the Presidential Election Campaign Fund) for such taxable year.
Joint Returns.--In the case of a joint return showing an adjusted income tax liability of $10 or more, each spouse may designate that $5 shall be paid over to the House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund.
Manner and Time of Designation.--Subsection (c) of section 6096 shall apply to the manner and time of the designation under this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of income tax payments to be used for the House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES GENERAL ELECTION TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Trust Fund Code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES GENERAL ELECTION TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such trust fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Accounts.--The trust fund shall consist of one account for each political party in each congressional district.
The amounts designated under section 6097 (relating to designation by individuals) shall be deposited in the appropriate accounts and shall be paid to certified House candidates (as defined in subsection (d)) at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe (in consultation with the Federal Election Commission) for the political parties and congressional districts of residence of the individuals making the designation.
Transfer to Fund of Amounts Designated by Individuals.--There is hereby appropriated to the House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6097.
Certified House Candidates Defined.--In this section, a `certified House candidate' means a candidate in a general election for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress who is certified by the Federal Election Commission under section 323 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 as eligible to accept payments under this section.
Treatment of Amounts Remaining After Election.--Any amount remaining in an account after all expenditures are made with respect to an election (including any runoff election subsequent to a general election) shall be deposited in the general fund of the Treasury.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund.''.
REQUIREMENTS FOR HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES WHO ACCEPT AMOUNTS FROM HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES GENERAL ELECTION TRUST FUND.
In General.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``requirements for house general election candidates who accept amounts from house of representatives general election campaign trust fund ``Sec.
In General.-- ``(1) Certification.--The Commission shall certify that a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress in a general election is eligible to accept payments from the appropriate account of the House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund under section 9512 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 if the candidate certifies the following (at such time and in such form and manner as the Commission may require): ``(A) The candidate has received contributions totaling not less than $60,000 (of which not more than $1,000 may be from the personal funds of the candidate) with respect to the election.
The candidate will not furnish (by contribution, loan, or otherwise) more than $20,000 with respect to the election from the personal funds of the candidate.
Subject to paragraph (2), the candidate will not make expenditures (including funds from the House of Representatives General Election Trust Fund) with respect to the election totaling more than $600,000.
Waiver of expenditure limits for certain candidates.--The Commission shall waive the application of paragraph (1)(C) to a candidate if the candidate's opponent in the general election-- ``(A) is not certified with respect to the election under this section; and ``(B) has accepted contributions with respect to the election totaling not less than $100,000 or has made expenditures with respect to the election totaling not less than $100,000.
Enforcement.-- ``(1) Audit of reports.--The Commission may audit campaign reports submitted under this Act to assure compliance with the requirements of this section.
Penalty for excess expenditures.--In the case of a violation of the expenditure limit provided under subsection (a)(1)(C), the Commission shall impose a civil penalty in an amount equal to not less than the amount of the excess expenditure and not more than four times the amount of the excess expenditure, except that, in the case of an inadvertent violation, the Commission shall impose a civil penalty in an amount equal to the amount of the excess expenditure.
Coordination With Secretary of the Treasury.--The Commission shall transmit to the Secretary of the Treasury the names of candidates certified under this section, together with such other information as may be required to enable the Secretary to carry out section 9512 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to elections occurring after December 31, 1996.
LIMITATION ON CERTAIN LOANS BY HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES GENERAL ELECTION CANDIDATES.
In General.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 301 et sequentes), as amended by section 4, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``limitation on certain loans by house of representatives general election candidates ``Sec.
A general election candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not make loans totaling more than $50,000 to any campaign committee of the candidate with respect to the election.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to elections occurring after December 31, 1996.