This Act may be cited as the ``Family Services Improvement Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) historically, Federal programs have addressed the Nation's problems by providing categorical financial assistance with detailed requirements relating to the use of funds; (2) while the assistance described in paragraph (1) has been directed at critical problems, some program requirements may inadvertently impede the effective delivery of services, and the Federal government should exercise leadership in eliminating these impediments; (3) the Nation's State, local, and tribal governments and private, nonprofit organizations are dealing with increasingly complex problems that require the coordinated delivery of many kinds of services; (4) the Nation's communities are diverse, and different needs are present in different communities; and (5) it is more important than ever for the Federal Government to-- (A) review, coordinate, and rationalize rules, regulations and policies governing the range of Federal financial assistance programs; (B) reduce the barriers between programs that impede State, local, and tribal governments' ability to deliver services in a coordinated and effective manner; and (C) promote more effective and efficient local delivery of services.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) remove Federal impediments to coordination of service delivery; (2) enable more efficient use of Federal, State, and local resources through program coordination and reduction of regulation; (3) facilitate cooperation among and coordination of programs operated by State, local, and tribal governments and private, nonprofit organizations; and (4) place less emphasis in Federal service programs on measuring resources and procedures and more emphasis on accountability for achieving policy goals.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) Eligible federal financial assistance program.--The term ``eligible Federal financial assistance program''-- (A) means a Federal program under which financial assistance is available, directly or indirectly, to a State, local, or tribal government or a qualified organization to carry out a specified program; (B) does not include a Federal program under which financial assistance is provided by the Federal Government directly to a beneficiary of that financial assistance, or to a State to provide financial or food voucher assistance directly to a beneficiary (but may include administrative costs for such a program if administrative funding levels are set separately from benefit funding by law or regulation); (C) includes the services portion of a program that provides both direct cash payments and services; and (D) does not include a direct spending program (as defined under the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990 (2 United States Code 900(c)(8)).
Eligible state, local, or tribal government.--The term ``eligible State, local, or tribal government'' means a State, local, or tribal government that is eligible to receive financial assistance under one or more eligible Federal financial assistance programs; (3) Local government.--The term ``local government'' means-- (A) a subdivision of a State that is a unit of general local government (as defined under section 6501 of title 31, United States Code); (B) any combination of political subdivisions described in subparagraph (A) recognized by the Council; and (C) local education agencies (as defined under section 8801(18) of title 20, United States Code); (4) Qualified organization.--The term ``qualified organization'' means a private, nonprofit organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (5) State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, and the Virgin Islands; (6) Qualified consortium.--The term ``qualified consortium'' means a group that-- (A) is composed of any combination of qualified organizations, State agencies, or local agencies that receive federally appropriated funds, and (B) includes representatives from not less than three organizations providing services in not less than three of the following areas: (i) Education.
Family support and preservation.
Maternal and child health.
Drug abuse prevention and treatment; and (7) Tribal government.--The term ``tribal government'' means the governing entity of an Indian tribe as defined in the Federally Recognized Indian Tribe List Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 479a), and any amendments to such Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF FEDERAL COORDINATION COUNCIL.
Designation and Membership.--The President shall designate a Federal Coordination Council, in this Act referred to as ``Council'', composed of the following: (1) The Attorney General.
The Secretary of Agriculture.
The Secretary of Labor.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
The Secretary of Education.
The Director of National Drug Control Policy.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Any additional members appointed at the discretion of the President.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate a Chair of the Council from among members of the Council.
Duties.--The Council shall perform the following functions: (1) Review regulations governing eligible Federal financial assistance programs in the areas listed in section 4(1)(A) and identify more efficient operation and coordination of such programs.
Coordinate and assist Federal agencies in eliminating, revising, and coordinating regulations, including regulations with respect to the blending of funds.
Coordinate and assist Federal agencies in creating an application to be used to apply for assistance from eligible Federal financial assistance programs in the areas listed in section 4(1)(A).
Coordinate and assist Federal agencies in creating a release form to be used by a client to authorize or prohibit service providers, including schools, from sharing information across eligible Federal financial assistance programs.
Coordinate and assist agencies in creating a system wherein an organization or consortium of organizations may use one proposal to apply for funding from multiple eligible Federal financial assistance programs.
Evaluate current performance standards and evaluation criteria for eligible Federal financial assistance programs, and make specific recommendations to Federal agencies regarding how to revise such standards and criteria in order to establish specific and measurable performance and outcome measures by which program success may be judged and future funding decisions made.
Ensure that Federal grants program criteria award priority funding to qualified consortia.
Establish interagency teams comprised of staff from the agencies that administer the covered federal financial assistance programs to provide training and technical assistance to assist program coordination.
Establish interagency teams to provide outcome-based, cross-program evaluation of coordinated programs.
Identify not less than ten qualified consortia to participate in a demonstration program to determine the benefits of the following accountability procedures: (A) The qualified consortium shall select a set of specific and measurable program goals.
The qualified consortium shall develop a flexibility and coordination plan to describe-- (i) how the consortium will attain these goals; (ii) how performance will be measured; and (iii) how the consortium will identify subgroups within the community, and collect and maintain data to measure the impact of the plan on individuals, the subgroups, and the community.
Reports.-- (1) Not later than one year after the designation of the Council, the Council shall submit to the Congress a report detailing any legislative encumbrances preventing the Council from carrying out its duties.
Not later than three years after the designation of the Council, the Council shall submit to the Congress a report detailing any regulations implemented as a result of findings of the Council.
INCENTIVES TO FORM CONSORTIA.
Exemption from Requirements.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, members of a qualified consortium shall be exempted, without any waiver application or approval, but subject to prior notification to the agency administering the affected Federal assistance programs, from meeting requirements or providing services which are met or performed by another member of the consortium, so long as the standards of the requirement or service are met by that other member of the consortium.
Retention of Certain Funds.--Any funds which each individual program saves from the program coordination described in subsection (a) may be retained by the consortium in a flexible account which shall be administered in accordance with a memorandum of understanding agreed to by each member of the consortium.
Flexible account funds may be used to expand, improve, or otherwise augment services provided by the consortium, consistent with the intent of Federal programs managed by consortium members, including data systems development and joint professional development with staff from other consortium members.
Permission to Set Aside Percentage of Funds.--Any agency or organization that is a member of a consortium may at its discretion set aside a maximum of 10 percent of its Federal funds in the flexible account described in subsection (b).
Audit of Federal Financial Assistance Programs.--The Federal agencies with jurisdiction over Federal financial assistance programs included in a consortium may designate a cognizant agency to audit flexible fund expenditures.
Enforcement of Requirements of Federal Financial Assistance Programs.--The Federal agencies with jurisdiction over Federal financial assistance programs included in a consortium may designate a cognizant agency to enforce the authorization requirements of Federal assistance programs.