This Act may be cited as the ``Tampon Safety and Research Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Tampons are used by up to 70 percent of menstruating women in the United States today, and the average woman may use as many as 11,400 tampons in her lifetime.
Most menstruation products, such as tampons, sanitary pads, and panty liners, contain dioxins to varying degrees, a by-product of a chlorine-bleaching process used in the manufacture of paper products.
The effects of dioxin from various sources are cumulative and can be measured 20 to 30 years after exposure.
Women may be exposed to dioxin in tampons and other menstrual products for approximately 40 years over the course of their reproductive lives.
Internal documents of the Food and Drug Administration suggest the agency has not adequately investigated the danger of dioxin in tampons, according to a 1992 staff report of a subcommittee of the Committee on Government Operations, House of Representatives.
The Food and Drug Administration has relied on data provided by feminine hygiene manufacturers in determining product safety.
Although the Food and Drug Administration currently requires tampon manufacturers to monitor dioxin levels in their finished products, the information is not readily available to the public.
The Environmental Protection Agency has concluded that dioxins are a probable human carcinogen (cancer-causing agent).
Recent studies have produced conflicting information about the link between dioxin exposure and increased risks for endometriosis.
The Environmental Protection Agency has concluded that people with high exposure to dioxins may be at risk for other noncancer effects that could suppress the immune system, increase the risk of pelvic inflammatory disease, reduce fertility, and interfere with fetal and childhood development.
An independent study in 1991 found that tampons commonly included any of the following additives: Chlorine compounds; absorbency enhancers (such as surfactants like polysorbate-20); natural and synthetic fibers (such as cotton, rayon, polyester, and polyacrylate); deodorant; and fragrance.
Toxic shock syndrome has been linked to tampon use.
Such syndrome is a rare bacterial-caused illness that occurs mostly in menstruating women.
During 1979 and 1980, the syndrome was responsible for at least 55 deaths and 1,066 nonfatal cases.
Independent research has shown that synthetic fiber additives in tampons amplify toxin production, which is associated with toxic shock syndrome.
NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH; RESEARCH ON DIOXIN PURSUANT TO OFFICE OF RESEARCH ON WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Part F of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 287d et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN PROJECTS REGARDING WOMEN'S HEALTH.
Dioxin in Feminine Hygiene Products.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of NIH, in collaboration with the Director of the Office, shall provide for the conduct or support of research to determine the extent to which the presence of dioxin, synthetic fibers, and other additives in tampons and other feminine hygiene products-- ``(A) pose any risks to the health of women who use the products, including risks relating to cervical cancer, endometriosis, infertility, ovarian cancer, breast cancer, immune system deficiencies, pelvic inflammatory disease, and toxic shock syndrome; and ``(B) pose any risks to the health of children of women who used such products during or before the pregnancies involved, including risks relating to fetal and childhood development.
Requirement regarding data from manufacturers.-- Research under paragraph (1) shall include research to confirm the data on tampons and other feminine hygiene products submitted to the Commissioner of Food and Drugs by manufacturers of such products.
Definition.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `feminine hygiene products' means tampons, pads, liners, and similar products used by women with respect to menstruation or other genital-tract secretions.
Reports.--Reports on the results of research under subsection (a) shall be periodically submitted to the Congress, the Commissioner of Food and Drugs, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Such reports shall be made available to the public through the data system and clearinghouse program established under section 486A, or through other appropriate means.