This Act may be cited as the ``Senior Safe Corridors Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to fund programs that establish corridors of safety for senior citizens in crime-troubled areas.
GRANTS PROGRAMS TO ESTABLISH CORRIDORS OF SAFETY FOR SENIOR CITIZENS.
Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part Q as part R; (2) by redesignating section 1701 as section 1801; and (3) by inserting after part P the following new part: ``PART Q--PROGRAMS TO ESTABLISH SAFE CORRIDORS FOR SENIOR CITIZENS ``SEC.
In General.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance may make grants under this part to States, and to units of local government with populations of more than 100,000 individuals, to fund programs that create corridors of safety for senior citizens in high- density senior citizen areas.
Uses of Funds.--Funds distributed under this part shall be used to fund programs that seek to decrease violent crimes against senior citizens by increasing the numbers, protective presence, and watchfulness of police, community group members, and others, and the watchfulness of business owners and employees, in high-density senior citizen areas.
Programs may include escorting senior citizens.
In General.--To request a grant under this part, a State, or a unit of local government with a population of more than 100,000 individuals, shall submit an application to the Director in the form and containing the information that the Director reasonably requires.
Approval.--The Director shall approve or disapprove each application made under subsection (a) within 60 days after the date that the application is received by the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
Criteria.--In order to receive a grant under this part, an applicant shall-- ``(1) demonstrate that there is significant violent crime against senior citizens in the high-density senior citizen areas that will be affected by the applicant's program; ``(2) state the number of senior citizens who will be served by the applicant's program, and define which individuals will be considered senior citizens for purposes of the program; ``(3) describe the manner in which the applicant, including the applicant's local governments and police, will involve other sectors of the community, including local businesses, community groups, religious institutions, and law enforcement personnel such as transit and public housing officers, in the applicant's program; and ``(4) comply with any other requirement established by the Director for purposes of this section.
Application of Criteria.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director shall determine which applicants receive funding under this part based on the criteria referred to in subsection (a).
Priority.--If 2 applicants demonstrate equal need under the criteria referred to in paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a), the applicant whose proposed program shows the greatest amount and diversity of community involvement, as described in paragraph (3) of such subsection, shall be given priority in receiving a grant under this part.
LIMIT ON AMOUNT OF GRANT.
In General.--The amount of a grant made under this part may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs, for the period for which the grant is received, of the program funded by the grant.
Waiver of Requirement.--The Director may waive the requirement of subsection (a) for a grant made to an applicant that is a unit of local government, if the Director finds that-- ``(1) the applicant has a compelling need for the program for which it is applying for funding under this part; and ``(2) the applicant has severe financial problems.
REPORTS BY GRANT RECIPIENTS.
In General.--A State or unit of local government that receives funding for a program under this part shall submit, by a deadline established by the Director, an annual report for each fiscal year for which the funding is received, containing any information the Director may require regarding the program.
Evaluation of Effect on Crime.--The report required by subsection (a) with respect to any program shall include an evaluation of the effect of the program on violent crime against senior citizens in the high-density senior citizen areas in which the program operates.
Use of Grant Funds for Report.--A State or unit of local government may spend not more than 2 percent of the funds received under this part to compile the report required by subsection (a), or to otherwise comply with subsections (a) and (b).
``For purposes of this part: ``(1) The term `applicant' means a State, or a unit of local government with a population of over 100,000 individuals, that applies for a grant under this part.
The term `Director' means the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
The term `high-density senior citizen area' means an area inside, surrounding, or adjacent to facilities or services that specialize in availability to senior citizens, such as a senior citizen program at a community center, a public housing authority or private senior citizen apartment complex, or a medical practice providing care to senior citizens.
The term `program' means a program described in section 1701(b).''.
In General.--Section 1001(a) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) There are authorized to be appropriated, to carry out part Q, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1995 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 1998.''.
Technical Amendment.--Section 1001(a)(3) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793) is amended by striking ``and O'' and inserting ``O, and Q''.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Evaluation of Programs.--Section 801(b) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3782(b)) is amended by striking ``and O'' and inserting ``O, and Q''.
Process for Denied Applications.--Section 802(b) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3783(b)) is amended in the 1st sentence by striking ``or O'' and inserting ``O, or Q''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 prec.)
is amended by striking the items relating to part Q and inserting the following new items: ``Part Q--Programs To Establish Safe Corridors for Senior Citizens ``Sec.
Limit on amount of grant.
Reports by grant recipients.
``Part R--Transition--Effective Date--Repealer ``Sec.
Continuation of rules, authorities, and proceedings.