This Act may be cited as the ``Small Watershed Rehabilitation Amendments of 2000''.
TITLE I--DAM REHABILITATION SEC.
REHABILITATION OF WATER RESOURCE STRUCTURAL MEASURES CONSTRUCTED UNDER CERTAIN DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE PROGRAMS.
The Watershed Protection and Flood Prevention Act (16 United States Code 1001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
REHABILITATION OF STRUCTURAL MEASURES NEAR, AT, OR PAST THEIR EVALUATED LIFE EXPECTANCY.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Rehabilitation.--The term `rehabilitation', with respect to a structural measure constructed as part of a covered water resource project, means the completion of all work necessary to extend the service life of the structural measure and meet applicable safety and performance standards.
This may include: (A) protecting the integrity of the structural measure or prolonging the useful life of the structural measure beyond the original evaluated life expectancy; (B) correcting damage to the structural measure from a catastrophic event; (C) correcting the deterioration of structural components that are deteriorating at an abnormal rate; (D) upgrading the structural measure to meet changed land use conditions in the watershed served by the structural measure or changed safety criteria applicable to the structural measure; or (E) decommissioning the structure, if requested by the local organization.
Covered water resource project.--The term `covered water resource project' means a work of improvement carried out under any of the following: ``(A) This Act.
Section 13 of the Act of December 22, 1944 (Public Law 78-534; 58 United States Statutes at Large 905).
The pilot watershed program authorized under the heading `Flood Prevention' of the Department of Agriculture Appropriation Act, 1954 (Public Law 156; 67 United States Statutes at Large 214).
Subtitle H of title XV of the Agriculture and Food Act of 1981 (16 United States Code 3451 et sequentes; commonly known as the Resource Conservation and Development Program).
Structural measure.--The term `structural measure' means a physical improvement that impounds water, commonly known as a dam, which was constructed as part of a covered water resource project, including the impoundment area and flood pool.
Cost Share Assistance for Rehabilitation.-- ``(1) Assistance authorized.--The Secretary may provide financial assistance to a local organization to cover a portion of the total costs incurred for the rehabilitation of structural measures originally constructed as part of a covered water resource project.
The total costs of rehabilitation include the costs associated with all components of the rehabilitation project, including acquisition of land, easements, and rights-of-ways, rehabilitation project administration, the provision of technical assistance, contracting, and construction costs, except that the local organization shall be responsible for securing all land, easements, or rights-of-ways necessary for the project.
Amount of assistance; limitations.--The amount of Federal funds that may be made available under this subsection to a local organization for construction of a particular rehabilitation project shall be equal to 65 percent of the total rehabilitation costs, but not to exceed 100 percent of actual construction costs incurred in the rehabilitation.
However, the local organization shall be responsible for the costs of water, mineral, and other resource rights and all Federal, State, and local permits.
Relation to land use and development regulations.--As a condition on entering into an agreement to provide financial assistance under this subsection, the Secretary, working in concert with the affected unit or units of general purpose local government, may require that proper zoning or other developmental regulations are in place in the watershed in which the structural measures to be rehabilitated under the agreement are located so that-- ``(A) the completed rehabilitation project is not quickly rendered inadequate by additional development; and ``(B) society can realize the full benefits of the rehabilitation investment.
Technical Assistance for Watershed Project Rehabilitation.-- The Secretary, acting through the Natural Resources Conservation Service, may provide technical assistance in planning, designing, and implementing rehabilitation projects should a local organization request such assistance.
Such assistance may consist of specialists in such fields as engineering, geology, soils, agronomy, biology, hydraulics, hydrology, economics, water quality, and contract administration.
Prohibited Use.-- ``(1) Performance of operation and maintenance.-- Rehabilitation assistance provided under this section may not be used to perform operation and maintenance activities specified in the agreement for the covered water resource project entered into between the Secretary and the local organization responsible for the works of improvement.
Such operation and maintenance activities shall remain the responsibility of the local organization, as provided in the project work plan.
Renegotiation.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), as part of the provision of financial assistance under subsection (b), the Secretary may renegotiate the original agreement for the covered water resource project entered into between the Secretary and the local organization regarding responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the project when the rehabilitation is finished.
Application for Rehabilitation Assistance.--A local organization may apply to the Secretary for technical and financial assistance under this section if the application has also been submitted to and approved by the State agency having supervisory responsibility over the covered water resource project at issue or, if there is no State agency having such responsibility, by the Governor of the State.
The Secretary shall request the State dam safety officer (or equivalent State official) to be involved in the application process if State permits or approvals are required.
The rehabilitation of structural measures shall meet standards established by the Secretary and address other dam safety issues.
At the request of the local organization, personnel of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture may assist in preparing applications for assistance.
Ranking of Requests for Rehabilitation Assistance.--The Secretary shall establish such system of approving rehabilitation requests, recognizing that such requests will be received throughout the fiscal year and subject to the availability of funds to carry out this section, as is necessary for proper administration by the Department of Agriculture and equitable for all local organizations.
The approval process shall be in writing, and made known to all local organizations and appropriate State agencies.
Prohibition on Certain Rehabilitation Assistance.--The Secretary may not approve a rehabilitation request if the need for rehabilitation of the structure is the result of a lack of adequate maintenance by the party responsible for the maintenance.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to provide financial and technical assistance under this section-- ``(1) $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; ``(2) $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; ``(3) $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; ``(4) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; and ``(5) $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2005.
Assessment of Rehabilitation Needs.--The Secretary, in concert with the responsible State agencies, shall conduct an assessment of the rehabilitation needs of covered water resource projects in all States in which such projects are located.
Recordkeeping and Reports.-- ``(1) Secretary.--The Secretary shall maintain a data base to track the benefits derived from rehabilitation projects supported under this section and the expenditures made under this section.
On the basis of such data and the reports submitted under paragraph (2), the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress an annual report providing the status of activities conducted under this section.
Grant recipients.--Not later than 90 days after the completion of a specific rehabilitation project for which assistance is provided under this section, the local organization that received the assistance shall make a report to the Secretary giving the status of any rehabilitation effort undertaken using financial assistance provided under this section.''.
TITLE II--DAM SAFETY SEC.
Inventory and Assessment of Other Dams.-- (1) Inventory.--The Secretary of the Army (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish an inventory of dams constructed by and using funds made available through the Works Progress Administration, the Works Projects Administration, and the Civilian Conservation Corps.
Assessment of rehabilitation needs.--In establishing the inventory required under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall also assess the condition of the dams on such inventory and the need for rehabilitation or modification of the dams.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing the inventory and assessment required by this section.
Interim Actions.-- (1) In general.--If the Secretary determines that a dam referred to in subsection (a) presents an imminent and substantial risk to public safety, the Secretary is authorized to carry out measures to prevent or mitigate against such risk.
Exclusion.--The assistance authorized in paragraph (1) shall not be available to dams under the jurisdiction of the Department of the Interior.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of assistance provided under this subsection shall be 65 percent of such cost.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section a total of $25,000,000 for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1999, of which not more than $5,000,000 may be expended on any one dam.
Coordination.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall coordinate with the appropriate State dam safety officials and the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Passed the House of Representatives July 17, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.