This Act may be cited as the ``Mississippi Gulf Coast National Heritage Area Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the 6-county area in southern Mississippi located on the Gulf of Mexico and in the Mississippi Coastal Plain has a unique identity that is shaped by-- (A) the coastal and riverine environment; and (B) the diverse cultures that have settled in the area; (2) the area is rich with diverse cultural and historical significance, including-- (A) early Native American settlements; and (B) Spanish, French, and English settlements originating in the 1600s; (3) the area includes spectacular natural, scenic, and recreational resources; (4) there is broad support from local governments and other interested individuals for the establishment of the Mississippi Gulf Coast National Heritage Area to coordinate and assist in the preservation and interpretation of those resources; (5) the Comprehensive Resource Management Plan, coordinated by the Mississippi Department of Marine Resources-- (A) is a collaborative effort of the Federal Government and State and local governments in the area; and (B) is a natural foundation on which to establish the Heritage Area; and (6) establishment of the Heritage Area would assist local communities and residents in preserving the unique cultural, historical, and natural resources of the area.
In this Act: (1) Heritage area.--The term ``Heritage Area'' means the Mississippi Gulf Coast National Heritage Area established by section 4(a).
Coordinating entity.--The term ``coordinating entity'' means the coordinating entity for the Heritage Area designated by section 4(c).
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan for the Heritage Area developed under section 5.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Mississippi.
MISSISSIPPI GULF COAST NATIONAL HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is established in the State the Mississippi Gulf Coast National Heritage Area.
Boundaries.--The Heritage Area shall consist of the counties of Pearl River, Stone, George, Hancock, Harrison, and Jackson in the State.
Coordinating Entity.-- (1) In general.--The Mississippi Department of Marine Resources, in consultation with the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, shall serve as the coordinating entity for the Heritage Area.
Oversight committee.--The coordinating entity shall ensure that each of the 6 counties included in the Heritage Area is appropriately represented on any oversight committee.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the coordinating entity shall develop and submit to the Secretary a management plan for the Heritage Area.
Requirements.--The management plan shall-- (1) provide recommendations for the conservation, funding, management, interpretation, and development of the cultural, historical, archaeological, natural, and recreational resources of the Heritage Area; (2) identify sources of funding for the Heritage Area; (3) include-- (A) an inventory of the cultural, historical, archaeological, natural, and recreational resources of the Heritage Area; and (B) an analysis of ways in which Federal, State, tribal, and local programs may best be coordinated to promote the purposes of this Act; (4) provide recommendations for educational and interpretive programs to inform the public about the resources of the Heritage Area; and (5) involve residents of affected communities and tribal and local governments.
Failure to Submit.--If a management plan is not submitted to the Secretary by the date specified in subsection (a), the Secretary shall not provide any additional funding under this Act until a management plan for the Heritage Area is submitted to the Secretary.
Approval or Disapproval of the Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after receipt of the management plan under subsection (a), the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the management plan.
Action following disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves a management plan under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall-- (A) advise the coordinating entity in writing of the reasons for disapproval; (B) make recommendations for revision of the management plan; and (C) allow the coordinating entity to submit to the Secretary revisions to the management plan.
Revision.--After approval by the Secretary of the management plan, the coordinating entity shall periodically-- (1) review the management plan; and (2) submit to the Secretary, for review and approval by the Secretary, any recommendations for revisions to the management plan.
AUTHORITIES AND DUTIES OF COORDINATING ENTITY.
Authorities.--For purposes of developing and implementing the management plan and otherwise carrying out this Act, the coordinating entity may make grants to and provide technical assistance to tribal and local governments, and other public and private entities.
Duties.--In addition to developing the management plan under section 5, in carrying out this Act, the coordinating entity shall-- (1) implement the management plan; and (2) assist local and tribal governments and non-profit organizations in-- (A) establishing and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (B) developing recreational resources in the Heritage Area; (C) increasing public awareness of, and appreciation for, the cultural, historical, archaeological, and natural resources of the Heritage Area; (D) restoring historic structures that relate to the Heritage Area; and (E) carrying out any other activity that the coordinating entity determines to be appropriate to carry out this Act, consistent with the management plan; (3) conduct public meetings at least annually regarding the implementation of the management plan; and (4) for any fiscal year for which Federal funds are made available under section 9-- (A) submit to the Secretary a report that describes, for the fiscal year, the actions of the coordinating entity in carrying out this Act; (B) make available to the Secretary for audit all records relating to the expenditure of funds and any matching funds; and (C) require, for all agreements authorizing the expenditure of Federal funds by any entity, that the receiving entity make available to the Secretary for audit all records relating to the expenditure of the funds.
Prohibition on Acquisition of Real Property.--The coordinating entity shall not use Federal funds made available under this Act to acquire real property or any interest in real property.
TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES.
In General.--On the request of the coordinating entity, the Secretary may provide technical and financial assistance to the coordinating entity for use in the development and implementation of the management plan.
Prohibition of Certain Requirements.--The Secretary may not, as a condition of the provision of technical or financial assistance under this section, require any recipient of the assistance to impose or modify any land use restriction or zoning ordinance.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) affects or authorizes the coordinating entity to interfere with-- (A) the right of any person with respect to private property; or (B) any local zoning ordinance or land use plan; (2) restricts an Indian tribe from protecting cultural or religious sites on tribal land; (3) modifies, enlarges, or diminishes the authority of any State, tribal, or local government to regulate any use of land under any other law (including regulations); (4)(A) modifies, enlarges, or diminishes the authority of the State to manage fish and wildlife in the Heritage Area, including the regulation of fishing and hunting; or (B) authorizes the coordinating entity to assume any management authorities over such lands; or (5) diminishes the trust responsibilities or government-to- government obligations of the United States to any federally recognized Indian tribe.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $10,000,000, of which not more than $1,000,000 may be made available for any fiscal year.
Cost-Sharing Requirement.--The Federal share of the total cost of any activity assisted under this Act shall be not more than 50 percent.