This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Financial Efficiency Act of 2013''.
TITLE I--FISCAL AND BUDGET EFFICIENCY SEC.
FISCAL YEAR FOR DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
Section 441(b) of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (sec.
204.41, D.C. Official Code) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Authorization To Establish Fiscal Year by Act of Council.-- The District may change the fiscal year of the District by an Act of the Council.
If a change occurs, such fiscal year shall also constitute the budget and accounting year.''.
AVAILABILITY OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA LOCAL FUNDS UPON FAILURE BY CONGRESS TO ENACT LOCAL BUDGET.
In General.--Subpart 1 of part D of title IV of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act is amended by inserting after section 446B the following new section: ``availability of local funds upon failure by congress to enact budget ``Sec.
Availability of Local Funds at Rate Established by Local Law if No Budget Enacted Prior to Beginning of District of Columbia Fiscal Year.-- ``(1) In general.--If, as of the first day of a fiscal year of the District of Columbia (as established under section 441), neither the regular District of Columbia appropriation bill for the fiscal year nor a District of Columbia continuing resolution for the fiscal year is in effect, there is appropriated, out of any moneys of the government of the District of Columbia not otherwise appropriated, and out of applicable corporate or other revenues, receipts, and funds, the amount provided for any project or activity for which funds are provided in the local budget act for such fiscal year.
Rate of funding.--An appropriation and funds made available or authority granted for a project or activity for a fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be at the rate of operations provided for such project or activity under the local budget act for such fiscal year.
Termination of period of availability.--An appropriation and funds made available or authority granted for a project or activity for a fiscal year pursuant to this section shall cease to be available-- ``(A) during any period of the fiscal year in which a District of Columbia continuing resolution for the fiscal year is in effect; or ``(B) upon the enactment into law of the regular District of Columbia appropriation bill for such fiscal year.
Terms and Conditions.--An appropriation and funds made available or authority granted for a project or activity for a fiscal year pursuant to this section shall be subject to the terms and conditions imposed with respect to the appropriation made and funds made available for the preceding fiscal year, or the authority granted for such project or activity under the applicable law in effect at the time.
Period of Coverage.--An appropriation and funds made available or authority granted for a project or activity for a fiscal year pursuant to this section shall cover all obligations or expenditures incurred for such project or activity during the portion of such fiscal year for which this section applies to such project or activity.
Restrictions on Programs or Activities Subject to Other Appropriations Acts.--This section shall not apply to a project or activity during any period of a fiscal year if any other provision of law (other than an authorization of appropriations)-- ``(1) makes an appropriation, makes funds available, or grants authority for such project or activity to continue for such period, or ``(2) specifically provides that no appropriation shall be made, no funds shall be made available, or no authority shall be granted for such project or activity to continue for such period.
Protection of Other Obligations.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to effect obligations of the government of the District of Columbia mandated by other law.
Definitions.--In this section-- ``(1) the term `District of Columbia continuing resolution' means, with respect to a fiscal year, any joint resolution making continuing appropriations for the fiscal year which includes continuing appropriations for the government of the District of Columbia and other activities chargeable in whole or in part against the revenues of the District; ``(2) the term `local budget act' means, with respect to a fiscal year, the act of the Council adopting the annual budget for the District of Columbia government for such fiscal year, as submitted by the Mayor to the President for transmission to Congress pursuant to section 446; and ``(3) the term `regular District of Columbia appropriation bill' means, with respect to a fiscal year, an annual appropriation bill making appropriations, otherwise making funds available, or granting authority, for the fiscal year for the government of the District of Columbia and other activities chargeable in whole or in part against the revenues of the District.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply with respect to fiscal year 2015 and each succeeding fiscal year.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 446 of such Act (sec.
204.46, D.C. Official Code) is amended by inserting ``section 446C,'' after ``section 446B,''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents of subpart 1 of part D of title IV of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 446B the following: ``446C.
Availability of local funds upon failure by Congress to enact budget.''.
TITLE II--COMPENSATION OF CHIEF FINANCIAL OFFICER SEC.
INCREASE IN MAXIMUM COMPENSATION.
Maximum Compensation.--Section 424(b)(2)(E) of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (sec.
204.24(b)(2)(E), D.C. Official Code) is amended to read as follows: ``(E) Pay.--The Chief Financial Officer shall be paid at a rate such that the total amount of compensation paid during any calendar year does not exceed an amount equal to the limit on total pay which is applicable during the year under section 5307 of title 5, United States Code, to an employee described in section 5307(d) of such title.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to pay periods beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.