ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL REMOTE TEACHER CORPS.
The Secretary of Education may establish the National Remote Teacher Corps (in this Act referred to as the ``Corps'') to fill teacher vacancies, reduce class sizes, and improve educational quality in qualified remote areas.
DESIGNATION AS A CORPS SITE.
In General.--In order to be designated as a Corps site, a local educational agency or charter school located in a qualified remote area shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--An application submitted under subsection (a) shall demonstrate that the agency or charter school is-- (1) experiencing a shortage of teachers; (2) willing to work with the Secretary to-- (A) promote teacher accountability and high standards for teachers; and (B) provide cooperation, support, and use of facilities for the programs described in section 10; (3) willing to provide mentorship and professional development programs to teachers; (4) willing to provide compensation in accordance with section 8(a) for each Corps participant placed with the agency or school under the Corps; and (5) willing to-- (A) work with the Secretary under section 9 to develop and implement an alternative certification route for individuals selected to be Corps participants; or (B) allow such individuals to participate in an existing alternative certification program that is in compliance with any requirements prescribed by the Secretary.
The Secretary may-- (1) conduct recruiting programs for the Corps at institutions of higher education, including institutions that offer majors in the fields of education, science, technology, engineering, or mathematics; and (2) recruit current highly qualified elementary school or secondary school teachers.
APPLICATION; SELECTION CRITERIA; PRIORITY.
Application.--Selection of individuals to participate in the Corps shall be made on the basis of applications submitted to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Selection Criteria.--An individual selected to participate in the Corps shall-- (1) have at least a bachelor's degree from an institution of higher education; and (2) comply with such other criteria as the Secretary may prescribe.
Priority.--In selecting individuals to participate in the Corps, the Secretary shall give priority to individuals-- (1) with at least a master's degree in education (such as special education or teaching English as a second language), science, technology, engineering, or mathematics and who agree to seek employment as science, technology, engineering, mathematics, special education, or English as a second language teachers in elementary schools or secondary schools; or (2) who are highly qualified teachers with-- (A) 10 or more years of experience teaching students in elementary school or secondary school; or (B) equivalent qualifications and experience, as determined by the Secretary.
In General.--The Secretary may reimburse an individual applying to participate in the Corps for the actual and reasonable expenses incurred-- (1) in traveling to and from the individual's place of residence to a Corps site at which the individual may be placed under section 6 for the purpose of evaluating such site with regard to being assigned at such site; and (2) for the travel of 1 family member to accompany the individual to such site.
Maximum Amount.--The Secretary may establish a maximum total amount that may be paid to an individual as reimbursement for such expenses.
PLACEMENT OF CORPS PARTICIPANTS.
In General.--The Secretary shall place each individual selected to be a Corps participant with a local educational agency or charter school that is designated as a Corps site.
Considerations.--In placing a Corps participant at a Corps site, the Secretary shall take into account-- (1) the preference of the Corps participant; (2) the preferences of local educational agencies and charter schools that are Corps sites; and (3) the relative need among Corps sites with respect to teacher shortages, including-- (A) the total number of open teaching positions; (B) the number of teachers needed for class size reductions; and (C) the shortage of teachers with a particular subject-matter expertise.
Participation Agreement.-- (1) In general.--An individual selected to participate in the Corps shall be required to enter into an agreement with the Secretary under which the individual agrees-- (A) within such time as the Secretary may require, to obtain certification or licensing as an elementary school teacher or secondary school teacher under section 9 or through another procedure approved by the Secretary; and (B) to accept an offer of full-time employment as an elementary school teacher or secondary school teacher for not less than 3 school years with a local educational agency or charter school that is a Corps site.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the 3-year commitment described in paragraph (1)(B), or any other requirement under a participation agreement described in paragraph (1), for a participant if the Secretary determines such waiver to be appropriate.
If the Secretary provides the waiver to a participant, the participant-- (A) shall not be considered to be in violation of the agreement; and (B) shall not be required to provide reimbursement for any funds received as a Corps participant.
Agreement Renewal.--Upon completion of the 3-year commitment described in subsection (a)(1)(B), a Corp participant's participation agreement may be renewed in 1-year increments.
COMPENSATION FOR CORPS PARTICIPANTS.
Salary.--A Corps participant shall be considered an employee of the local educational agency or charter school in which the participant is employed under the Corps and shall be compensated at the same rates, including periodic increases, as employees who are similarly situated in similar teaching positions and who have similar training, experience, and skills, and such rates shall be in accordance with applicable law.
Federal Benefits.-- (1) Supplement, not supplant.--Any Federal funds a Corps participant receives from the Secretary under this section or section 5 shall supplement, not supplant, the compensation the participant receives under subsection (a) of this section.
Travel stipends.--The Secretary may reimburse each Corps participant for all or part of the actual and reasonable expenses incurred by the participant and 1 family member when traveling, not more than once per year of participation, from the Corps site to any location in the continental United States and from such location back to the Corps site.
Cash bonus.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may award annual or one-time cash bonuses to Corps participants, in amounts determined by the Secretary.
Priority.--In awarding cash bonuses under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall give priority to Corps participants-- (i) with at least a master's degree in education (such as special education or teaching English as a second language), science, technology, engineering, or mathematics and who are participating in the Corps as science, technology, engineering, mathematics, special education, or English as a second language teachers in elementary schools or secondary schools; or (ii) who are highly qualified teachers with-- (I) 10 or more years of experience teaching students in elementary school or secondary school; or (II) equivalent qualifications and experience, as determined by the Secretary.
Treatment of cash bonus.--A cash bonus paid under subparagraph (A) to a Corps participant shall not be taken into account in determining the eligibility of the participant for Federal student financial assistance provided under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070).
In General.--Subject to subsection (d), the Secretary and each Corps site shall, jointly, develop and implement a high-quality alternative certification route for individuals selected to participate in the Corps who are not certified teachers.
Priority.--In selecting individuals described in subsection (a) to participate in the alternative certification route, the Secretary shall give priority to individuals-- (1) who do not have a degree in education; and (2) who have expertise in a field in which there is a shortage of teachers, such as mathematics, science, special education, English language acquisition, or another high-need subject.
Access.--All classes and materials available under the alternative certification route shall be accessible to all Corps participants.
Exception.--A Corps site that has an existing alternative certification program that complies with any requirements prescribed by the Secretary, may, in lieu of developing and implementing an alternative certification route under subsection (a), allow individuals described in subsection (a) participate in such program.
PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT AND DISTANCE LEARNING.
Development of Program.--From the amounts appropriated to carry out this subsection under section 12, the Secretary, in consultation with at least 1 institution of higher education that is a research university, as determined by the Secretary, shall develop a professional development and distance-learning certificate or degree program that offers academic credit through-- (1) online classes; (2) classes through video- or tele-conference technology; (3) independent study; (4) in-person instruction at Corps sites; and (5) other distance learning methodologies as the Secretary designates, to assist individuals located in qualified remote areas in becoming highly qualified teachers.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--From the amounts appropriated to carry out this subsection under section 12, the Secretary shall award grants to institutions of higher education that offer the program developed under subsection (a) to students enrolled at the institution.
Uses of funds.--An institution of higher education that receives a grant under this subsection shall use such grant funds to cover-- (A) the cost of administering the program developed under subsection (a); and (B) to the maximum extent practicable, the total cost of program tuition for teachers at Corps sites enrolled in the program at the institution.
Application.-- (A) In general.--To receive a grant under this subsection, an institution of higher education shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Articulation agreements.--An application submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include an assurance by the institution that the institution will include the program in its articulation agreements between or among other institutions of higher education.
In this Act: (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided, any term that is defined in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801) shall have the meaning given such term in such section.
Articulation agreement.--The term ``articulation agreement'' has the meaning given such term in section 486A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1093a).
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001).
Qualified remote area.--The term ``qualified remote area'' means an area-- (A) from which an institution of higher education is located more than 3 hours away when using public or private transportation (including rail or bus); (B) to which the only method of access to the site at least 6 months of the year is by boat or airplane; or (C) that is located in a United States Territory.
United states territory.--The term ``United States Territory'' means the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and Puerto Rico.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.