The Congress finds that-- (1) the city of Waterloo, Iowa, and northeast Iowa of the State possess many important elements of the nationally significant story of American agriculture, including Native American agriculture, agricultural mechanization, seed hybridization, farm cooperative movements, rural electrification, farm-to-market systems, rural to urban migration, veterinary practice, food processing and preservation, national farm organizations, international hunger relief, and the development of national and international agribusiness; (2) these resources offer outstanding and unique opportunities to acknowledge and appreciate the development of American agriculture; (3) the National Park Service has determined that the story of American agriculture is nationally significant, that northeast Iowa is an ideal place to tell that story, and that this story could be divided into 4 principal topics for interpretation in northeast Iowa: the Amazing Science of Agriculture, Agriculture as a Way of Life, Organizing for Survival, and Crops from Field to Table; (4) the responsibility for interpreting, retaining, enhancing, and promoting the resources, values, and amenities of Waterloo, Iowa and northeast Iowa resides with volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, and the State of Iowa; and (5) despite the efforts by volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, and the State of Iowa, the cultural and historical resources of the area have not realized full potential and may be lost without some assistance from the Federal Government.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to interpret, retain, enhance, and promote the unique and significant contributions to national and international agriculture of certain natural, historic, and cultural resources within Waterloo, Iowa, and northeast Iowa; (2) to provide a partnership management framework to assist volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, and the State of Iowa in developing and implementing Management Plan policies and programs that will assist in the interpretation, retention, enhancement, and promotion of the cultural, natural, and recreational resources of northeast Iowa; (3) to allow for local, State, and Federal contributions through limited grants and technical assistance to create America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership through cooperative agreements among volunteer associations, private businesses, political subdivisions of the State, the State of Iowa, and residents of the area; and (4) to provide for an economically self-sustaining Partnership for the educational and inspirational benefit of current and future generations concerning the story of American agriculture.
As used in this Act: (1) Partnership.--The term ``Partnership'' means the America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership as established by section 3(a).
Management entity.--The term ``management entity'' means the management entity as established by section 4(a).
Political subdivision.--The term ``political subdivision'' means a political subdivision of the State of Iowa, any part of which is located in or adjacent to the area in which the Partnership's Activities occur, including a county, city, or town.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Iowa.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Partnership management plan.--The term ``Partnership Management Plan'' means the plan as established in section 5(a).
Activities.--The term ``activities'' means the activities limited in section 3(b).
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AMERICA'S AGRICULTURAL HERITAGE PARTNERSHIP.
Establishment.--To carry out this Act, there is established in the State of Iowa the America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership upon publication by the Secretary in the Federal Register of notice that a Partnership Management Plan has been approved by the Secretary.
Activities.--The Partnership's activities shall be limited to the counties of northeast Iowa that are generally depicted in ``Alternatives #2 and #3'' described in the 1995 National Park Service ``Special Resource Study, Cedar Valley, Iowa.''.
Participation.--Nothing in this Act shall require any resident located in the area in which the Partnership's activities occur to participate in or be associated with the Partnership or the Partnership's activities.
Affiliations.--Nothing in this Act shall prohibit future affiliations or designations of the Partnership or Partnership Management Entity.
Grants, Technical Assistance, and Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) Grants and technical assistance.--The Secretary may make grants and provide technical assistance to America's Agricultural Heritage Partnership to assist it in carrying out its purposes.
Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with private entities, the State of Iowa, or any political subdivision thereof, and other Federal entities, to further the purposes of this Act, the Partnership, or the Partnership Management Entity.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE AMERICA'S AGRICULTURAL HERITAGE PARTNERSHIP MANAGEMENT ENTITY.
Establishment.--There is established a management entity for the Partnership based on the ``Management Option #5'' outlined in the 1995 National Park Service ``Special Resource Study, Cedar Valley, Iowa'' and subject to the approval of the Secretary.
Partnership Management Plan.--The Partnership management entity shall be established in the Partnership Management Plan as established in section 5(a).
Composition.--The membership of the management entity may include persons affiliated with the following entities: the American Association of Museums, American Farm Bureau, American Farmland Trust, Effigy Mounds National Monument and Herbert Hoover National Historic Site, Iowa Department of Agriculture and Land Stewardship, Iowa Department of Corrections, Iowa Department of Cultural Affairs, Iowa Department of Economic Development, National Trust for Historic Preservation, Smithsonian Institution, the State Historic Preservation Office of the State of Iowa, United States Department of Agriculture, United States Department of Transportation and the America's Agricultural/Industrial Heritage Landscape, Inc. SEC.
Preparation of Partnership Management Plan.--A Partnership Management Plan shall be submitted to the Secretary for approval no later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Assistance.--The Secretary may provide technical assistance in the preparation of the Partnership Management Plan.
LAND USE REGULATION AND PRIVATE PROPERTY PROTECTION.
Regulation.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to modify, enlarge, or diminish any authority of Federal, State, and local governments to regulate any use of privately owned land than that provided by current law or regulation.
Land Use.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to grant the powers of zoning, land use or condemnation to the Partnership Management Entity, the Secretary or any other Federal, State, or local government entity.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated not more than $400,000 annually for grants and technical assistance under sections 3(e)(1) and 5(b).
Percent of Cost.--Federal funding under sections 3(e)(1) and 5(b) shall not exceed 50 percent of the total cost of the grant or technical assistance provided under such section.