This Act may be cited as the ``Tuition Tax Deduction Act of 1995''.
DEDUCTION FOR TUITION AND FEES FOR UNDERGRADUATE AND POSTSECONDARY VOCATIONAL EDUCATION.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
TUITION AND FEES FOR UNDERGRADUATE AND POSTSECONDARY VOCATIONAL EDUCATION.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the qualified educational expenses paid during the taxable year to one or more eligible educational institutions for himself, his spouse, or any of his dependents (as defined in section 152).
Limitation.--The aggregate payments during the taxable year for the qualified educational expenses of an individual which may be taken into account under subsection (a) shall not exceed $5,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified educational expenses.--The term `qualified educational expenses' means amounts paid for tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of a student at an eligible educational institution.
In the event an amount paid for tuition or fees includes an amount for meals, lodging, or similar expenses which is not separately stated, the portion of such amount which is attributable to meals, lodging, or similar expenses shall be determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Eligible educational institution.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `eligible educational institution' has the meaning given to such term by section 135(c)(3).
Institutions with excessive tuition increases not eligible institutions.--An institution shall not be treated as an eligible educational institution with respect to any academic year unless such institution certifies to the Secretary (before the most recent July 1 preceding such academic year) that the percentage increase in tuition for such academic year will not exceed the applicable percentage increase in the cost- of-living.
Definitions.--For purposes of subparagraph (B)-- ``(i) Percentage increase in tuition.--The percentage increase in tuition for an academic year is the percentage (if any) by which the tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of a student at such institution for such academic year exceed such tuition and fees for the preceding academic year.
Applicable percentage increase in cost-of-living.--The applicable percentage increase in the cost-of-living with respect to any academic year is the percentage (if any) by which the CPI for the last calendar year ending before the beginning of such academic year exceeds the CPI for the calendar year preceding such calendar year.
CPI for calendar year.--The CPI for any calendar year is the average of the Consumer Price Index (as defined in section 1(f)(5)) as of the close of such calendar year.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Adjustment for certain scholarships and veterans benefits.--The amounts otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) as qualified educational expenses of any individual during any period shall be reduced (before the application of subsection (b)) by any amounts received by such individual during such period as-- ``(A) a qualified scholarship (within the meaning of section 117(b)) which under section 117 is not includible in gross income, or ``(B) an educational assistance allowance under chapters 32, 34, or 35 of title 38 of the United States Code.
Eligible courses.--Amounts paid for qualified educational expenses of any individual shall be taken into account under subsection (a) only to the extent such expenses-- ``(A) are attributable to courses of instruction for which credit is allowed toward a recognized degree by an institution of higher education or toward a certificate of required course work at a vocational school, and ``(B) are not attributable to any graduate program of such individual.
Individual must be at least half-time student.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for amounts paid during the taxable year for qualified educational expenses with respect to any individual unless that individual, during any 4 calendar months during the calendar year in which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins, is carrying at least one- half the normal full-time work load for the course of study the student is pursuing, as determined by the eligible education institution.
Taxpayer who is dependent of another taxpayer.--No deduction shall be allowed to a taxpayer under subsection (a) for amount paid for the education of such taxpayer if such taxpayer is a dependent of another person for a taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins.
Spouse.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for amounts paid during the taxable year for qualified educational expenses for the spouse of the taxpayer unless-- ``(A) the taxpayer is entitled to an exemption for his spouse under section 151(b) for the taxable year, or ``(B) the taxpayer files a joint return with his spouse for the taxable year.
Coordination With Other Provisions.--This section shall not apply to any amount which is allowable as a deduction under this chapter without regard to this section.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the provisions of this section.''
Deduction Allowed Whether or Not Taxpayer Itemizes Other Deductions.--Subsection (a) of section 62 of such Code is amended by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraph: ``(16) Tuition and related expenses.--The deduction allowed by section 220.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Tuition and fees for undergraduate and postsecondary vocational education.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid after December 31, 1995, with respect to education furnished after such date.