This Act may be cited as the ``Recycling Information Clearinghouse Act of 1993''.
Findings.--Section 1002(c) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901(c)) is amended by striking out ``and'' in paragraph (2), by striking out the period in paragraph (3) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Recycling should be promoted through a national clearinghouse to provide information about the economic feasibility of recycling various materials, State and local initiatives that have succeeded in increasing the recycling rate for municipal waste, and Federal, State, and local procurement opportunities for recyclable materials.''.
Objectives and Policy.--Section 1003(a) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6902(a)) is amended by striking out the period in paragraph (11) and inserting ``; and'', by striking out ``and'' in paragraph (1), and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) establishing an information clearinghouse to promote the recycling of municipal solid waste.''.
Section 1004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6903) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(40) The term `municipal solid waste' means residential, institutional, and commercial solid waste generated within a community.
The term does not include any garbage, refuse, sludge, or other residue that is a byproduct of an industrial process or any solid waste which is regulated under subtitle C. ``(41) The term `recycled material' means a material which has been previously used which can be reused with or without reprocessing in place of a virgin material.
The term `recycled product' means a product that is derived substantially from recycled materials.
The term `recycling' means remanufacturing or reprocessing used or discarded materials into a useful product.''.
Establishment.--Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Establishment.--The Administrator shall establish a clearinghouse for information about the recycling of municipal solid waste, to be administered by the Office of Solid Waste in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Information Collection and Analysis.--The clearinghouse shall collect and provide the following types of information: ``(1) A data base containing information on the annual volume and rate of recycling of materials from the municipal solid waste stream.
Such data base should include information that may be available from trade associations, nonprofit organizations, Federal agencies, and State governments.
At a minimum, the data base should estimate the aggregate annual tonnage and recycling rate for glass, metal, paper, plastic, and corrugated containers.
To the extent feasible, the data base should include an analysis of the impact of geographic and demographic factors on the recycling rate.
An annual estimate of the balance of trade in recycled materials and products.
Economic data comparing the costs and benefits of recycling various materials from the municipal solid waste stream.
The analysis should take into account the avoided disposal costs resulting from recycling.
A catalog of State and local laws that encourage or require the recycling of materials from the municipal solid waste stream.
The catalog should include information about any recycling targets or objectives established by such legislation and, where feasible, evaluate whether those objectives are being met.
A list of all purchases of recycled materials or products by the Federal Government, organized by agency and the type of recycled materials or products purchased.
A register announcing all solicitations by Federal agencies for the purchase of recycled materials or products.
Such information shall be organized to provide timely and relevant information to persons seeking to sell recycled materials or products to the Federal Government.
To the extent feasible, the register should include information about procurement opportunities available from State or local governments.
Information about state-of-the-art recycling methods, programs, and technologies, including the results of any recycling research or demonstration programs funded by the Federal Government.
A register of all potential purchasers (both government and private) of recycled materials.
Information Coordination.--The Administrator may, at his or her discretion, make available through the information clearinghouse any other information that would promote national, State, and local recycling efforts including, but not limited to, information that may be obtained under subtitle D and subtitle E. ``(d) Information Dissemination.--The information compiled and analyzed under this section shall be made available to the public.
A toll-free, telephone hotline shall be established and made available to members of the public seeking information from the clearinghouse.
To the extent feasible, the information compiled should be computerized to facilitate analysis and provide for prompt retrieval of information.
Independent Organization.--In carrying out this section the Administrator shall cooperate with any independent organization which is comprised of persons engaged in recycling and persons representing environmental organizations and which provides matching funds to cover the costs of any cooperative program undertaken by the organization and the Environmental Protection Agency.
Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator $500,000 for each fiscal year occurring after enactment of the Recycling Information Clearinghouse Act of 1993 for functions carried out by the information clearinghouse.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 4003(c) of such subtitle D is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) A State shall not be eligible for assistance under section 4008(a)(3) after December 31, 1994, unless the State maintains and publicizes a State register of potential purchasers (both governmental and private) of recycled materials known to the State solid waste planning authorities.
Such register shall be periodically updated and submitted to the information clearinghouse established under section 4011.''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for such subtitle D is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.