This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Fairness in Reimbursement Act of 2000''.
IMPROVING FAIRNESS OF PAYMENTS UNDER THE MEDICARE FEE-FOR- SERVICE PROGRAM.
Title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new sections: ``improving fairness of payments under the original medicare fee-for- service program ``Sec.
Establishment of System.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall establish a system for making adjustments to the amount of payment made to entities and individuals for items and services provided under the original medicare fee-for-service program under parts A and B.
System Requirements.-- ``(1) Adjustments.--Under the system described in subsection (a), the Secretary (beginning in 2001) shall make the following adjustments: ``(A) Certain states above national average.--If a State average per beneficiary amount for a year is greater than 105 percent (or 110 percent in the case of the determination made in 2000) of the national average per beneficiary amount for such year, then the Secretary shall reduce the amount of applicable payments in such a manner as will result (as estimated by the Secretary) in the State average per beneficiary amount for the subsequent year being at 105 percent (or 110 percent in the case of payments made in 2001) of the national average per beneficiary amount for such subsequent year.
Certain states below national average.--If a State average per beneficiary amount for a year is less than 95 percent (or 90 percent in the case of the determination made in 2000) of the national average per beneficiary amount for such year, then the Secretary shall increase the amount of applicable payments in such a manner as will result (as estimated by the Secretary) in the State average per beneficiary amount for the subsequent year being at 95 percent (or 90 percent in the case of payments made in 2001) of the national average per beneficiary amount for such subsequent year.
Determination of averages.-- ``(A) State average per beneficiary amount.--Each year (beginning in 2000), the Secretary shall determine a State average per beneficiary amount for each State which shall be equal to the Secretary's estimate of the average amount of expenditures under the original medicare fee-for-service program under parts A and B for the year for a beneficiary enrolled under such parts that resides in the State ``(B) National average per beneficiary amount.-- Each year (beginning in 2000), the Secretary shall determine the national average per beneficiary amount which shall be equal to the average of the State average per beneficiary amounts determined under subparagraph (B) for the year.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(A) Applicable payments.--The term `applicable payments' means payments made to entities and individuals for items and services provided under the original medicare fee-for-service program under parts A and B to beneficiaries enrolled under such parts that reside in the State.
State.--The term `State' has the meaning given such term in section 210(h).
Beneficiaries Held Harmless.--The provisions of this section shall not effect-- ``(1) the entitlement to items and services of a beneficiary under this title, including the scope of such items and services; or ``(2) any liability of the beneficiary with respect to such items and services.
Regulations.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, shall promulgate regulations to carry out this section.
Protecting rural communities.--In promulgating the regulations pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give special consideration to rural areas.
Budget Neutrality.--The Secretary shall ensure that the provisions contained in this section do not cause the estimated amount of expenditures under this title for a year to increase or decrease from the estimated amount of expenditures under this title that would have been made in such year if this section had not been enacted.
``improvements in collection and use of hospital wage data ``Sec.
Collection of Data.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish procedures for improving the methods used by the Secretary to collect data on employee compensation and paid hours of employment for hospital employees by occupational category.
Timeframe.--The Secretary shall implement the procedures described in paragraph (1) by not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Rural Health Protection and Improvement Act of 2000.
Adjustment to Hospital Wage Level.--By not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Rural Health Protection and Improvement Act of 2000, the Secretary shall make necessary revisions to the methods used to adjust payments to hospitals for different area wage levels under section 1886(d)(3)(E) to ensure that such methods take into account the data described in subsection (a)(1).
Limitation.--To the extent possible, in making the revisions described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall ensure that current rules regarding which hospital employees are included in, or excluded from, the determination of the hospital wage levels are not effected by such revisions.
Budget Neutrality.--The Secretary shall ensure that any revisions made under subsection (b) do not cause the estimated amount of expenditures under this title for a year to increase or decrease from the estimated amount of expenditures under this title that would have been made in such year if the Secretary had not made such revisions.