SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicaid Services Restoration Act of 2008''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--REHABILITATIVE SERVICES PROTECTIONS Sec.
Inclusion of therapeutic foster care as medical assistance.
Reasonable and efficient payment methodologies for rehabilitative services.
Inclusion of attainment and retention of functional status in rehabilitative services.
Clarification of coverage of EPSDT services for children receiving inpatient psychiatric hospital services.
Third party liability clarification relating to diagnostic, screening, preventive, and rehabilitative services.
TITLE II--CASE MANAGEMENT AND TARGETED CASE MANAGEMENT PROTECTIONS Sec.
Third party liability clarification relating to case management and targeted case management.
Reasonable and efficient payment methodologies for case management services.
Protecting health and safety.
Codification of Olmstead standard; protecting children.
Assuring appropriate case management.
TITLE I--REHABILITATIVE SERVICES PROTECTIONS SEC.
INCLUSION OF THERAPEUTIC FOSTER CARE AS MEDICAL ASSISTANCE.
Section 1905 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (27), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating paragraph (28) as paragraph (29); and (C) by inserting after paragraph (27) the following new paragraph: ``(28) therapeutic foster care services described in subsection (y); and''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(y)(1) For purposes of subsection (a)(28), therapeutic foster care services described in this subsection are services provided for children who have not attained age 21, and, as a result of mental illness, other emotional or behavioral disorders, medically fragile conditions, or developmental disabilities need the level of care normally provided in an institution (including a psychiatric residential treatment facility) or nursing facility but who can be cared for in a community placement, through therapeutic foster care programs that-- ``(A) are licensed by the State and accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations, the Commission on Accreditation of Rehabilitation Facilities, or the Council on Accreditation; ``(B) provide structured daily activities, including the development, improvement, monitoring, and reinforcing of age- appropriate social, communication and behavioral skills, crisis intervention and crisis support services, medication monitoring, counseling, and case management, and may furnish other intensive community services; and ``(C) provide foster care parents with specialized training and consultation in the management of children with mental illness, other emotional or behavioral disorders, medically fragile conditions, or developmental disabilities, and specific additional training on the needs of each child provided such services.
In the case of a child in State custody or for whom the State makes foster care maintenance payments under part E of title IV such services shall not include room and board.''.
REASONABLE AND EFFICIENT PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES FOR REHABILITATIVE SERVICES.
Section 1905(a)(13) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)(13)), as amended by section 103, is amended by inserting ``(and which reimbursement for, in the case of rehabilitative services, may be made through the establishment of reasonable and efficient payment methodologies, including fee-for-service payments, case rates, daily rates, or other forms of capitated payment'' after ``status''.
INCLUSION OF ATTAINMENT AND RETENTION OF FUNCTIONAL STATUS IN REHABILITATIVE SERVICES.
Section 1905(a)(13) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)(13)) is amended by striking ``and restoration of an individual to the best possible functional level'' and inserting ``, restoration of an individual to the best possible functional level, or attainment or retention of the individual's best possible functional status''.
CLARIFICATION OF COVERAGE OF EPSDT SERVICES FOR CHILDREN RECEIVING INPATIENT PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL SERVICES.
Section 1905(h)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(h)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (C), by adding ``and'' after the semicolon; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (C), the following new subparagraph: ``(D) services described in subsection (r) which are provided on an inpatient or outpatient basis to an individual receiving inpatient services described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).''.
THIRD PARTY LIABILITY CLARIFICATION RELATING TO DIAGNOSTIC, SCREENING, PREVENTIVE, AND REHABILITATIVE SERVICES.
Section 1903(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(c)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting, or authorizing the Secretary to prohibit or restrict, payment under subsection (a) for medical assistance for services provided under section 1905(a)(13) to eligible individuals furnished by qualified providers under non-medical programs, provided, however, a State or local agency administering such plan shall comply with section 1902(a)(25).''.
The amendments made by this title shall take effect as if enacted on July 1, 2008.
TITLE II--CASE MANAGEMENT AND TARGETED CASE MANAGEMENT PROTECTIONS SEC.
THIRD PARTY LIABILITY CLARIFICATION RELATING TO CASE MANAGEMENT AND TARGETED CASE MANAGEMENT.
Section 1903(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(c)), as amended by section 105, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Nothing in this title shall be construed as prohibiting or restricting, or authorizing the Secretary to prohibit or restrict payment under subsection (a) for medical assistance for services provided under section 1915 (g) to eligible individuals furnished by qualified providers under non-medical programs, provided, however, a State or local agency administering such plan shall comply with section 1902(a)(25).''.
REASONABLE AND EFFICIENT PAYMENT METHODOLOGIES FOR CASE MANAGEMENT SERVICES.
Section 1915(g)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396n(g)(4)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Reimbursement for case management and targeted case management services may be made through the establishment of reasonable and efficient payment methodologies including fee-for-service payments, case rates, daily rates, or other forms of capitated payment.''.
PROTECTING HEALTH AND SAFETY.
Section 1915(c)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396n(c)(4)) is amended by adding after the second sentence the following new sentence: ``For the purpose of developing and monitoring the implementation of the written plan of care required under paragraph (1), and to assure the health and welfare of individuals, the State may require case management services for each beneficiary and may limit the case managers available with respect to case management services for eligible individuals in order to ensure that the case managers for such individuals are capable of ensuring that such individuals receive needed services.''.
CODIFICATION OF OLMSTEAD STANDARD; PROTECTING CHILDREN.
Section 1915(g)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396n(g)(2)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``services which will'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``services furnished to assist individuals, eligible under the State plan who reside in a community setting or are transitioning to a community setting, in gaining access to needed medical, social, educational, and other services.
Such services may be offered by staff of non-medical programs or those who contract with non-medical programs, so long as such individuals are qualified providers under the State plan under this title and the case management services are distinct from the direct services of the non-medical program.
''; (2) by redesignating clause (ii) as clause (iii); and (3) by inserting after clause (i) (as amended by paragraph (1)), the following new clause: ``(ii) For purposes of providing case management services, individuals (other than individuals who have attained age 22 but not attained age 65 and are patients in an institution for mental diseases or individuals who are inmates of public institutions) may be considered to be transitioning to a community setting for up to the last 180 days of an institutional stay.''.
ASSURING APPROPRIATE CASE MANAGEMENT.
Section 1915(g)(4) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396n(g)(4)), as amended by section 202, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed as prohibiting a State from providing case management or targeted case management services, as defined in subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, of paragraph (2), through multiple case managers to any individual who qualifies for medical assistance under the State plan, or to specific classes of individuals, or to individuals who reside in specified areas, selected by the State pursuant to this subsection.''.
The amendments made by this title shall take effect as if enacted on December 4, 2007.