This Act may be cited as the ``Medical Liability Improvement Act of 1993''.
Congressional Findings.-- (1) Effect on interstate commerce.--The Congress finds that the health care and insurance industries are industries affecting interstate commerce and the medical malpractice litigation systems existing throughout the United States affect interstate commerce by contributing to the high cost of health care and premiums for malpractice insurance purchased by health care providers.
Effect on federal spending.--The Congress finds that the medical malpractice litigation systems existing throughout the United States have a significant effect on the amount, distribution, and use of Federal funds because of-- (A) the large number of individuals who receive health care benefits under programs operated or financed by the Federal Government; (B) the large number of individuals who benefit because of the exclusion from Federal taxes of the amounts spent by their employers to provide them with health insurance benefits; (C) the large number of health care providers and health care professionals who provide items or services for which the Federal Government makes payments; and (D) the large number of such providers and professionals who have received direct or indirect financial assistance from the Federal Government because of their status as such professionals or providers.
Applicability.--This Act shall apply with respect to any medical malpractice liability claim and to any medical malpractice liability action brought in any State or Federal court, except that this Act shall not apply to-- (1) a claim or action for damages arising from a vaccine- related injury or death to the extent that title XXI of the Public Health Service Act applies to the action; or (2) a claim or action in which the claimant's sole allegation is an allegation of an injury arising from the use of a medical product.
Preemption of State Law.--Subject to section 12, this Act supersedes State law only to the extent that State law differs from any provision of law established by or under this Act.
Any issue that is not governed by any provision of law established by or under this Act shall be governed by otherwise applicable State or Federal law.
Federal Court Jurisdiction Not Established on Federal Question Grounds.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to establish any jurisdiction in the district courts of the United States over medical malpractice liability actions on the basis of sections 1331 or 1337 of title 28, United States Code.
As used in this Act: (1) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who alleges a medical malpractice liability claim, or, in the case of an individual who is deceased, incompetent, or a minor, the person on whose behalf such a claim is alleged.
Economic damages.--The term ``economic damages'' means damages paid to compensate an individual for losses for hospital and other medical expenses, lost wages, lost employment, and other pecuniary losses.
Health care professional.--The term ``health care professional'' means any individual who provides health care services in a State and who is required by State law or regulation to be licensed or certified by the State to provide such services in the State.
Health care provider.--The term ``health care provider'' means any organization or institution that is engaged in the delivery of health care services in a State and that is required by State law or regulation to be licensed or certified by the State to engage in the delivery of such services in the State.
Injury.--The term ``injury'' means any illness, disease, or other harm that is the subject of a medical malpractice liability action or claim.
Medical malpractice liability action.--The term ``medical malpractice liability action'' means a civil action (other than an action in which the claimant's sole allegation is an allegation of an intentional tort) brought in a State or Federal court against a health care provider or health care professional (regardless of the theory of liability on which the action is based) in which the claimant alleges a medical malpractice liability claim.
Medical malpractice liability claim.--The term ``medical malpractice liability claim'' means a claim in which the claimant alleges that injury was caused by the provision of (or the failure to provide) health care services.
Medical product.--The term ``medical product'' means a device (as defined in section 201(h) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act) or a drug (as defined in section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act).
Noneconomic damages.--The term ``noneconomic damages'' means damages paid to compensate an individual for losses for physical and emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment, mental anguish, disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of consortium, and other nonpecuniary losses, but does not include punitive damages.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall apply with respect to claims accruing or actions brought on or after the expiration of the 3-year period that begins on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Exception for States Requesting Earlier Implementation of Reforms.-- (1) Application.--A State may submit an application to the Secretary requesting the early implementation of this Act with respect to claims or actions brought in the State.
Decision by secretary.--The Secretary shall issue a response to a State's application under paragraph (1) not later than 90 days after receiving the application.
If the Secretary determines that the State meets the requirements of this Act at the time of submitting its application, the Secretary shall approve the State's application, and this Act shall apply with respect to actions brought in the State on or after the expiration of the 90-day period that begins on the date the Secretary issues the response.
If the Secretary denies the State's application, the Secretary shall provide the State with a written explanation of the grounds for the decision.
Limitation on Contingency Fees.--An attorney shall not contract for or collect a contingency fee for representing a claimant in a medical malpractice liability action in excess of the following: (1) 40 percent of the first $50,000 (or portion thereof) of the amount recovered by the claimant.
33\1/3\ percent of the next $50,000 (or portion thereof) of the amount recovered by the claimant.
25 percent of the next $500,000 (or portion thereof) of the amount recovered by the claimant.
15 percent of any amounts recovered by the claimant in excess of $600,000.
This subsection applies whether the recovery is by settlement, arbitration, or judgment.
Calculation of Periodic Payments.--If periodic payments are awarded to the claimant pursuant to section 8(b), the court shall place a total value on these payments based upon the projected life expectancy of the claimant and include this amount in computing the total award from which attorneys' fees are calculated under subsection (a).
Special Rule for Determining Amount Recovered.--In subsection (a), the term ``recovered'' means the net sum recovered after deducting any disbursements or costs incurred in connection with prosecution or settlement of the claim, except that costs of medical care incurred by the claimant and the attorney's office overhead costs or charges shall not be deductible disbursements under this subsection.
LIMITATION ON NONECONOMIC DAMAGES.
The total amount of damages which may be awarded to an individual and the family members of such individual for noneconomic losses resulting from an injury which is the subject of a medical malpractice liability claim may not exceed $250,000, regardless of the number of health care professionals and health care providers against whom the claim is brought or the number of claims brought with respect to the injury.
In General.--No medical malpractice liability claim may be brought after the expiration of the 2-year period that begins on the date the alleged injury that is the subject of the action should reasonably have been discovered, but in no event after the expiration of the 4-year period that begins on the date the alleged injury occurred.
Exception for Minors.--In the case of an alleged injury suffered by a minor who has not attained 6 years of age, no medical malpractice liability claim may be brought after the expiration of the 2-year period that begins on the date the alleged injury that is the subject of the action should reasonably have been discovered, but in no event after the date on which the minor attains 10 years of age.
PERIODIC PAYMENTS FOR FUTURE LOSSES.
If more than $50,000 in damages for expenses to be incurred in the future is awarded to the claimant in a medical malpractice liability action, the court shall at the request of either party, enter a judgment ordering such damages to be paid on a periodic basis determined appropriate by the court (based upon projections of when such expenses are likely to be incurred).
MANDATORY OFFSETS FOR DAMAGES PAID BY A COLLATERAL SOURCE.
In General.--The total amount of damages received by a plaintiff in a medical malpractice liability action shall be reduced (in accordance with subsection (b)) by any other payment that has been or will be made to the individual to compensate the plaintiff for the injury that was the subject of the action, including payment under-- (1) Federal or State disability or sickness programs; (2) Federal, State, or private health insurance programs; (3) private disability insurance programs; (4) employer wage continuation programs; and (5) any other source of payment intended to compensate the plaintiff for such injury.
Amount of Reduction.--The amount by which an award of damages to a plaintiff shall be reduced under subsection (a) shall be-- (1) the total amount of any payments (other than such award) that have been made or that will be made to the plaintiff to compensate the plaintiff for the injury that was the subject of the action; minus (2) the amount paid by the plaintiff (or by the spouse, parent, or legal guardian of the plaintiff) to secure the payments described in paragraph (1).
SPECIAL PROVISION FOR CERTAIN OBSTETRIC SERVICES.
Imposition of Higher Standard of Proof.-- (1) In general.--In the case of a medical malpractice liability action relating to services provided during labor or the delivery of a baby, if the defendant health care professional did not previously treat the plaintiff for the pregnancy, the trier of fact may not find that the defendant committed malpractice and may not assess damages against the defendant unless the malpractice is proven by clear and convincing evidence.
Applicability to group practices or agreements among providers.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a health care professional shall be considered to have previously treated an individual for a pregnancy if the professional is a member of a group practice whose members previously treated the individual for the pregnancy or is providing services to the individual during labor or the delivery of a baby pursuant to an agreement with another professional.
Clear and Convincing Evidence Defined.--In subsection (a), the term ``clear and convincing evidence'' is that measure or degree of proof that will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction as to the truth of the allegations sought to be established, except that such measure or degree of proof is more than that required under preponderance of the evidence, but less than that required for proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
JOINT AND SEVERAL LIABILITY.
The liability of each defendant in a medical malpractice liability action shall be several only and shall not be joint, and each defendant shall be liable only for the amount of damages allocated to the defendant in direct proportion to the defendant's percentage of responsibility (as determined by the trier of fact).
In General.--This Act supersedes any State law only to the extent that State law-- (1) permits the recovery of a greater amount of damages by a plaintiff; (2) permits the collection of a greater amount of attorneys' fees by a plaintiff's attorney; (3) establishes a longer period during which a medical malpractice liability claim may be initiated; or (4) establishes a stricter standard for determining whether a defendant was negligent or for determining the liability of defendants described in section 10 in actions described in such section.
Effect on Sovereign Immunity and Choice of Law or Venue.-- Nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to-- (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any State under any provision of law; (2) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the United States; (3) affect the applicability of any provision of the Foreign Sovereign Immunities Act of 1976; (4) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation; or (5) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum.
RETURNS RELATING TO TAXABLE MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AWARDS.
In General.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information concerning transactions with other persons) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
RETURNS RELATING TO TAXABLE MEDICAL MALPRACTICE AWARDS.
In General.--If-- ``(1) any person makes medical malpractice payments to another person during any calendar year, ``(2) a portion of such payments is includible in gross income for purposes of chapter 1, and ``(3) the portion of such payments so includible exceeds $600, then the person making such payments shall make a return (at such time and in such form as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe) setting forth the name, address, and TIN of the person to whom such payments were made, the aggregate amount of such payments, and the portion of such payments includible in gross income for purposes of chapter 1.
Statements To Be Furnished to Persons With Respect to Whom Information Is Required To Be Furnished.--Every person required to make a return under subsection (a) with respect to payments made to any person shall furnish to such person a written statement showing-- ``(1) the name and address of the person required to make such return, and ``(2) the information required to be shown on the return with respect to the person to whom such payments were made.
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be furnished to the person on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year for which the return under subsection (a) was made.
Medical Malpractice Payments.--For purposes of this section, the term `medical malpractice payment' means any payment (whether by suit or agreement and whether as a lump sum or periodic payment) on account of a medical malpractice liability claim (as defined in section 3(7) of the Medical Liability Improvement Act of 1993).''
Penalties.-- (1) Returns.--Subparagraph (A) of section 6724(d)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (vi), by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (vii) and inserting ``or'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: ``(viii) section 6050O (relating to returns relating to taxable medical malpractice awards),''.
Statements.--Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) of such Code is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (P) through (S) as subparagraphs (Q) through (T), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (O) the following new subparagraph: ``(P) section 6050O(b) (relating to returns relating to taxable medical malpractice awards),''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Returns relating to taxable medical malpractice awards.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments after the date of the enactment of this Act.