This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Pay for Performance Act''.
For the purpose of this Act-- (1) the term ``Federal deficit'' or ``deficit'' means, with respect to any fiscal year, the amount by which total budget outlays of the Government for such fiscal year exceed total revenues of the Government for such fiscal year; (2) the term ``Member of Congress'' means an individual serving in a position referred to in section 601(a)(1) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 United States Code 31(1)); and (3) the term ``year'' means a calendar year.
TEMPORARY SUSPENSION OF USUAL PAY ADJUSTMENT PROCEDURES.
Subject to section 5, rates of basic pay for Members of Congress shall not be adjusted except in accordance with section 4.
In General.--Effective as of the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1st of each year, the rate of basic pay for each Member of Congress shall be reduced by the percentage derived by multiplying the applicable factor under subsection (b) for such year by the applicable factor under subsection (c) for such year.
Factor Reflecting Magnitude of the Deficit.--The applicable factor under this subsection for any year is the number of hundreds of billions of dollars to which the Federal deficit is equal, as determined under subsection (d) with respect to such year.
Factor Reflecting Degree of Success in Reducing or Eliminating the Deficit.--The applicable factor under this subsection for any year shall be determined in accordance with the following: (1) For the first year beginning on or after the effective date of this Act, the applicable factor under this subsection is 2 percent.
For each year thereafter, the applicable factor under this subsection is-- (A) the same percentage as was applicable under this subsection in the previous year, if the deficit for the year in question is at least $100,000,000,000 less than-- (i) the size of the deficit for the year referred to in paragraph (1), or (ii) the lowest level attained in the deficit for any year after the year referred to in paragraph (1), whichever is less; or (B) 2 times the percentage which was applicable under this subsection in the previous year, if subparagraph (A) does not apply.
Determining the Size of the Deficit.--For the purpose of any determination under this Act, the size or level of the Federal deficit for any year-- (1) shall be equal to the size or level of the deficit for the fiscal year ending on the September 30th immediately preceding the start of such year; and (2) shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100,000,000,000 (or, if midway between multiples of $100,000,000,000, to the next higher multiple of $100,000,000,000).
Limitation.--Nothing in this Act shall have the effect of reducing any rate of basic pay below $1.
Suspension in Time of War.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), upon the enactment of a declaration of war-- (A) subsections (a) through (d) shall be suspended; and (B) any subsequent reduction in rates of basic pay for Members of Congress under such subsections shall be precluded.
Restoration.--In the event of a suspension of subsections (a) through (d) due to a declaration of war, then, effective with the first year that begins in the session after the state of war is concluded by Senate ratification of the necessary treaties-- (A) the provisions of subsections (a) through (d) shall be restored to full force and effect, and any adjustment scheduled to take effect on or after the first day of such year shall be implemented in accordance with such provisions; and (B) the initial rate of basic pay for a Member of Congress (before the implementation of any adjustment referred to in subparagraph (A)) shall be equal to the rate of basic pay in effect for such a Member as of the day before the effective date of this Act.
EFFECT OF ELIMINATING THE DEFICIT.
In General.--Effective as of the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after January 1st of the first year with respect to which the deficit is determined to have been eliminated-- (1) the provisions of law suspended by section 2 (disregarding subsection (f) thereof) shall be restored to full force and effect, and any adjustment scheduled to take effect on or after such first day under such provisions shall be implemented in accordance with such provisions; (2) the initial rate of basic pay for a Member of Congress (before the implementation of any adjustment referred to in paragraph (1)) shall be equal to 2 times the rate of basic pay in effect for such a Member as of the effective date of this Act.
the provisions of section 4 shall cease to be effective.
Rule Relating to Determining When the Deficit Has Been Eliminated.-- (1) In general.--For the purpose of this Act, the deficit shall be considered to have been eliminated as of the start of the first year for which the applicable factor under section 4(b) would be less than 1.
No tax increase.--The condition under paragraph (1) shall be considered unmet if there is enacted, after the effective date of this Act, any legislation that reduces the Federal deficit by changing the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
In General.--This Act shall take effect on January 1st of the first year beginning after the first election of Representatives following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Definition.--For the purpose of subsection (a), the term ``election of Representatives'' has the meaning given such term by 225(i)(4)(B) of the Federal Salary Act of 1967 (2 United States Code 359(4)(B)).