This Act may be cited as the ``Nigeria Democracy Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Nigeria is one of the most important countries in Africa, with the largest population on the continent, a critically important role in West Africa, and tremendous economic and human potential.
The American and Nigerian people have enjoyed a long history of friendship and cooperation.
Since independence in 1960, Nigeria has experienced a series of military and civilian governments, marked by coups and political instability, including the devastating and tragic civil war in the Biafra region.
On June 12, 1993, Nigeria held a presidential election, which most observers believe generally represented the will of the Nigerian people despite imperfections in the electoral process, but the Nigerian military government nullified that election and later installed an interim government.
On September 23, 1993, General Sani Abacha overthrew the interim government and assumed power in a military coup, and more than two years later, on October 1, 1995, he announced a three-year transition to democratic elections, a period widely regarded as unnecessarily long.
The rule of General Abacha has been marked by egregious human rights abuses, a devastating economic decline, and rampant corruption.
On November 10, 1995, Ken Saro-Wiwa, an internationally-recognized human rights activist, and eight others, were executed following a seriously-flawed judicial proceeding despite numerous pleas for clemency from the international community; others, including M.K.O.
Abiola, General Obasanjo, Beko Ransome-Kuti, and General Sheu Musa Yar'Adua, have been sentenced in secret tribunals to long prison terms.
Since 1993, the United States and other members of the international community, including Great Britain, have imposed limited sanctions against Nigeria to promote human rights and an expeditious transition to civilian, democratic government, but these efforts have had limited impact.
The continued military rule of General Abacha undermines confidence in the Nigerian economy, damages relations between Nigeria and the United States, threatens the political and economic stability of West Africa, and harms the lives of the people of Nigeria.
The Congress declares that the United States, working in concert with the international community, should maintain a policy toward the Government of Nigeria that is designed to protect internationally recognized human rights, expedite the transition to civilian, democratic government, and promote equitable economic development in Nigeria.
SANCTIONS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA.
United States Measures To Promote Democracy and Human Rights.-- (1) No assistance.--No assistance may be made available under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or the Arms Export Control Act to the Government of Nigeria.
International financial institutions.--The President shall instruct the United States Executive Director of each international financial institution to vote against any loan or other utilization of the funds of the respective institution to or from Nigeria.
Air transportation.--Air transportation with Nigeria shall be prohibited in accordance with subsection (b).
Defense articles and services.--No defense article or defense service may be sold or financed with respect to Nigeria, and no license to export to Nigeria a defense article or service may be issued.
Exclusion of nigerians from admission to the united states.--Except as required by United States treaty obligations, any Nigerian national who formulates, implements, or benefits from policies which hinder Nigeria's transition to democracy and members of their immediate families shall be ineligible to receive a visa and shall be excluded from admission into the United States.
Eximbank, opic, and tda.--No funds available to the Export-Import Bank of the United States, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, or the Trade and Development Agency may be used with respect to Nigeria.
Prohibition of new investment.-- (A) No national of the United States may, directly or through another person, invest or participate in the liquefied natural gas project at Bonny, Nigeria.
In addition to the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A), no national of the United States may, directly or through another person, make any new investment in Nigeria, including new investments in the energy sector.
The prohibition contained in subparagraph (B) shall take effect 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Assets freeze.--The President, acting through the Secretary of the Treasury, shall exercise the authority of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to block the assets of any Nigerian national who formulates, implements, or benefits from policies which hinder Nigeria's transition to democracy and members of their immediate families.
Sports.--It is the sense of Congress that the international community should consider excluding or suspending Nigeria from international sports activities, including the 1996 Summer Olympic Games.
Prohibition of Air Transportation With Nigeria.--(1)(A) The President shall immediately notify the Government of Nigeria of his intention to suspend the rights of any air carrier designated by the Government of Nigeria under any air transport agreement between the United States and Nigeria to service the routes provided in the agreement.
Ten days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall direct the Secretary of Transportation to revoke the right of any air carrier designated by the Government of Nigeria under such agreement to provide service pursuant to the agreement.
Ten days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall direct the Secretary of Transportation not to permit or otherwise designate any United States air carrier to provide service between the United States and Nigeria pursuant to such agreement.
(A) The Secretary of State shall terminate any air transport agreement between the Government of the United States and the Government of Nigeria in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.
Upon termination of such agreement, the Secretary of Transportation shall prohibit any aircraft of a foreign air carrier owned, directly of indirectly, by the Government of Nigeria or by Nigerian nationals from engaging in air transportation with respect to the United States.
The Secretary of Transportation shall prohibit the takeoff and landing in Nigeria of any aircraft by an air carrier owned, directly or indirectly, or controlled by a national of the United States or by any corporation or other entity organized under the laws of the United States or of any State.
The prohibitions contained in paragraph (1) or (2) do not apply when such air transportation is important to the national interest of the United States, including emergencies in which the safety of an aircraft or its crew or passengers is threatened.
For the purposes of this subsection, the terms ``aircraft'', ``air transportation'', and ``foreign air carrier'' have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code 1301).
Multilateral Measures To Promote Democracy and Human Rights.-- (1) The President should actively urge other countries to undertake steps, similar to those in subsections (a)(1)-(9), including freezing assets, to promote democracy and human rights in Nigeria.
The President, acting through the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations, should actively pursue the passage of a resolution in the United Nations Security Council to impose an international arms embargo against Nigeria.
The President, both at the United Nations and together with other members of the international community, should actively seek multilateral support for an international embargo on the sale or distribution of any crude oil or refined petroleum product from Nigeria.
The President, acting through his representative, should actively pursue the passage of a resolution condemning Nigeria at the United Nations Human Rights Commission.
Waiver of Sanctions.--(1) The President may waive any of the sanctions contained in this section if he certifies to Congress-- (A) that the Government of Nigeria has-- (i) released all political prisoners; (ii) demonstrated a commitment to respecting internationally recognized human rights, including respect for the rule of law; and (iii) demonstrated an unequivocal commitment to civilian, democratic government; or (B) such waiver is important to the national interest of the United States.
In addition to the grounds of waiver set forth in paragraph (1), the President may waive the sanctions contained in subsection (a)(1) or (a)(4) for purposes of supporting international peacekeeping operations.
Termination of Sanctions.--The sanctions contained in this section terminate when the President certifies to Congress that the conditions contained in subsection (d)(1) have been met and the Nigerian Government is civilian and democratic.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the United States should impose additional measures against the Government of Nigeria if substantial progress has not been made within three months of the date of enactment of this Act in moving toward the establishment of civilian, democratic government and respect for internationally recognized human rights.
Report.--(1) The President shall prepare and transmit to the Congress within three months of enactment of this Act a report on the extent to which significant progress has been made toward the establishment of civilian, democratic government and respect for internationally recognized human rights.
If the President determines that significant progress has not been made by the Government of Nigeria in moving toward establishment of civilian, democratic government and respect for internationally recognized human rights, the President shall include in the report required by paragraph (1) steps taken under paragraphs (2) and (3) or subsection 4(c) to build support for an international oil and arms embargo, as well as a recommendation and analysis of additional unilateral measures to be imposed, including a unilateral oil embargo and a ban on the export of any refined petroleum product to Nigeria.
As used in this Act: (1) International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institutions'' includes the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the Mutual Investment Guarantee Agency, the African Development Bank, the African Development Fund, and the International Monetary Fund.
National of the united states.--The term ``national of the United States'' means-- (A) a natural person who is a citizen of the United States or is an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States, as defined by section 101(a)(20) of the Immigration and Nationality Act; or (B) a corporation, partnership, or other business association which is organized under the law of the United States, any State or territory thereof, or the District of Columbia.
New investment.--The term ``new investment''-- (A) means-- (i) a commitment or contribution of funds or other assets, and (ii) a loan or other extension of credit, and (B) does not include-- (i) the reinvestment of profits generated by a controlled Nigerian entity into that same controlled Nigerian entity or the investment of such profits in a Nigerian entity; and (ii) contributions of money or other assets where such contributions are necessary to enable a controlled Nigerian entity to operate in an economically sound manner, without expanding its operations.
Nigerian entity.--The term ``Nigerian entity'' means-- (A) a corporation, partnership, or other business association or entity organized in Nigeria; or (B) a branch, office, agency, or sole proprietorship in Nigeria of a person that resides or is organized outside Nigeria.