This Act may be cited as the ``10 Million Solar Roofs Act of 2010''.
In this Act: (1) Eligible participant.--The term ``eligible participant'' means-- (A) an owner of a home; (B) a business entity; (C) a local educational agency; and (D) any other individual or entity that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
Installed nameplate capacity.--The term ``installed nameplate capacity'' means the maximum output of a solar electric system under specific conditions designated by the manufacturer of the solar electric system.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
Solar energy system.--The term ``solar energy system'' means rooftop- or ground-mounted solar equipment-- (A) that is used to generate electricity or heat water; and (B) with an installed nameplate capacity not exceeding 1 megawatt or the thermal equivalent of 1 megawatt.
REBATES, LOANS, AND OTHER INCENTIVES FOR PURCHASE AND INSTALLATION OF SOLAR ENERGY SYSTEMS.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a program under which the Secretary shall provide competitive grants to States, Indian tribes, and local governments to provide rebates, loans, or other incentives to eligible participants for the purchase and installation of solar energy systems for properties located in the United States.
Implementation.-- (1) Competitive grants.-- (A) In general.--For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall provide competitive grants to States, Indian tribes, and local governments to be used in accordance with this section.
Requirements.--The Secretary shall adopt and implement criteria for awarding competitive grants under subparagraph (A) to States, Indian tribes, and local governments that would-- (i) provide the maximum leverage of Federal funds; (ii) provide for the maximum deployment of solar energy; (iii) ensure that grants are awarded to a diversity of geographic locations and recipients with different population sizes; (iv) provide not less than 2 percent of the funds available to Indian tribes and consortia of Indian tribes; and (v) provide a preference for grant recipients that have established and maintained, or agree to commit to establish and maintain, standards and policies to overcome barriers to distributed generation (including interconnection and net metering) in a manner consistent with the legal authorities of the grant recipient.
Authorized use of funds.--Subject to subsection (c), competitive grants provided under this section may be used to expand an existing, or establish and fund a new-- (A) solar rebate program; (B) solar loan program; (C) solar performance-based incentive program; or (D) solar incentive program, solar deployment program or project, or innovative solar financing program not described in subparagraphs (A) through (C), as determined by the Secretary.
Program requirements.--For each fiscal year during which a grant recipient uses funds provided under this section, the grant recipient shall-- (A) certify to the Secretary that the funds will be used-- (i) to supplement, expand, or create new programs or projects and will not supplant existing programs as to maximize program participation; and (ii) to deploy an increased quantity of solar energy systems; and (B) submit to the Secretary an implementation plan that contains-- (i) projections for solar energy systems deployment; (ii) data regarding the number of eligible participants that are assisted under existing applicable State and local programs; and (iii) projections for-- (I) additional solar energy system deployment; and (II) the number of additional eligible participants who will be covered by the annual implementation plan.
Solar Energy System.--With respect to grant awards in any fiscal year under this section, the Secretary may specify the type and capacity of the solar energy system and type of deployment or incentive program for which the grant funds are made available.
Non-Federal Share.--Each eligible entity that receives funds under this section shall be responsible for an amount equal to 20 percent of the amount of the provided funds.
Administrative Expenses.-- (1) In general.--Not more than 5 percent of the amounts made available for each fiscal year under this section may be used to pay the administrative expenses of the Department of Energy that the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this Act (including expenses arising from monitoring and evaluation).
Eligible entities; other grant recipients.--Grant recipients may use amounts made available for each fiscal year under this section to pay for administrative expenses in accordance with section 545(b)(3)(A) of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (42 United States Code 17155(b)(3)(A)).
Relationship to Other Law.--An eligible participant that receives a rebate under this section shall not be eligible for a rebate under section 206(c) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15853).
Coordination; Consultation.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Chief Executive of each grant recipient that receives funds under this section to ensure that each program carried out by each grant recipient through the use of the funds is coordinated with each other applicable incentive or financing program of the Federal Government or any other applicable program.
Maximum Incentive.-- (1) In general.--With respect to each rebate, grant, and tax credit provided to an eligible participant under this section, the aggregate value of the grants, rebates, and tax credits may not exceed 50 percent of the cost to the purchaser of the purchase and installation of the solar energy system.
Effect.--Nothing in this subsection affects any solar loan or financing program under this section or any other law (including regulations).
Goal.--It is the goal of the United States, through this Act and any appropriate incentive or research and development program, to install distributed solar energy systems on not less than 10,000,000 properties located in the United States by December 31, 2021.
Report Regarding Additional Recommendations.--Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives a report that contains additional recommendations that the Secretary determines to be necessary to achieve the goal described in subsection (i), including any modification to the program established under subsection (a).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section-- (1) for fiscal year 2012, $250,000,000; and (2) for each of fiscal years 2013 through 2021, such sums as are necessary.