TITLE I--SHORT TITLE Sec.
This Act may be cited as the ``Protection and Reduction of Government Secrecy Act''.
TITLE II--COMMISSION ON PROTECTING AND REDUCING GOVERNMENT SECRECY purpose Sec.
It is the purpose of this title to establish a study commission which will examine the implications of the systematic overclassification of information and to make recommendations to reduce the volume of information classified and to strengthen the protection of legitimately classified information.
Following World War II the United States and the Soviet Union engaged in a global conflict known as the Cold War; (b) During the Cold War a secrecy system developed to enormous proportions, thereby limiting the public's access to vital information and reducing the ability of the public to participate with full knowledge in the process of governmental decision-making; (c) In 1990 6,797,720 documents were classified and approximately three million persons held some form of security clearance; (d) The burden of managing nearly 7 million newly classified documents every year has led to reduced communication within the government and within the scientific community, reduced communication between the government and the people of the United States, tremendous administrative expense and the selective and unauthorized public disclosure of classified information; (e) The requirement that approximately three million persons obtain security clearances represents a substantial loss of individual privacy which is inconsistent with American traditions; (f) If a smaller amount of truly sensitive information was classified expense, lost privacy and inhibitions on public discussion would be reduced and the remaining classified information could be held more securely; (g) In 1970 a Task Force organized by the Defense Science Board and headed by Dr. Frederick Seitz concluded that ``more might be gained than lost if our Nation were to adopt--unilaterally, if necessary--a policy of complete openness in all areas of information;'' and, (h) A bipartisan study commission specially constituted for the purpose of examining the consequences of the secrecy system will be able to offer comprehensive proposals for reform.
function of the commission Sec.
The function of the Commission shall be-- (1) to conduct an investigation into all matters in any way related to any legislation, executive order, regulation, practice or procedure relating to the access to or the classification of information or involving security clearances, including without limitation access to classified information under the Freedom of Information Act; (2) to make such recommendations concerning the classification of national security information as the Commission shall see fit, including proposing new legislation.
composition of the commission Sec.
To carry out the purposes of this title, there is established a Commission on the Protection and Reduction of Government Secrecy (hereafter referred to in this title as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall be composed of the following twelve members: (1) four members appointed by the President, two from the executive branch of the Government and two from private life; (2) four members appointed by the President of the Senate, two from the Senate (one from each of the two major political parties) and two from private life; and (3) four members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, two from the House of Representatives (one from each of the two major political parties) and two from private life.
The Commission shall elect a Chairman and a Vice Chairman from among its members.
Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation and Travel Expenses.-- (1) Compensation in general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission may be compensated at not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which that member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Government personnel.--Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress shall receive no additional pay on account of their service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in the Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703(b) of title 5, United States Code.
powers of the commission Sec.
The Commission, or on the authorization of the Commission, any subcommittee or member hereof, may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this title, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, and require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, correspondence, memorandums, papers, and documents as the Commission or such subcommittee or member may deem advisable.
Subpoenas may be issued under the signature of the Chairman of the Commission, of any such subcommittee, or any designated member, and may be served by any person designated by such Chairman or member.
The provisions of sections 102 through 104 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (2 United States Code 192- 194) shall apply in the case of any failure of any witness to comply with any subpena or to testify when summoned under authority of this section.
The Commission is authorized to secure directly from any executive department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, independent establishment, or instrumentality information, suggestions, estimates, and statistics for the purpose of this title.
Each such department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, establishment, or instrumentality is authorized and directed, to the extent authorized by law, to furnish such information, suggestions, estimates, and statistics directly to the Commission, upon request made by the Chairman or Vice Chairman.
staff of the commission Sec.
The Commission shall have power to appoint and fix the compensation of such personnel as it deems advisable, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
The Commission is authorized to procure the services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates not to exceed the daily rate paid a person occupying a position at GS-18.
expenses of the commission Sec.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this title.