This Act may be cited as the ``Tribal HUD-VASH Act of 2017''.
RENTAL ASSISTANCE FOR HOMELESS OR AT-RISK INDIAN VETERANS.
Section 8(o)(19) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437f(o)(19)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) Indian veterans housing rental assistance program.-- ``(i) Definitions.--In this subparagraph: ``(I) Eligible indian veteran.--The term `eligible Indian veteran' means an Indian veteran who is-- ``(aa) homeless or at risk of homelessness; and ``(bb) residing in or near an Indian area.
Eligible recipient.--The term `eligible recipient' means a recipient eligible to receive a grant under section 101 of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self- Determination Act of 1996 (25 United States Code 4111).
Indian.--The term `Indian' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 5304).
Indian area.--The term `Indian area' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Native American Housing Assistance and Self- Determination Act of 1996 (25 United States Code 4103).
Indian veteran.--The term `Indian veteran' means an Indian who is a veteran.
Tribal organization.--The term `tribal organization' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 5304).
Program specifications.--The Secretary shall use not less than 5 percent of the amounts made available for rental assistance under this subsection to carry out a rental assistance and supported housing program (in this subparagraph referred to as the `Program'), in conjunction with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, for the benefit of eligible Indian veterans.
Model.-- ``(I) In general.--Except as provided in subclause (II), the Secretary shall model the Program on the rental assistance and supported housing program authorized under subparagraph (A) and applicable appropriations Acts, including administration in conjunction with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Exceptions.-- ``(aa) Secretary of housing and urban development.--After consultation with Indian tribes, eligible recipients, and any other appropriate tribal organizations, the Secretary may make necessary and appropriate modifications to facilitate the use of the Program by eligible recipients to serve eligible Indian veterans.
Secretary of veterans affairs.--After consultation with Indian tribes, eligible recipients, and any other appropriate tribal organizations, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may make necessary and appropriate modifications to facilitate the use of the Program by eligible recipients to serve eligible Indian veterans.
Eligible recipients.--The Secretary shall make amounts for rental assistance and associated administrative costs under the Program available to eligible recipients.
Funding criteria.--The Secretary shall award rental assistance under the Program based on-- ``(I) need; ``(II) administrative capacity; and ``(III) any other funding criteria established by the Secretary in a notice published in the Federal Register after consulting with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Administration.--Rental assistance made available under the Program shall be administered in accordance with the Native American Housing Assistance and Self- Determination Act of 1996 (25 United States Code 4101 et seq.
), except that grantees shall-- ``(I) submit to the Secretary, in a manner prescribed by the Secretary, reports on the utilization of rental assistance provided under the Program; and ``(II) provide to the Secretary information specified by the Secretary to assess the effectiveness of the Program in serving eligible Indian veterans.
Consultation.-- ``(I) Grant recipients; tribal organizations.--The Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, shall consult with eligible recipients and any other appropriate tribal organization on the design of the Program to ensure the effective delivery of rental assistance and supportive services to eligible Indian veterans under the Program.
Indian health service.--The Director of the Indian Health Service shall provide any assistance requested by the Secretary or the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in carrying out the Program.
Waiver.-- ``(I) In general.--Except as provided in subclause (II), the Secretary may waive or specify alternative requirements for any provision of law (including regulations) that the Secretary administers in connection with the use of rental assistance made available under the Program if the Secretary finds that the waiver or alternative requirement is necessary for the effective delivery and administration of rental assistance under the Program to eligible Indian veterans.
Exception.--The Secretary may not waive or specify alternative requirements under subclause (I) for any provision of law (including regulations) relating to labor standards or the environment.
Reporting.--Every 5 years, the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Director of the Indian Health Service, shall-- ``(I) conduct a review of the implementation of the Program, including any factors that may have limited its success; and ``(II) submit a report describing the results of the review under subclause (I) to-- ``(aa) the Committee on Indian Affairs, the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate; and ``(bb) the Subcommittee on Indian, Insular and Alaska Native Affairs of the Committee on Natural Resources, the Committee on Financial Services, the Committee on Veterans' Affairs, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.