This Act may be cited as the ``A First Step to Long-Term Care Act of 2002''.
MAKING MEDICAID ESTATE RECOVERY OPTIONAL.
In General.--Section 1917(b)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396p(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``shall seek'' each place it appears and inserting ``may seek''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
A State (as defined for purposes of title XIX of the Social Security Act) may apply such amendments to estates and sales occurring at such earlier date as the State may specify.
COVERAGE OF SUBSTITUTE ADULT DAY CARE SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.
Substitute Adult Day Care Services Benefit.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(m) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(m)) is amended-- (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``or (8)'' after ``paragraph (7)''; (B) in paragraph (6), by striking ``and'' at the end; (C) in paragraph (7), by adding ``and'' at the end; and (D) by inserting after paragraph (7), the following new paragraph: ``(8) substitute adult day care services (as defined in subsection (ww));''.
Substitute adult day care services defined.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Substitute Adult Day Care Services; Adult Day Care Facility ``(ww)(1)(A) The term `substitute adult day care services' means the items and services described in subparagraph (B) that are furnished to an individual by an adult day care facility as a part of a plan under subsection (m) that substitutes such services for a portion of the items and services described in subparagraph (B)(i) furnished by a home health agency under the plan, as determined by the physician establishing the plan.
The items and services described in this subparagraph are the following items and services: ``(i) Items and services described in paragraphs (1) through (7) of subsection (m).
A program of supervised activities designed to promote physical and mental health and furnished to the individual by the adult day care facility in a group setting for a period of not fewer than 4 and not greater than 12 hours per day.
A medication management program (as defined in subparagraph (C)).
For purposes of subparagraph (B)(iv), the term `medication management program' means a program of services, including medicine screening and patient and health care provider education programs, that provides services to minimize-- ``(i) unnecessary or inappropriate use of prescription drugs; and ``(ii) adverse events due to unintended prescription drug- to-drug interactions.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), the term `adult day care facility' means a public agency or private organization, or a subdivision of such an agency or organization, that-- ``(i) is engaged in providing skilled nursing services and other therapeutic services directly or under arrangement with a home health agency; ``(ii) meets such standards established by the Secretary to ensure quality of care and such other requirements as the Secretary finds necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished services in the facility; ``(iii) provides the items and services described in paragraph (1)(B); and ``(iv) meets the requirements of paragraphs (2) through (8) of subsection (o).
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), the term `adult day care facility' shall include a home health agency in which the items and services described in clauses (ii) through (iv) of paragraph (1)(B) are provided-- ``(i) by an adult day-care program that is licensed or certified by a State, or accredited, to furnish such items and services in the State; and ``(ii) under arrangements with that program made by such agency.
The Secretary may waive the requirement of a surety bond under paragraph (7) of subsection (o) in the case of an agency or organization that provides a comparable surety bond under State law.
For purposes of payment for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services furnished under this title, any reference to a home health agency is deemed to be a reference to an adult day care facility.''.
Payment for Substitute Adult Day Care Services.--Section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Payment Rate for Substitute Adult Day Care Services.--In the case of home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services (as defined in section 1861(ww)), the following rules apply: ``(1) The Secretary shall estimate the amount that would otherwise be payable under this section for all home health services under that plan of care other than substitute adult day care services for a period specified by the Secretary.
The total amount payable for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services under such plan may not exceed 95 percent of the amount estimated to be payable under paragraph (1) furnished under the plan by a home health agency.''.
Adjustment in Case of Overutilization of Substitute Adult Day Care Services.-- (1) Monitoring expenditures.--Beginning with fiscal year 2004, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall monitor the expenditures made under the Medicare Program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) for home health services (as defined in section 1861(m) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(m))) for the fiscal year, including substitute adult day care services under paragraph (8) of such section (as added by subsection (a)), and shall compare such expenditures to expenditures that the Secretary estimates would have been made for home health services for that fiscal year if subsection (a) had not been enacted.
Required reduction in payment rate.--If the Secretary determines, after making the comparison under paragraph (1) and making such adjustments for changes in demographics and age of the Medicare beneficiary population as the Secretary determines appropriate, that expenditures for home health services under the Medicare Program, including such substitute adult day care services, exceed expenditures that would have been made under such program for home health services for a year if subsection (a) had not been enacted, then the Secretary shall adjust the rate of payment to adult day care facilities so that total expenditures for home health services under such program in a fiscal year does not exceed the Secretary's estimate of such expenditures if subsection (a) had not been enacted.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 2003.
CLARIFICATION OF THE DEFINITION OF HOMEBOUND FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING ELIGIBILITY FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.
Clarification.--Sections 1814(a) and 1835(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395f(a); 1395n(a)) are each amended by adding at the end the following: ``Notwithstanding the preceding sentences, in the case of an individual that requires technological assistance or the assistance of another individual to leave the home, the Secretary may not disqualify such individual from being considered to be `confined to his home' based on the frequency or duration of the absences from the home.''.
Technical Amendments.--(1) Sections 1814(a) and 1835(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395f(a); 1395n(a)) are each amended in the sixth sentence by striking ``leave home,'' and inserting ``leave home and''.
Section 1814(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395f(a)), as amended by subsection (a), is amended by moving the seventh sentence, as added by section 322(a)(1) of the Medicare, Medicaid, and SCHIP Benefits Improvement and Protection Act of 2000 (appendix F, 114 United States Statutes at Large 2763A-501), as enacted into law by section 1(a)(6) of Public Law 106-554, to the end of that section.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to items and services furnished on or after the date of enactment of this Act.