This Act may be cited as the ``Criminal Aliens Federal Responsibility Act of 1995''.
INCARCERATION OF CRIMINAL ALIENS BY OR AT THE EXPENSE OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
Definition.--In this section, ``criminal alien who has been convicted of a felony and is incarcerated in a State or local correctional facility'' means an alien who-- (1)(A) is in the United States in violation of the immigration laws; or (B) is deportable or excludable under the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101 et sequentes); and (2) has been convicted of a felony under State or local law and incarcerated in a correctional facility of the State or a subdivision of the State.
Federal Custody.--At the request of a State or political subdivision of a State, the Attorney General shall-- (1)(A) take custody of a criminal alien who has been convicted of a felony and is incarcerated in a State or local correctional facility; and (B) provide for the imprisonment of the criminal alien in a Federal prison in accordance with the sentence of the State court; or (2) enter into a contractual arrangement with the State or local government to compensate the State or local government for incarcerating alien criminals for the duration of their sentences.
EXPEDITING CRIMINAL ALIEN DEPORTATION AND EXCLUSION.
Convicted Defined.--Section 241(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1251(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Convicted defined.--In this paragraph, the term `convicted' means a judge or jury has found the alien guilty or the alien has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, whether or not the alien appeals therefrom.''.
Deportation of Convicted Aliens.-- (1) Immediate deportation.--Section 242(h) of such Act (8 United States Code 1252(h)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(h) An alien'' and inserting ``(h)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), an alien''; (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) An alien sentenced to imprisonment may be deported prior to the termination of such imprisonment by the release of the alien from confinement, if the Service petitions the appropriate court or other entity with authority concerning the alien to release the alien into the custody of the Service for execution of an order of deportation.''.
Prohibition of reentry into the united states.--Section 212(a)(2) of such Act (8 United States Code 1182(a)(2)) is amended-- (A) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph ``(G)''; and (B) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Aliens deported before serving minimum period of confinement.--An alien deported pursuant to section 242(h)(2) is excludable during the minimum period of confinement to which the alien was sentenced.''.
Execution of Deportation Orders.--Section 242(i) of such Act (8 United States Code 1252(i)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``An order of deportation may not be executed until all direct appeals relating to the conviction which is the basis of the deportation order have been exhausted.''.
DETENTION OF ALIENS SUBJECT TO DEPORTATION ON CRIMINAL AND SECURITY GROUNDS PENDING DEPORTATION PROCEEDINGS.
Apprehension and Deportation of Aliens Subject to Deportation on Criminal or Security Grounds.--Section 242(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1252(a)) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of paragraph (1) by striking ``paragraph (2),'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (4),''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Pending a determination of deportability in the case of any alien subject to deportation for criminal offenses or security and related grounds pursuant to paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 241(a), the Attorney General shall-- ``(A) upon warrant of the Attorney General, arrest and take into custody the alien pending a final determination of deportability; or ``(B) take the alien into custody upon release of the alien from incarceration (regardless of whether or not such release is on parole, supervised release, or probation, and regardless of the possibility of rearrest or further confinement in respect of the same offense) pending a final determination of deportability.
Notwithstanding paragraph (1) or subsection (c) and (d), the Attorney General shall not release such alien from custody.''.
Mandatory Detention of Aggravated Felons Pending Determination of Deportability.--Section 242(a)(2) of such Act is further amended-- (1) by striking subparagraph (B); and (2) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) by striking ``(2)(A)'' and inserting ``(2)'', and (B) in the second sentence-- (i) by striking ``but subject to subparagraph (B)'', and (ii) by inserting before the period ``pending a final determination of deportability''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to aliens with respect to whom a deportation proceeding is initiated more than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PRISONER TRANSFER TREATY PROGRAM.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit to the Congress a report on ways to expand bilateral prisoner transfer treaties.
Such report shall consider the feasibility of subsidizing the Government of Mexico for costs associated with the incarceration of Mexican nationals returned to Mexico pursuant to such a treaty and methods of verifying that prisoners transferred pursuant to such treaties are serving adequate terms of imprisonment upon transfer.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, in cooperation with the Government of Mexico the Attorney General shall implement a program of interior repatriation of criminal aliens who are deported or voluntarily repatriated to Mexico.
INS CLEARINGHOUSE CONCERNING CRIMINAL ALIENS.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Immigration and Naturalization Service shall develop a uniform and sound methodology for collecting information concerning criminal aliens incarcerated in local and State jails, including the number of such aliens.