This Act may be cited as the ``American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act Amendments''.
Section 2 of the American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 4001) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7) The term `Commission' means the Indian Trust Reform Commission established under section 303.''.
OFFICE OF SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR AMERICAN INDIANS, INDIAN TRUST REFORM COMMISSION.
Office of Special Trustee for American Indians.-- (1) In general.--Section 302 of the American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 4042) is amended by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following: ``(c) Term of Special Trustee.--The Special Trustee shall serve for a term of 2 years.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 306 of the American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act (25 United States Code 4046) is amended by striking subsection (d).
Indian Trust Reform Commission.--Section 302 of the American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act (25 United States Code 4042) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Indian Trust Fund Reform Commission.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established the Indian Trust Fund Reform Commission.
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of the following members: ``(A) One member appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One member appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
One member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the Secretary of the Interior.
Consultation.--Before making an appointment under paragraph (2), each individual referred to in subparagraphs (A) through (D) shall consult with each other individual referred to in those subparagraphs to achieve, to the maximum extent practicable, fair and equitable representation of different interests, with resect to the matters to be studied by the commission, including the interests of Indian tribes, appropriate intertribal organizations, and individual Indian account holders.
Qualifications of members.-- ``(A) In general.--Each individual appointed as a member under paragraph (2) shall-- ``(i) have legal, accounting, regulatory, or administrative experience with respect to trust assets and accounts or comparable experience in tribal government; or ``(ii) at the time of the appointment, be an individual who is serving as a member of the advisory board established under section 306(a).
Concurrent membership.--A member of the advisory board referred to in subparagraph (A)(ii) may serve concurrently as a member of the Commission.
Chairperson.--Not later than the date on which a majority of the members of the Commission have been appointed (but not later than 75 days after the date of enactment of this subsection) a chairperson of the Commission shall be selected a consensus or majority decision made by the Secretary of the Interior, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Initial appointments; period of appointment; and vacancies.-- ``(A) Initial appointments.--The initial appointment of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this subsection.
Period of appointment.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment, but not later than 60 days after the date on which the vacancy occurs.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which a majority of the members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Duties of the commission.--The Commission shall carry out the duties of the Commission specified in section 303(a).
Powers of the commission.-- ``(A) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the duties of the Commission under this Act.
Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission under this subsection.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Commission personnel matters.-- ``(A) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- ``(A) In general.--The Chairman may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairman may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Board without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.--The Chairman may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.''.
Section 303 of the American Indian Trust Fund Management Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 4043) is amended by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a) In General.-- ``(1) Reinvention strategy.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 180 days after a majority of the members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission, in consultation with Indian tribes and appropriate Indian organizations, shall prepare for submission to the individuals and entities specified in subparagraph (C) in accordance with subparagraph (B) a recommended reinvention strategy for all phases of the trust management business cycle that ensures the proper and efficient discharge of the trust responsibility of the Federal Government to Indian tribes and individual Indians in compliance with this title.
Adoption.--Not later than 90 days after the date specified in subparagraph (A), the Commission shall-- ``(i)(I) meet to consider the reinvention strategy developed under subparagraph (A); and ``(II)(aa) take a vote concerning the adoption of the reinvention strategy for recommendation to the individuals and entities specified in subparagraph (C), and adopt for recommendation the reinvention strategy if it is approved by a majority vote; or ``(bb) modify the reinvention strategy, and if the modified reinvention strategy is approved by a majority vote, adopt the modified reinvention strategy for recommendation to the individuals and entities specified in subparagraph (C); and ``(ii) submit a recommended reinvention strategy to the individuals and entities specified in subparagraph (C).
Individuals and entities.--The individuals and entities referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B) are as follows: ``(i) The advisory commission established under section 306(a).
The Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
The Committee on Indian Affairs of the Senate.
Reinvention strategy requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--In preparing the reinvention strategy under this subsection, the Commission shall explicitly consider and include in the report to the individuals and entities described in paragraph (1)(C) findings concerning the following options for fulfilling the obligations of the Federal Government (including the trust obligations of the Federal Government) to Indian tribes and individual Indian account holders: ``(i) The creation of a Government- sponsored enterprise or a federally chartered corporation to undertake some or all of the management, accounting, or other parts of the trust management business cycle.
The use of existing or expanded authority under the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450 et seq.)
to undertake some or all of the management, accounting, or other parts of the trust management business cycle.
Requiring the Secretary to contract directly with private sector entities (including banks and other private institutions) to undertake some or all of the management, accounting, or other parts of the trust management business cycle.
Any combination of the options described in clauses (i) through (iii) that the Commission considers to be appropriate.
Additional requirements.--In addition to meeting the requirements under subparagraph (A), the reinvention strategy shall-- ``(i) identify all reforms to the policies, procedures, practices, and systems of the Department (including systems of the Bureau, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Minerals Management Service) that are necessary to ensure the proper and efficient discharge of the trust responsibilities of the Secretary in compliance with this Act; ``(ii) include provisions to-- ``(I) provide opportunities to Indian tribes to assist in the management of their trust accounts; and ``(II) identify for the Secretary options for the investment of the trust accounts of Indian tribes in a manner consistent with the trust responsibilities of the Secretary in compliance with this Act in such manner as to ensure the promotion of economic development in the communities of Indian tribes; and ``(iii) include recommendations concerning whether the position of Special Trustee should be continued or made permanent.
Regulatory entity.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after approving a reinvention strategy under paragraph (1), the Commission shall recommend to Congress the Federal agency that should be responsible for regulating the trust management activities of the Federal Government, with respect to funds held in trust under this Act, and submit such recommendations for legislation to implement the reinvention strategy as the Commission considers to be appropriate.
Criteria for recommending regulatory entity.--In determining which regulatory entity to recommend under subparagraph (A), the Commission shall consider-- ``(i) the provisions of the recommended reinvention strategy approved under paragraph (1); and ``(ii) the similarity of the recommended reinvention strategy approved under paragraph (1) and the functions and activities of an entity regulated by-- ``(I) the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency; ``(II) the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; ``(III) the Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Oversight; ``(IV) the Federal Trade Commission; ``(V) the Office of Thrift Supervision; or ``(VI) any other Federal agency charged with the responsibility of regulating public or private entities that invest or manage financial resources.