SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Fort Carson-Pinon Canyon Military Lands Withdrawal Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Withdrawal and reservation of lands at Fort Carson Military Reservation.
Withdrawal and reservation of lands at Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site.
Maps and legal descriptions.
Management of withdrawn lands.
Management of withdrawn and acquired mineral resources.
Hunting, fishing, and trapping.
Termination of withdrawal and reservation.
Determination of presence of contamination and effect of contamination.
Amendment to Military Lands Withdrawal Act of 1986.
WITHDRAWAL AND RESERVATION OF LANDS AT FORT CARSON MILITARY RESERVATION.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights and except as otherwise provided in this Act, the lands at the Fort Carson Military Reservation, Colorado, that are described in subsection (c) are hereby withdrawn from all forms of appropriation under the public land laws, including the mining laws, the mineral and geothermal leasing laws, and the mineral materials disposal laws.
Reservation.--The lands withdrawn under subsection (a) are reserved for use by the Secretary of the Army-- (1) for military maneuvering, training and weapons firing; and (2) for other defense related purposes consistent with the uses specified in paragraph (1).
Land Description.--The lands referred to in subsection (a) comprise 3,133.02 acres of public land and 11,415.16 acres of federally-owned minerals in El Paso, Pueblo, and Fremont Counties, Colorado, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Fort Carson Proposed Withdrawal--Fort Carson Base'', dated February 6, 1992, and published in accordance with section 4.
WITHDRAWAL AND RESERVATION OF LANDS AT PINON CANYON MANEUVER SITE.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights and except as otherwise provided in this Act, the lands at the Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site, Colorado, that are described in subsection (c) are hereby withdrawn from all forms of appropriation under the public land laws, including the mining laws, the mineral and geothermal leasing laws, and the mineral materials disposal laws.
Reservation.--The lands withdrawn under subsection (a) are reserved for use by the Secretary of the Army-- (1) for military maneuvering and training; and (2) for other defense related purposes consistent with the uses specified in paragraph (1).
Land Description.--The lands referred to in subsection (a) comprise 2,517.12 acres of public lands and 130,139 acres of federally- owned minerals in Las Animas County, Colorado, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Fort Carson Proposed Withdrawal--Fort Carson Maneuver Area--Pinon Canyon site'', dated February 6, 1992, and published in accordance with section 4.
MAPS AND LEGAL DESCRIPTIONS.
Preparation of Maps and Legal Description.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall prepare maps depicting the lands withdrawn and reserved by this Act and publish in the Federal Register a notice containing the legal description of such lands.
Legal Effect.--Such maps and legal descriptions shall have the same force and effect as if they were included in this Act, except that the Secretary of the Interior may correct clerical and typographical errors in such maps and legal descriptions.
Availability of Maps and Legal Description.--Copies of such maps and legal descriptions shall be available for public inspection in the offices of the Colorado State Director and the Canon City District Manager of the Bureau of Land Management and in the offices of the Commander of Fort Carson, Colorado.
Costs.--The Secretary of the Army shall reimburse the Secretary of the Interior for the costs of implementing this section.
MANAGEMENT OF WITHDRAWN LANDS.
Management Guidelines.-- (1) Management by secretary of the army.--Except as provided in section 6, during the period of withdrawal, the Secretary of the Army shall manage for military purposes the lands covered by this Act and may authorize use of the lands by the other military departments and agencies of the Department of Defense, and the National Guard, as appropriate.
Access restrictions.--When military operations, public safety, or national security, as determined by the Secretary of the Army, require the closure of roads and trails on the lands withdrawn by this Act commonly in public use, the Secretary of the Army is authorized to take such action, except that such closures shall be limited to the minimum areas and periods required for the purposes specified in this subsection.
Appropriate warning notices shall be kept posted during closures.
Suppression of fires.--The Secretary of the Army shall take necessary precautions to prevent and suppress brush and range fires occurring within and outside the lands as a result of military activities and may seek assistance from the Bureau of Land Management in suppressing such fires.
The memorandum of understanding required by this section shall provide for Bureau of Land Management assistance in the suppression of such fires, and for a transfer of funds from the Department of the Army to the Bureau of Land Management as compensation for such assistance.
Management Plan.-- (1) Development required.--The Secretary of the Army, with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Interior, shall develop a plan for the management of acquired lands and lands withdrawn under sections 2 and 3 for the period of withdrawal.
The plan shall-- (A) be consistent with applicable law; (B) include such provisions as may be necessary for proper resource management and protection of the natural, cultural, and other resources and values of such lands; and (C) identify those withdrawn and acquired lands, if any, which are to be open to mining or mineral and geothermal leasing, including mineral materials disposal.
Time for development.--The management plan required by this subsection shall be developed not later than 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Implementation of Management Plan.-- (1) Memorandum of understanding required.--The Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Interior shall enter into a memorandum of understanding to implement the management plan developed under subsection (b).
Duration.--The duration of any such memorandum of understanding shall be the same as the period of withdrawal specified in section 8(a).
Amendment.--The memorandum of understanding may be amended by agreement of both Secretaries.
Use of Certain Resources.--The Secretary of the Army is authorized to utilize sand, gravel, or similar mineral or mineral material resources from the lands withdrawn by this Act when the use of such resources is required for construction needs of the Fort Carson Reservation or Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site.
MANAGEMENT OF WITHDRAWN AND ACQUIRED MINERAL RESOURCES.
Except as provided in section 5(d), the Secretary of the Interior shall manage all withdrawn and acquired mineral resources within the boundaries of the Fort Carson Military Reservation and Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site in the same manner as provided in section 12 of the Military Lands Withdrawal Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-606; 100 United States Statutes at Large 3466) for mining and mineral leasing on certain lands withdrawn by that Act from all forms of appropriation under the public land laws.
HUNTING, FISHING, AND TRAPPING.
All hunting, fishing, and trapping on the lands withdrawn and reserved by this Act shall be conducted in accordance with section 2671 of title 10, United States Code.
TERMINATION OF WITHDRAWAL AND RESERVATION.
Termination Date.--The withdrawal and reservation made by this Act shall terminate 15 years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Determination of Continuing Military Need.-- (1) Determination required.--At least three years before the termination under subsection (a) of the withdrawal and reservation established by this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall advise the Secretary of the Interior as to whether or not the Department of the Army will have a continuing military need for any of the lands after the termination date.
Method of making determination.--If the Secretary of the Army concludes under paragraph (1) that there will be a continuing military need for any of the lands after the termination date established by subsection (a), the Secretary of the Army, in accordance with applicable law, shall-- (A) evaluate the environmental effects of renewal of such withdrawal and reservation; (B) hold at least one public hearing in Colorado concerning such evaluation; and (C) file, after completing the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B), an application for extension of the withdrawal and reservation of such lands in accordance with the regulations and procedures of the Department of the Interior applicable to the extension of withdrawals for military uses.
Notification.--The Secretary of the Interior shall notify the Congress concerning a filing under paragraph (3)(C).
Early Relinquishment of Withdrawal.--If the Secretary of the Army concludes under subsection (b) that before the termination date established by subsection (a) there will be no military need for all or any part of the lands withdrawn and reserved by this Act, or if, during the period of withdrawal, the Secretary of the Army otherwise decides to relinquish any or all of the lands withdrawn and reserved under this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall file with the Secretary of the Interior a notice of intention to relinquish such lands.
Acceptance of Lands Proposed for Relinquishment.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior, upon deciding that it is in the public interest to accept jurisdiction over the lands proposed for relinquishment, may revoke the withdrawal and reservation established by this Act as it applies to the lands proposed for relinquishment.
Should the decision be made to revoke the withdrawal and reservation, the Secretary of the Interior shall publish in the Federal Register an appropriate order which shall-- (1) terminate the withdrawal and reservation; (2) constitute official acceptance of full jurisdiction over the lands by the Secretary of the Interior; and (3) state the date upon which the lands will be opened to the operation of the public land laws, including the mining laws if appropriate.
DETERMINATION OF PRESENCE OF CONTAMINATION AND EFFECT OF CONTAMINATION.
Determination of Presence of Contamination.-- (1) Before relinquishment notice.--Before filing a relinquishment notice under section 8(c), the Secretary of the Army shall prepare a written determination as to whether and to what extent the lands to be relinquished are contaminated with explosive, toxic, or other hazardous materials.
A copy of the determination made by the Secretary of the Army shall be supplied with the relinquishment notice.
Copies of both the relinquishment notice and the determination under this subsection shall be published in the Federal Register by the Secretary of the Interior.
Upon termination of withdrawal.--At the expiration of the withdrawal period made by this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall determine whether and to what extent the lands withdrawn by this Act are contaminated to an extent which prevents opening such contaminated lands to operation of the public land laws.
Program of Decontamination.-- (1) In general.--Throughout the duration of the withdrawal and reservation made by this Act, the Secretary of the Army, to the extent funds are made available, shall maintain a program of decontamination of the lands withdrawn by this Act at least at the level of effort carried out during fiscal year 1992.
Decontamination of lands to be relinquished.--In the case of lands subject to a relinquishment notice under section 8(c) that are contaminated, the Secretary of the Army shall decontaminate the land to the extent that funds are appropriated for such purpose if the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of the Army, determines that-- (A) decontamination of the lands is practicable and economically feasible, taking into consideration the potential future use and value of the land; and (B) upon decontamination, the land could be opened to the operation of some or all of the public land laws, including the mining laws.
Authority of Secretary of the Interior To Refuse Contaminated Lands.--The Secretary of the Interior shall not be required to accept lands proposed for relinquishment if the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Interior conclude that-- (1) decontamination of any or all of the lands proposed for relinquishment is not practicable or economically feasible; (2) the lands cannot be decontaminated sufficiently to allow them to be opened to the operation of the public land laws; or (3) insufficient funds are appropriated for the purpose of decontaminating the lands.
Effect of Continued Contamination.--If the Secretary of the Interior declines under subsection (c) to accept jurisdiction of lands proposed for relinquishment or if the Secretary of the Interior determines under subsection (a)(2) that some of the lands withdrawn by this Act are contaminated to an extent that prevents opening the contaminated lands to operation of the public land laws-- (1) the Secretary of the Army shall take appropriate steps to warn the public of the contaminated state of such lands and any risks associated with entry onto such lands; (2) after the expiration of the withdrawal, the Secretary of the Army shall undertake no activities on such lands except in connection with decontamination of such lands; and (3) the Secretary of the Army shall report to the Secretary of the Interior and to the Congress concerning the status of such lands and all actions taken under paragraphs (1) and (2).
Effect of Subsequent Decontamination.--If the lands described in subsection (d) are subsequently decontaminated, upon certification by the Secretary of the Army that the lands are safe for all nonmilitary uses, the Secretary of the Interior shall reconsider accepting jurisdiction over the lands.
Effect on Other Laws.--Nothing in this Act shall affect, or be construed to affect, the obligations of the Secretary of the Army, if any, to decontaminate lands withdrawn by this Act pursuant to applicable law, including the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes) and the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes).
The functions of the Secretary of the Army under this Act may be delegated.
The functions of the Secretary of the Interior under this Act may be delegated, except that the order referred to in section 8(d) may be approved and signed only by the Secretary of the Interior, the Deputy Secretary of the Interior, or an Assistant Secretary of the Department of the Interior.
In General.--The United States shall be held harmless and shall not be liable for any injuries or damages to persons or property suffered in the course of any mining, mineral activity, or geothermal leasing activity conducted on lands comprising the Fort Carson Reservation or Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site, including liabilities to non-Federal entities under section 107 or 113 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9607, 9613), or section 7003 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6973).
Indemnification.--Any party conducting any mining, mineral, or geothermal leasing activity on lands comprising the Fort Carson Reservation or Pinon Canyon Maneuver Site shall indemnify the United States against any costs, fees, damages, or other liabilities (including costs of litigation) incurred by the United States and arising from or relating to such mining activities, including costs of mineral materials disposal, whether arising under the Comprehensive Environmental Response Compensation and Liability Act of 1980, the Solid Waste Disposal Act, or otherwise.
AMENDMENT TO MILITARY LANDS WITHDRAWAL ACT OF 1986.
Use of Certain Resources.--Section 3(f) of the Military Lands Withdrawal Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-606; 100 United States Statutes at Large 3461) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary of the military department concerned may utilize sand, gravel, or similar mineral or material resources when the use of such resources is required for construction needs on the respective lands withdrawn by this Act.''.
Technical Correction.--Section 9(b) of the Military Lands Withdrawal Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-606; 100 United States Statutes at Large 3466) is amended by striking ``section 7(f)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section 8(f)''.
There are hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives March 28, 1995.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.
104th CONGRESS 1st Session H. R. 256 _______________________________________________________________________ AN ACT To withdraw and reserve certain public lands and minerals within the State of Colorado for military uses, and for other purposes.