DRUG-FREE COMMUNITIES SUPPORT PROGRAM.
Short Title.--Chapter 2 of the National Narcotics Leadership Act of 1988 (21 United States Code 1521 et sequentes), (referred to in this section as ``the Act'') is amended by inserting after the chapter heading the following: ``SEC.
``This chapter may be cited as the `Drug-Free Communities Act'.''.
Extension and Increase in Program.--Section 1024(a) of the Act (21 United States Code 1524(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting a semicolon; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(6) $55,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; ``(7) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; ``(8) $65,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and ``(9) $70,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.''.
Administrative Costs.--Section 1024(b) of the Act (21 United States Code 1524(b)) is amended by striking ``amounts authorized'' and inserting ``amounts made available''.
Extension of Limitation on Administrative Costs.--Section 1024(b) of the Act (21 United States Code 1524(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) 3 percent for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2006.''.
Modification of Amount for Grant Renewals.--Section 1032 of the Act (21 United States Code 1532) is amended-- (1) by striking clause (iv) of subsection (b)(1)(A) and inserting the following: ``(iv) Limitations.-- ``(I) Funding levels.--Except as provided in subclause (II), the amount of a grant award under this subparagraph may not exceed $100,000 for a fiscal year.
In the second year of the grant award period, upon successful reapplication, a grant recipient is eligible to maintain its funding level at 100 percent of the original award.
In the third year of the grant award period, upon successful reapplication, a grant recipient is eligible to maintain its funding level at 75 percent of the original award.
In the fourth and fifth years of the grant award period, upon successful reapplication, a grant recipient is eligible to maintain its funding level at 50 percent of the original award.
Exceptions.--Any grant recipient receiving an award of $50,000 or less is eligible in a subsequent fiscal year of the grant award period, upon successful reapplication, to receive not less than that amount.
A grant recipient receiving an award amount greater than $50,000 and successfully reapplying for a grant award shall not have its funding level reduced below $50,000 in any subsequent fiscal year of the grant award period.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Modification of Eligibility Criteria.--The Administrator may not implement any modification in the criteria specified in subsection (a) for eligibility for the renewal of a grant award under this section without consulting the Advisory Commission.''.
Study.--The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy shall conduct a study that evaluates the need, if any, to increase administrative costs for the Drug-Free Communities Act (referred to in this section as ``the Act'').
Report.--After the completion of the study described in subsection (a), but not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit to Congress a report that includes the findings of such study and-- (1) information regarding current staffing levels and administrative requirements necessary to carry out the Act; (2) the necessity, if any, and justification of an increase in administrative funds, including the amount of such increase, to carry out the Act; (3) what programs or activities any proposed increase will support and a description of how such programs or activities will improve grant performance, application processing, grant administration, and program support, including support for the Advisory Commission established under the Act; (4) a specific accounting of the amount or percentage of any such increase which will be used by Federal agencies involved in administering or supporting the program established under the Act; and (5) an analysis of expected outcomes if administrative funds are increased and what measures the Director and the Attorney General will take to limit administrative costs in the future.
In General.--The Director of the Office of National Drug Control Policy may make grants to an organization to provide for the establishment of a National Community Antidrug Coalition Institute.
Requirements.--The organization receiving a grant under subsection (a) shall-- (1) be a national nonprofit organization that represents, provides technical assistance and training to, and has special expertise and broad, national-level experience in community antidrug coalitions; and (2) establish a National Community Antidrug Coalition Institute that will-- (A) provide education, training, and technical assistance for coalition leaders and community teams; (B) conduct research, testing, and diffusion of tools, mechanisms, and measures to better evaluate and document coalition performance measures and outcomes; and (C) bridge the gap between research and practice by translating knowledge from research into practical information.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 and 2003 to make grants as provided in this section.