This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Financial Security Act of 1996''.
FEDERAL CONTRIBUTIONS TO CHILD RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the close of each calendar year, the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate shall transfer for such calendar year, from amounts in the general fund of the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $1,000 to the Child Retirement Account of each individual who is an eligible child for such calendar year.
Eligible Child.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible child'' means, with respect to any calendar year, any individual who, as of the close of such calendar year-- (1) is a citizen or resident alien of the United States, and (2) has not attained age 6.
Reduction in Contribution for Children of High Income Parents.-- (1) In general.--If, with respect to an eligible child, the adjusted gross income of the applicable taxpayer for the taxable year ending with or within a calendar year exceeds the threshold amount, the $1,000 amount in subsection (a) with respect to such child for such calendar year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to $1,000 as such excess bears to the phaseout range.
Applicable taxpayer may make-up reduced contribution.-- If there is a reduction under this subsection in the amount transferred under subsection (a) to the Child Retirement Account of an eligible child for any calendar year, the applicable taxpayer with respect to such child may (at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe) transfer an amount equal to the amount of such reduction to the Child Retirement Account of such child.
Children Below Age 19 as of Enactment.-- (1) In general.--In the case of an individual who, as of the close of 1996-- (A) is a citizen or resident alien of the United States, and (B) has not attained age 19, the applicable taxpayer with respect to such individual may (at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe) contribute to the Child Retirement Account of such child an amount equal to the lesser of $6,000 or the product of $1,000 and the age of such child as of the close of 1996.
Any contribution under the preceding sentence may be made only during 1997 and 1998.
Reduction of contribution for children of high income parents.--If, with respect to an individual described in paragraph (1), the adjusted gross income of the applicable taxpayer for the taxable year ending with or within 1997 exceeds the threshold amount, the amount otherwise determined under paragraph (1) with respect to such individual shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount so otherwise determined as such excess bears to the phaseout range.
Definitions.--For purposes of subsections (c) and (d)-- (1) Phaseout range.--The term ``phaseout range'' means-- (A) $50,000 in the case of a joint return, (B) $33,000 in the case of an individual who is not married, and (C) $25,000 in the case of a married individual filing a separate return.
Threshold amount.--The term ``threshold amount'' means-- (A) $100,000 in the case of a joint return for such taxable year, (B) $67,000 in the case of an individual who is not married, and (C) $50,000 in the case of a married individual filing a separate return.
Applicable taxpayer.--The term ``applicable taxpayer'' means, with respect to an eligible child-- (A) the taxpayer to whom a deduction is allowable under section 151(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for such child, or (B) if no taxpayer is described in subparagraph (A), such child.
In General.--Subchapter F of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exempt organizations) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART VIII--CHILD RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS ``Sec.
Child Retirement Account.--For purposes of this part, the term `Child Retirement Account' means any trust created or organized in the United States for the exclusive benefit of the account beneficiary but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(1) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash.
The only contributions which will be accepted are-- ``(A) contributions under section 2 of the Children's Financial Security Act of 1996, ``(B) contributions of not more than $100 for each calendar year after the calendar year in which the account beneficiary attains age 5 and before the calendar year in which such beneficiary attains age 19, and ``(C) trustee-to-trustee transfers to such trust from another Child Retirement Account of the account beneficiary.
The assets of the trust are invested only in an approved mutual fund.
The requirements of paragraphs (2) through (6) of section 408(a) are met.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.-- ``(1) In general.--A Child Retirement Account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be a Child Retirement Account.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such Account is subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc., organizations).
Account terminations.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 408(e) shall apply to Child Retirement Accounts; except that such paragraph (4) shall not apply to loans which are qualified special purpose distributions.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.-- ``(A) Withholding.--The trustee of a Child Retirement Account shall deduct and withhold from any distribution from such Account a tax equal to 20 percent of such distribution.
No other tax.--Distributions from a Child Retirement Account shall not be includible in gross income.
Credit for amounts withheld only on qualified special purpose loan distributions which are repaid.-- In the case of an amount withheld under subparagraph (A) on a qualified special purpose distribution from a Child Retirement Account in the form of a loan, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for any taxable year an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount withheld as the principal amount of such loan which is repaid during such taxable year bears to the total principal amount of the loan.
The credit allowed under the preceding sentence shall be treated as a credit allowed under subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of this chapter and shall be allowed to the account beneficiary.
Penalty on distributions not used for qualified purposes.--If any distribution is made from a Child Retirement Account which is not a qualified distribution, the account beneficiary's tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which such distribution is made shall be increased by an amount equal to 50 percent of such distribution.
Qualified distribution.--For purposes of paragraph (2), the term `qualified distribution' means any distribution-- ``(A) made on or after the date on which the account beneficiary attains age 59\1/2\, ``(B) made to a beneficiary (or to the estate of the individual) on or after the death of the account beneficiary, ``(C) attributable to the account beneficiary being disabled (within the meaning of section 72(m)(7)), or ``(D) which is a qualified special purpose distribution.
Qualified special purpose distribution.--For purposes of paragraph (3), the term `qualified special purpose distribution' means any distribution (including in the form of a loan) from a Child Retirement Account to the account beneficiary-- ``(A) if such distribution is a qualified first- time homebuyer distribution, or ``(B) to the extent the aggregate distributions from the Account does not exceed the qualified higher education expenses of the account beneficiary for the taxable year in which received.
Such term shall not include any distribution from such an Account during a calendar year to the extent such distribution, when added to the amount of all prior distributions from such Account during the calendar year and all prior calendar years, exceeds an amount equal to 50 percent of the balance in such Account as of the close of the prior calendar year.
Qualified first-time homebuyer distributions.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified first-time homebuyer distribution' means any payment or distribution received by the account beneficiary to the extent such payment or distribution is used by such beneficiary within a reasonable period to pay qualified acquisition costs with respect to a principal residence for such beneficiary as a first-time homebuyer.
Qualified acquisition costs.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified acquisition costs' means the costs of acquiring, constructing, or reconstructing a residence.
Such term includes any usual or reasonable settlement, financing, or other closing costs.
First-time homebuyer; other definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) First-time homebuyer.--The term `first-time homebuyer' means any individual if such individual (and, if married, such individual's spouse) had no present ownership interest in a principal residence during the 3- year period ending on the date of acquisition of the principal residence to which this paragraph applies.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 1034.
Date of acquisition.--The term `date of acquisition' means the date-- ``(I) on which a binding contract to acquire the principal residence to which subparagraph (A) applies is entered into, or ``(II) on which a binding contract to construct or reconstruct such a principal residence is entered into.
Qualified higher education expenses.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means-- ``(i) expenses for tuition, fees, books, supplies, and equipment required for the enrollment or attendance of the account beneficiary at an eligible educational institution (as defined in section 135(c)(3)), and ``(ii) reasonable living expenses while away from home while attending such institution.
Coordination with savings bond provisions.-- The amount of qualified higher education expenses for any taxable year shall be reduced by any amount excludable from gross income under section 135.
Exceptions from withholding tax and penalty for trustee-to-trustee transfers.--Paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) shall not apply to any trustee-to-trustee transfers from a Child Retirement Account to another Child Retirement Account of the same account beneficiary.
Approved Mutual Fund.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `approved mutual fund' means any fund of any regulated investment company (as defined in section 851(a)) if-- ``(A) an election under section 851(b)(1) is in effect with respect to such company, and ``(B) such fund is designated by the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board for purposes of this section.
Standards for designation.--A fund may be designated under paragraph (1) only if the Federal Retirement Thrift Investment Board determines that it is reasonable to expect that not less than 75 percent of the total value of the assets of such fund are represented by equity securities.
Certain Rules To Apply.--Rules similar to the following rules shall apply for purposes of this section: ``(1) Section 219(f)(3) (relating to time when contributions deemed made).
Section 408(g) (relating to community property laws).
Section 408(h) (relating to custodial accounts).
Reports.--The Secretary may require the trustee of a Child Retirement Account to make such reports regarding such Account to the Secretary and to the account beneficiary with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by the Secretary.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Tax on prohibited transactions.-- (A) Section 4975 of such Code (relating to tax on prohibited transactions) is amended by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(5) Special rule for child retirement accounts.--An individual for whose benefit a Child Retirement Account (within the meaning of section 529(a)) is established shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be a Child Retirement Account by reason of the application of section 529(b)(2) to such Account.''
Paragraph (1) of section 4975(e) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (D), by redesignating subparagraph (E) as subparagraph (F), and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) a Child Retirement Account described in section 529(a), or''.
Failure to provide reports on child retirement accounts.--Paragraph (2) of section 6693(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) section 529(f) (relating to Child Retirement Accounts).''
Clerical amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter F of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part VIII.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.