This Act may be cited as the ``Ronald Reagan Peace Dividend Investment Act''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET ACT OF 1974.
In general.--Title VI of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990) is amended by adding after section 606 the following new section: ``SEC.
DETERMINATION OF PEACE DIVIDEND.
Fiscal Year 1993.-- ``(1) In general.--If pursuant to section 251(a)(7) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 outlays in the defense category for fiscal year 1993 are estimated to be below the discretionary spending limit for such outlays, the difference shall be used to reduce the deficit and to increase the personal income tax exemption as provided in subsection (c).
Adjustment to discretionary spending limits.--If outlays for the defense category in fiscal year 1993 are estimated to be below the discretionary spending limit for such outlays, the discretionary spending limits calculated pursuant to section 251(b) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 shall be adjusted for the difference.
Fiscal Years 1994 and Thereafter.-- ``(1) In general.--If outlays in the defense category as defined in section 250(c)(4) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 for each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 1994 are below the defense baseline for such fiscal year as determined under paragraph (3), the difference shall be used to reduce the deficit and increase the personal exemption as provided in subsection (c).
Adjustment to discretionary spending limits.--For fiscal year 1994 or 1995 if the defense category outlays for such fiscal year are estimated to be below the defense baseline for such fiscal year, the discretionary spending limits shall be adjusted by the difference.
Baseline.--(A) For fiscal year 1994 or 1995, the applicable baseline for defense outlays shall be the total estimated discretionary outlays for the fiscal year multiplied by the ratio of the final defense outlay cap for fiscal year 1993 divided by the final total discretionary cap for fiscal year 1993.
Fiscal year 1996 and thereafter.--Beginning with fiscal year 1996 and each fiscal year thereafter, the applicable defense outlay baseline shall be the Congressional Budget Office baseline inflator multiplied by the defense outlay level for the previous fiscal year.
Allocation of Adjustments.--The adjustments in the discretionary spending limits for outlays described in subsections (a) and (b) shall be allocated in the following manner: ``(1) Deficit reduction.--The maximum deficit amount calculated pursuant to section 253 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 for any of fiscal years 1993 through 1995 shall be reduced by an amount equal to the change in the estimated deficit resulting from such reduced outlays and the reduction in revenue described in paragraph (2).
Personal exemption.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall increase the personal exemption amount for individuals as determined under section 151 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 by an amount estimated to reduce receipts in the calendar year beginning during such fiscal year by an amount equal to one-half of the difference (peace dividend) described in subsections (a) or (b) with respect to defense outlays for that fiscal year.
Permitting of Peace Dividend Investment.--Legislation affecting receipts as a result of the requirements of section (c)(2) shall not be considered legislation that increases the deficit for purposes of section 252 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
Point of Order.-- ``(1) It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any bill, resolution, amendment, or conference report that would reduce defense spending below the spending limit for the defense category as defined in section 250(c)(4) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 if such bill, resolution, amendment, or conference report does not allocate the total amount of reduced new budget authority or outlays between deficit reduction and increases in the personal income tax exemption as provided in this section.
For purposes of this subsection, the levels of defense spending for a fiscal year shall be determined on the basis of estimates made by the Committee on the Budget.''.
Point of Order.--The last sentence of section 904(d) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by the Budget Enforcement Act of 1990) is amended by striking ``and 606(c)'' and inserting ``606(c), and 606A''.