This Act may be cited as the ``Broadband Deployment Act of 2001''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Internet has been the single greatest contributor to the unprecedented economic expansion experienced by the United States over the last 8 years.
Increasing the speed that Americans can access the Internet is necessary to ensure the continued expansion.
Today, most residential Internet users, especially those located in low income areas, are extremely limited in the type of information they can send and receive over the Internet because their means of access is limited to ``narrowband'' communications media, typically conventional phone lines at a maximum speed of 56,000 bits per second.
Similarly, small businesses in low income areas are also deprived of full information access because of their dependence on narrowband facilities.
By contrast, many residential users located in higher income urban and suburban areas and urban business users can access the Internet from a variety of carriers at speeds in excess of 1,500,000 bits per second, giving them a choice among carriers and high-speed access to a wide array of audio and data applications.
The result is a growing disparity in the speed of access to the Internet and the opportunities it creates between subscribers located in low income areas and subscribers located in higher income urban and suburban areas.
The disparity in current broadband access to the Internet is proving detrimental to the on-going economic expansion.
It is, therefore, appropriate for Congress to take action to narrow the current disparity in the level of broadband access to the Internet.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to accelerate deployment of broadband access to the Internet for users located in certain low income areas.
In General.--Subpart E of part IV of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rules for computing investment credit) is amended by inserting after section 48 the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 46, the broadband credit for any taxable year is equal to 10 percent of the qualified expenditures incurred with respect to qualified equipment offering broadband services to underserved subscribers and taken into account with respect to such taxable year.
When Expenditures Taken Into Account.--For purposes of this section qualified expenditures with respect to qualified equipment shall be taken into account with respect to the first taxable year in which broadband services are offered by the taxpayer through such equipment to subscribers.
Special Allocation Rules.--For purposes of determining the broadband credit under subsection (a), if the qualified equipment is capable of serving both underserved subscribers and other subscribers, the qualified expenditures shall be multiplied by a fraction-- ``(1) the numerator of which is the sum of the total potential subscriber populations within the underserved areas which the equipment is capable of serving, and ``(2) the denominator of which is the total potential subscriber population of the area which the equipment is capable of serving.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Antenna.--The term `antenna' means any device used to transmit or receive signals through the electromagnetic spectrum, including satellite equipment.
Broadband service.--The term `broadband service' means the transmission of signals at a rate of at least 1,500,000 bits per second to the subscriber and at least 200,000 bits per second from the subscriber.
Cable operator.--The term `cable operator' has the meaning given such term by section 602(5) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 522(5)).
Commercial mobile service carrier.--The term `commercial mobile service carrier' means any person authorized to provide commercial mobile radio service as defined in section 20.3 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations.
Nonresidential subscriber.--The term `nonresidential subscriber' means a person or entity who purchases broadband services which are delivered to the permanent place of business of such person or entity.
Open video system operator.--The term `open video system operator' means any person authorized to provide service under section 653 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 573).
Other wireless carrier.--The term `other wireless carrier' means any person (other than a telecommunications carrier, commercial mobile service carrier, cable operator, open video system operator, or satellite carrier) providing broadband service to subscribers through the radio transmission of energy.
Packet switching.--The term `packet switching' means controlling or routing the path of a digitized transmission signal which is assembled into packets or cells.
Qualified equipment.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified equipment' means equipment capable of providing broadband services at any time to each subscriber who is utilizing such services.
Only certain investment taken into account.-- Except as provided in subparagraph (C), equipment shall be taken into account under subparagraph (A) only to the extent it-- ``(i) extends from the last point of switching to the outside of the unit, building, dwelling, or office owned or leased by a subscriber in the case of a telecommunications carrier, ``(ii) extends from the customer side of the mobile telephone switching office to a transmission/receive antenna (including such antenna) on the outside of the unit, building, dwelling, or office owned or leased by a subscriber in the case of a commercial mobile service carrier, ``(iii) extends from the customer side of the headend to the outside of the unit, building, dwelling, or office owned or leased by a subscriber in the case of a cable operator or open video system operator, or ``(iv) extends from a transmission/receive antenna (including such antenna) which transmits and receives signals to or from multiple subscribers to a transmission/receive antenna (including such antenna) on the outside of the unit, building, dwelling, or office owned or leased by a subscriber in the case of a satellite carrier or other wireless carrier, unless such other wireless carrier is also a telecommunications carrier.
Packet switching equipment.--Packet switching equipment, regardless of location, shall be taken into account under subparagraph (A) only if it is deployed in connection with equipment described in subparagraph (B) and it is uniquely designed to perform the function of packet switching for broadband services, but only if such packet switching is the last in a series of such functions performed in the transmission of a signal to a subscriber or the first in a series of such functions performed in the transmission of a signal from a subscriber.
Qualified expenditure.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified expenditure' means any amount chargeable to capital account with respect to the purchase and installation of qualified equipment (including any upgrades thereto) for which depreciation is allowable under section 168.
Certain satellite expenditures excluded.-- Such term shall not include any expenditure with respect to the launching of any satellite equipment.
Residential subscriber.--The term `residential subscriber' means an individual who purchases broadband services which are delivered to such individual's dwelling.
Satellite carrier.--The term `satellite carrier' means any person using the facilities of a satellite or satellite service licensed by the Federal Communications Commission and operating in the Fixed-Satellite Service under part 25 of title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations or the Direct Broadcast Satellite Service under part 100 of title 47 of such Code to establish and operate a channel of communications for point-to-multipoint distribution of signals, and owning or leasing a capacity or service on a satellite in order to provide such point-to-multipoint distribution.
Subscriber.--The term `subscriber' means a person who purchases broadband services.
Telecommunications carrier.--The term `telecommunications carrier' has the meaning given such term by section 3(44) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153 (44)), and-- ``(A) includes all members of an affiliated group of which a telecommunications carrier is a member, but ``(B) does not include a commercial mobile service carrier.
Total potential subscriber population.--The term `total potential subscriber population' means, with respect to any area and based on the most recent census data, the total number of potential residential subscribers residing in dwellings located in such area and potential nonresidential subscribers maintaining permanent places of business located in such area.
Underserved subscriber.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `underserved subscriber' means a residential subscriber residing in a dwelling located in an underserved area or nonresidential subscriber maintaining a permanent place of business located in an underserved area.
Underserved area.--The term `underserved area' means any census tract-- ``(i) the poverty level of which is at least 30 percent (based on the most recent census data), ``(ii) the median family income of which does not exceed-- ``(I) in the case of a census tract located in a metropolitan statistical area, 70 percent of the greater of the metropolitan area median family income or the statewide median family income, and ``(II) in the case of a census tract located in a nonmetropolitan statistical area, 70 percent of the nonmetropolitan statewide median family income, or ``(iii) which is located in an empowerment zone and enterprise community designated under section 1391 or a renewal community designated under section 1400E.
Designation of Census Tracts.--The Secretary shall, not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this section, designate and publish those census tracts meeting the criteria described in paragraph (16)(B) of subsection (d), and such tracts shall remain so designated for the period ending with the termination date described in subsection (f).
Termination.--This section shall not apply to expenditures incurred after December 31, 2006.''
Credit To Be Part of Investment Credit.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the amount of investment credit) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) the broadband credit.''.
Special Rule for Mutual or Cooperative Telephone Companies.-- Section 501(c)(12)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to list of exempt organizations) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (iii), (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (iv) and inserting ``, or'', and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(v) from sources not described in subparagraph (A), but only to the extent such income does not in any year exceed an amount equal to the credit for qualified expenditures which would be determined under section 48A for such year if the mutual or cooperative telephone company was not exempt from taxation.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 48 the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures incurred after December 31, 2001.
Special rule.--The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply to amounts received after December 31, 2001.
No Federal or State agency or instrumentality shall adopt regulations or ratemaking procedures that would have the effect of confiscating any credit or portion thereof allowed under section 48A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by section 3) or otherwise subverting the purpose of this Act.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that in order to maintain competitive neutrality, the credit allowed under section 48A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by section 3) should be administered in such a manner so as to ensure that each class of carrier receives the same level of financial incentive to deploy broadband services.
Study and Report.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, within 180 days after the effective date of section 3, study the impact of the credit allowed under section 48A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by section 3) on the relative competitiveness of potential classes of carriers of broadband services, and shall report to Congress the findings of such study, together with any legislative or regulatory proposals determined to be necessary to ensure that the purposes of such credit can be furthered without impacting competitive neutrality among such classes of carriers.