This Act may be cited as the ``Inflation Tax Relief Act of 1993''.
INDEXING OF CERTAIN ASSETS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING GAIN OR LOSS.
In General.--Part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis rules of general application) is amended by inserting after section 1021 the following new section: ``SEC.
INDEXING OF CERTAIN ASSETS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING GAIN OR LOSS.
General Rule.-- ``(1) Indexed basis substituted for adjusted basis.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if an indexed asset which has been held for more than 1 year is sold or otherwise disposed of, for purposes of this title the indexed basis of the asset shall be substituted for its adjusted basis.
Exception for depreciation, etc.--The deduction for depreciation, depletion, and amortization shall be determined without regard to the application of paragraph (1) to the taxpayer or any other person.
Indexed Asset.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `indexed asset' means-- ``(A) stock in a corporation, and ``(B) tangible property (or any interest therein), which is a capital asset or property used in the trade or business (as defined in section 1231(b)).
Certain property excluded.--For purposes of this section, the term `indexed asset' does not include-- ``(A) Creditor's interest.--Any interest in property which is in the nature of a creditor's interest.
Options.--Any option or other right to acquire an interest in property.
Net lease property.--In the case of a lessor, net lease property (within the meaning of subsection (h)(1)).
Certain preferred stock.--Stock which is fixed and preferred as to dividends and does not participate in corporate growth to any significant extent.
Stock in foreign corporations.--Stock in a foreign corporation.
Exception for stock in foreign corporation which is regularly traded on national or regional exchange.--Paragraph (2)(E) shall not apply to stock in a foreign corporation the stock of which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, or any domestic regional exchange for which quotations are published on a regular basis other than-- ``(A) stock of a foreign investment company (within the meaning of section 1246(b)), and ``(B) stock in a foreign corporation held by a United States person who meets the requirements of section 1248(a)(2).
Indexed Basis.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Indexed basis.--The indexed basis for any asset is-- ``(A) the adjusted basis of the asset, multiplied by ``(B) the applicable inflation ratio.
Applicable inflation ratio.--The applicable inflation ratio for any asset is the percentage arrived at by dividing-- ``(A) the gross national product deflator the calendar quarter in which the disposition takes place, by ``(B) the gross national product deflator for the calendar quarter in which the asset was acquired by the taxpayer (or, if later, the calendar quarter ending December 31, 1991).
The applicable inflation ratio shall not be taken into account unless it is greater than 1.
The applicable inflation ratio for any asset shall be rounded to the nearest one-tenth of 1 percent.
Gross national product deflator.--The gross national product deflator for any calendar quarter is the implicit price deflator for the gross national product for such quarter (as shown in the first revision thereof).
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Treatment as separate asset.--In the case of any asset, the following shall be treated as a separate asset: ``(A) a substantial improvement to property, ``(B) in the case of stock of a corporation, a substantial contribution to capital, and ``(C) any other portion of an asset to the extent that separate treatment of such portion is appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.
Assets which are not indexed assets throughout holding period.-- ``(A) In general.--The applicable inflation ratio shall be appropriately reduced for calendar months at any time during which the asset was not an indexed asset.
Certain short sales.--For purposes of applying subparagraph (A), an asset shall be treated as not an indexed asset for any short sale period during which the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse sells short property substantially identical to the asset.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the short sale period begins on the day after the substantially identical property is sold and ends on the closing date for the sale.
Treatment of certain distributions.--A distribution with respect to stock in a corporation which is not a dividend shall be treated as a disposition.
Section cannot increase ordinary loss.--To the extent that (but for this paragraph) this section would create or increase a net ordinary loss to which section 1231(a)(2) applies or an ordinary loss to which any other provision of this title applies, such provision shall not apply.
The taxpayer shall be treated as having a long-term capital loss in an amount equal to the amount of the ordinary loss to which the preceding sentence applies.
Acquisition date where there has been prior application of subsection (a)(1) with respect to the taxpayer.--If there has been a prior application of subsection (a)(1) to an asset while such asset was held by the taxpayer, the date of acquisition of such asset by the taxpayer shall be treated as not earlier than the date of the most recent such prior application.
Collapsible corporations.--The application of section 341(a) (relating to collapsible corporations) shall be determined without regard to this section.
Certain Conduit Entities.-- ``(1) Regulated investment companies; real estate investment trusts; common trust funds.-- ``(A) In general.--Stock in a qualified investment entity shall be an indexed asset for any calendar month in the same ratio as the fair market value of the assets held by such entity at the close of such month which are indexed assets bears to the fair market value of all assets of such entity at the close of such month.
Ratio of 90 percent or more.--If the ratio for any calendar month determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 90 percent or more, such ratio for such month shall be 100 percent.
Ratio of 10 percent or less.--If the ratio for any calendar month determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 10 percent or less, such ratio for such month shall be zero.
Valuation of assets in case of real estate investment trusts.--Nothing in this paragraph shall require a real estate investment trust to value its assets more frequently than once each 36 months (except where such trust ceases to exist).
The ratio under subparagraph (A) for any calendar month for which there is no valuation shall be the trustee's good faith judgment as to such valuation.
Qualified investment entity.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified investment entity' means-- ``(i) a regulated investment company (within the meaning of section 851), ``(ii) a real estate investment trust (within the meaning of section 856), and ``(iii) a common trust fund (within the meaning of section 584).
Partnerships.--In the case of a partnership, the adjustment made under subsection (a) at the partnership level shall be passed through to the partners.
Dispositions Between Related Persons.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall not apply to any sale or other disposition of property between related persons except to the extent that the basis of such property in the hands of the transferee is a substituted basis.
Related persons defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `related persons' means-- ``(A) persons bearing a relationship set forth in section 267(b), and ``(B) persons treated as single employer under subsection (b) or (c) of section 414.
Transfers To Increase Indexing Adjustment.--If any person transfers cash, debt, or any other property to another person and the principal purpose of such transfer is to secure or increase an adjustment under subsection (a), the Secretary may disallow part or all of such adjustment or increase.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Net lease property defined.--The term `net lease property' means leased real property where-- ``(A) the term of the lease (taking into account options to renew) was 50 percent or more of the useful life of the property, and ``(B) for the period of the lease, the sum of the deductions with respect to such property which are allowable to the lessor solely by reason of section 162 (other than rents and reimbursed amounts with respect to such property) is 15 percent or less of the rental income produced by such property.
Stock includes interest in common trust fund.--The term `stock in a corporation' includes any interest in a common trust fund (as defined in section 584(a)).
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of such chapter 1 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1021 the following new item: ``Sec.
Indexing of certain assets for purposes of determining gain or loss.''
Adjustment To Apply for Purposes of Determining Earnings and Profits.--Subsection (f) of section 312 (relating to effect on earnings and profits of gain or loss and of receipt of tax-free distributions) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) Effect on earnings and profits of indexed basis.-- For substitution of indexed basis for adjusted basis in the case of the disposition of certain assets after December 31, 1991 see section 1022(a)(1).''
The amendments made by section 2 shall apply to dispositions after December 31, 1993, in taxable years ending after such date.