This Act may be cited as the ``YMCA Healthy Teen Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Adolescence is an ideal time to promote good physical health.
Positive and negative behaviors in adolescence tend to carry over into adulthood.
Unfortunately, many American teenagers exhibit behaviors that compromise their present and future health.
Many adolescents are not very active and many do not have a healthy diet.
Insufficient physical activity and poor nutrition play roles in obesity, coronary heart disease, stroke, hypertension, type 2 diabetes and some cancers.
Other health risk factors for teens include tobacco use, drug and alcohol use, mental health problems, and dangerous behaviors that lead to injury and violence.
It is clear that the health of our youth is in danger.
The YMCA movement--in its history, strengths and commitments--is in a unique position to tackle this public health problem.
Research has shown that YMCA programs have a powerful influence on adolescent behavior, both protecting young people from many different problem behaviors and promoting positive attitudes and behaviors.
Recognizing the unique obstacles faced by teenagers, the YMCA has launched the Teen Action Agenda, a nationwide campaign to dramatically expand programs that serve teens.
In more than 1,900 YMCAs across the United States in cities large and small, in neighborhoods rich and poor, teen groups meet regularly and engage one another in safe, wholesome, educational, recreational and creative activities.
YMCAs serve people of all faiths, races, abilities, ages, and incomes.
Approximately 400 YMCAs partner with juvenile courts, 300 partner with public housing developments, 1,550 partner with elementary schools, and 1,033 partner with high schools.
The YMCA is especially committed to reaching teens that are most at-risk for exhibiting health-compromising behaviors.
In this Act: (1) Local ymca.--The term ``local YMCA'' means one of the approximately 2,400 locally incorporated and governed YMCAs in the United States.
Teen and teenager.--The terms ``teen'' and ``teenager'' mean any individual between the ages of 11 and 19.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Ymca of the usa.--The term ``YMCA of the USA'' means the private, nonprofit, national membership and service organization of approximately 2,400 local YMCAs.
GRANTS TO THE YMCA OF THE USA TO PROMOTE HEALTHY LIVING AMONG TEENS.
Purposes.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary shall award a grant to the YMCA of the USA for the implementation of programs to promote healthy living among teenage youth.
Subgrants.--From amounts provided under a grant awarded under subsection (a), the YMCA of the USA shall award subgrants to a local YMCA, or a consortium of local YMCAs, to be used for expenditures associated with programs carried out under this Act, including the hiring of staff and other personnel, procurement of goods, services and equipment, or such other purposes as are approved by the Secretary.
In General.-- (1) Programs for at-risk teens.--Amounts provided under a grant under this Act shall be used by the YMCA of the USA to provide funding to carry out YMCA programs that have a primary purpose of serving teenage youth at-risk for exhibiting health- compromising behaviors.
Program requirements.-- (A) Requirement.--Each school- or community-based program for which assistance is provided under this Act shall include-- (i) physical activity programs among teenage youth; and (ii) nutrition education programs among teenage youth.
Other permissible uses.--A school- or community-based program for which assistance is provided under this Act may also include strategies to reduce other health risks among teenage youth, such as alcohol use, tobacco use, drug use, mental health problems, and dangerous behaviors that lead to injury and violence.
Funding for Miscellaneous Activities.--From amounts provided under a grant under this Act for each fiscal year, the YMCA of the USA shall use-- (1) not less than 2 percent of such amounts for research and evaluation of subgrants awarded under this Act; (2) not less than 5 percent of such amounts for targeted health and wellness program development initiatives focused on issues such as-- (A) youth and teens; (B) minority populations; (C) low-income populations; and (D) school, hospital and community collaborations; and (3) not more than 6 percent of such amounts for the management and administration of the subgrants awarded under this Act.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a subgrant under this Act, a local YMCA or consortium of YMCAs shall submit an application to the YMCA of the USA that shall include-- (1) a request for a subgrant to be used for the purposes of this Act; (2) a description of the population to be served by the subgrant and information demonstrating that this population is at-risk for exhibiting unhealthy living; (3) a description of the program to be expanded or established under the subgrant; (4) a description of the manner in which the applicant shall coordinate with appropriate State and local authorities, such as State and local school departments, State departments of health, governors councils for physical activity and good nutrition, and State and local parks and recreation departments; (5) a description of the manner in which the applicant will evaluate the effectiveness of the program carried out under the subgrant; (6) information demonstrating that there are non-Federal contributions (which may be in the form of an in-kind contribution of goods or services) available to cover at least 50 percent of the total cost of the project to be funded under the subgrant; and (7) any additional statistical or financial information that the YMCA of the USA may reasonably require.
Consideration of Subgrants.--In awarding subgrants under this Act, the YMCA of the USA shall consider-- (1) the ability of the applicant to provide the intended services; (2) the history and establishment of the applicant in providing teen activities; and (3) efforts to achieve an equitable geographic distribution of subgrant awards.
For each fiscal year for which a grant is awarded under this Act, the YMCA of the USA shall submit to the Secretary a report that details the progress of programs funded under this Act.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Continued Availability.--Amounts appropriated to carry out this Act shall remain available until expended.