This Act may be cited as the ``Teleworking Advancement Act''.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by inserting after section 30A the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for any taxable year an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) the employer telework tax credit, plus ``(2) the telework equipment tax credit.
Employer Telework Tax Credit; Telework Equipment Tax Credit.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Employer telework tax credit.--Except as provided for in subsection (c)(1), the employer telework tax credit for any taxable year is equal to $500 for each employee who participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement during the taxable year.
Telework equipment tax credit.--Except as provided for in subsection (c)(2), the telework equipment tax credit for any taxable year is equal to 10 percent of qualified telework expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year by either the employer on behalf of the employee, or directly by the employee, pursuant to an employer sponsored telework arrangement.
Special Rule for Disabled Employees and Employees of Small Businesses.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) For each employee who is covered under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 1201), or for each employee of a small business, the employer telework tax credit for any taxable year is equal to $1,000 for each employee who participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement during the taxable year.
For each employee who is covered under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 1201), or for each employee of a small business, the telework equipment tax credit for any taxable year is equal to 20 percent of qualified telework expenses paid or incurred during the taxable year by either the employer on behalf of the employee, or directly by the employee, pursuant to an employer sponsored telework arrangement.
Credit Adjustments and Limitations.-- ``(1) Credit adjustments.--In computing the credit allowed under subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1) for any taxable year, the following adjustments shall apply: ``(A) In the case of an employee who participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement for less than the full taxable year, the credit amount identified in subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1), whichever is applicable, shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the total number of months in the taxable year that the employee participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement and the denominator of which is 12.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, an employee is considered to be participating in an employer sponsored telework arrangement for a month if the employee teleworks for at least one full day of such month.
In the case of an employee who participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement but does not telework every day of the taxable year that the employee is required by his or her employer to work, the credit amount identified in subsection (b)(1) or (c)(1), whichever is applicable, shall be multiplied by a fraction, the numerator of which is the total number of full days in the taxable year that the employee teleworks and the denominator of which is the total number of days in the taxable year that the employee is required by his or her employer to work.
Telework equipment credit limitations.-- ``(A) In computing the credit allowed under subsection (b)(2) for any taxable year, the following limitations shall apply: ``(i) The maximum credit claimed by any employer with respect to qualified telework expenses paid or incurred on behalf of an employee shall not exceed $500 for each employee who participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement.
The maximum credit claimed by any employee with respect to qualified telework expenses paid or incurred directly by the employee pursuant to an employer sponsored telework arrangement shall not exceed $500.
In computing the credit allowed under subsection (c)(2) for any taxable year with respect to employees who are covered under the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 1201), or for each employee of a small business, the following limitations shall apply: ``(i) The maximum credit claimed by any employer with respect to qualified telework expenses paid or incurred on behalf of an employee shall not exceed $1,000 for each employee who participates in an employer sponsored telework arrangement.
The maximum credit claimed by any employee with respect to qualified telework expenses paid or incurred directly by the employee pursuant to an employer sponsored telework arrangement shall not exceed $1,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Employer sponsored telework arrangement.--The term `employer sponsored telework arrangement' means an arrangement established by an employer that enables employees of the employer to telework for a minimum of 25 full days per taxable year.
Such an arrangement shall be supported by a written agreement between the employer and each teleworking employee that describes the terms of the employer sponsored telework arrangement.
Qualified telework expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified telework expenses' shall include expenses paid or incurred for computers, computer-related hardware and software, modems, data processing equipment, telecommunications equipment, and access to Internet or broadband technologies, including applicable taxes and other expenses for the delivery, installation, or maintenance of such equipment.
Only certain expenses taken into account.-- Expenses shall be taken into account under subparagraph (A) only to the extent they are authorized by the employer pursuant to an employer sponsored telework arrangement and are necessary to enable the employee to telework.
Small business.--The term `small business' means a business with an average of 100 or fewer employees during the taxable year.
Telework.--An employee shall be treated as engaged in telework if-- ``(A) the employee's normal and regular work functions are performed at a fixed location provided by the employer, ``(B)(i) the employee, under an employer sponsored telework arrangement, performs such functions at the employee's residence or at a location specifically designed to allow employees to perform such functions closer to their residence, and ``(ii) the performance of such functions at such residence or location eliminates or substantially reduces the physical commute of the employee to the fixed location described in subparagraph (A), and ``(C) the employee transmits by electronic or other communications medium the employee's work product from such residence or location to the fixed location where such functions would otherwise have been performed.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Limitation based on amount of tax.-- ``(A) Liability for tax.--The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) the regular tax for the taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and the preceding sections of this subpart, over ``(ii) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Carryforward of unused credit.--If the amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the limitation under paragraph (1)(A) for the taxable year, the excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
Basis reduction.--The basis of any property for which a credit is allowable under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit (determined without regard to paragraph (1)).
Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases to be property eligible for such credit.
Property used outside united states, etc., not qualified.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any property referred to in section 50(b) or with respect to the portion of the cost of any property taken into account under section 179.
Election not to take credits.--No credits shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense if the taxpayer elects to not have this section apply with respect to such expense.
Denial of double benefit.--No deduction or credit (other than under this section) shall be allowed under this chapter with respect to any expense which is taken into account in determining the credit under this section.
Documentation.--Employers and employees are responsible for maintaining adequate documentation to support any credits claimed under this section.''
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to general rule for adjustments to basis) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(29) in the case of property with respect to which a credit was allowed under section 30B, to the extent provided in section 30B(f)(2).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 30A the following new item: ``Sec.
Regulatory Matters.-- (1) Prohibition.--No Federal or State agency or instrumentality shall adopt regulations or ratemaking procedures that would have the effect of confiscating any credit or portion thereof allowed under sections 30B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this Act) or otherwise subverting the purpose of this Act.
Treasury regulatory authority.--It is the intent of Congress in providing the telework tax credit under section 30B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this Act) to promote broad participation in employer sponsored telework arrangements by providing incentives to both employers and employees.
Accordingly, the Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of section 30B of such Code, including regulations describing the information, records, and data that employers and employees are required to provide the Secretary to substantiate compliance with the requirements of this section and section 30B of such Code.
Until the Secretary prescribes such regulations, employers and employees may base such determinations on any reasonable method that is consistent with the purposes of section 30B of such Code.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
SMALL BUSINESS TELECOMMUTING PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--In accordance with this section, the Administrator shall conduct, in not more than 5 of the Small Business Administration's regions, a pilot program to raise awareness about telecommuting among small business employers and to encourage such employers to offer telecommuting options to employees.
Special Outreach to Individuals With Disabilities.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Administrator shall make special efforts to do outreach to-- (1) businesses owned by or employing individuals with disabilities, and disabled American veterans in particular; (2) Federal, State, and local agencies having knowledge and expertise in assisting individuals with disabilities or disabled American veterans; and (3) any group or organization, the primary purpose of which is to aid individuals with disabilities or disabled American veterans.
Permissible Activities.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Administrator may only-- (1) produce educational materials and conduct presentations designed to raise awareness in the small business community of the benefits and the ease of telecommuting; (2) conduct outreach-- (A) to small business concerns that are considering offering telecommuting options; and (B) as provided in subsection (b); and (3) acquire telecommuting technologies and equipment to be used for demonstration purposes.
Selection of Regions.--In determining which regions will participate in the pilot program, the Administrator shall give priority consideration to regions in which Federal agencies and private-sector employers have demonstrated a strong regional commitment to telecommuting.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the first date on which funds are appropriated to carry out this section, the Administrator shall transmit to the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Small Business of the Senate a report containing the results of an evaluation of the pilot program and any recommendations as to whether the pilot program, with or without modification, should be extended to include the participation of all Small Business Administration regions.
Definitions.--In this section-- (1) the term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Small Business Administration; (2) the term ``disability'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12102); (3) the term ``pilot program'' means the program established under this section; and (4) the term ``telecommuting'' means the use of telecommunications to perform work functions under circumstances which reduce or eliminate the need to commute.
Termination.--The pilot program shall terminate 2 years after the first date on which funds are appropriated to carry out this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Small Business Administration $5,000,000 to carry out this section.