This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Honors Scholarship Act of 1996''.
PRESIDENTIAL HONORS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
Part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after subpart 6 the following new subpart: ``Subpart 7--Presidential Honors Scholarship Program ``SEC.
PRESIDENTIAL HONORS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this subpart to establish a Presidential Honors Scholarship Program to encourage high academic achievement in public and private secondary schools and to recognize and reward the achievement of their outstanding graduates.
Program Authority.--The Secretary is authorized, in accordance with this subpart, to carry out a program of recognizing high academic achievement in public and private secondary schools by awarding scholarships to all students in the top 5 percent of their graduating class, and thereby encouraging students to excel in their secondary studies and pursue postsecondary education.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $130,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years, to carry out the purposes of this subpart.
Funds shall remain available for obligation until the end of the fourth fiscal year immediately succeeding the fiscal year for which such funds were appropriated.
Terms of Scholarships.-- ``(1) Amount of scholarship.--(A) The amount of a scholarship awarded under this subpart shall be $1,000.
Notwithstanding subparagraph (A), if funds available in a fiscal year are insufficient to fully fund all scholarships under this subpart, the amount paid to each student shall be reduced proportionately.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a scholarship awarded under this part-- ``(i) shall not be counted in determining the student's need for grant, loan, or work assistance under this title; and ``(ii) may, alone or in combination with other grant, loan, or work assistance received under this title, exceed the student's cost of attendance, as defined in section 472.
Period of scholarships.--A student who satisfies the requirements of subsection (f) may receive a scholarship under this subpart for a period of not more than 1 academic year of postsecondary education or training on at least a half-time basis, as determined by the institution.
Scholarship proceeds.-- ``(A) Use and availability.--Scholarship proceeds shall be used for the scholarship recipient's first year of postsecondary education or training, and shall remain available for such use for not more than 3 academic years following his or her graduation from secondary school.
Disbursal.--Scholarship proceeds shall be disbursed on behalf of students who receive scholarships under this subpart to the institutions of higher education at which the students are enrolled.
No scholarship proceeds shall be disbursed on behalf of a student until the student is enrolled at an institution of higher education on at least a half-time basis, as determined by such institution.
Use at any institution permitted.--A scholarship awarded under this subpart may be used to attend any institution of higher education, as defined in section 481.
Selection of Scholars.-- ``(1) In general.--Scholarships shall be awarded to all students who rank in the top 5 percent of the graduating class of each secondary school that participates in the program under this subpart.
Ranking procedures shall be established by each such school, but may not include any nonacademic or extracurricular factors.
Annual announcement of scholarships.--Each participating school shall announce the availability of scholarships under this subpart, and its selection procedures, to all students in the school, and their parents, at the beginning of each academic year.
Records.--Each participating school shall maintain records of its selection procedures, the names of the students selected, and such other related information as the Secretary may require.
Student Eligibility.--In order to receive a scholarship under this subpart, a student must-- ``(1) rank in the top 5 percent of the graduating class at the secondary school that he or she attends, as established by such school in accordance with subsection (e); and ``(2) meet the requirements of section 484.
Recognition of Scholarship Receipt.-- ``(1) Designation of scholarship recipients.--Students awarded scholarships under this subpart shall be known as `Presidential Honors Scholars'.
Certificates; ceremonies.--The Secretary shall provide each student awarded a scholarship under this subpart a certificate from the President that indicates that the recipient is a Presidential Honors Scholar.
The certificates shall be provided through the secondary schools that selected such students.
Such schools may present these certificates in appropriate ceremonies.
Evaluation.--The Secretary shall, from time to time, conduct an evaluation of the program authorized by this subpart.
Secretarial Authority.--In order to carry out the purposes of this subpart, the Secretary may, from time to time, establish policies, procedures, and requirements, set deadlines, and require information.