This Act may be cited as the ``Uterine Fibroid Research and Education Act of 2003''.
Congress finds as follows: (1) The development of uterine fibroids is a common and significant health problem, affecting women of all ages, racial backgrounds, and socioeconomic levels.
It has been estimated that between 20 and 30 percent of women of reproductive age have uterine fibroids, though not all have been diagnosed.
Studies indicate the prevalence could be much higher.
Symptomatic uterine fibroids can cause heavy bleeding, pain, and reproductive problems, including infertility.
There is no known cause of uterine fibroids.
Uterine fibroids are the most common indication for hysterectomy, accounting for approximately one-third of hysterectomies, or 200,000 procedures annually.
African American women are 2 to 3 times more likely to develop uterine fibroids than women of other racial groups.
The estimated annual charges for inpatient care for uterine fibroids totaled more than $2,000,000,000 in 1997.
The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality found a ``remarkable lack of high quality evidence supporting the effectiveness of most interventions for symptomatic fibroids''.
RESEARCH WITH RESPECT TO UTERINE FIBROIDS.
In General.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health (in this section referred to as the ``Director of NIH'') shall expand, intensify, and coordinate programs for the conduct and support of research with respect to uterine fibroids.
Administration.-- (1) In general.--The Director of NIH shall carry out this section through the appropriate institutes, offices, and centers, including the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, the Office of Research on Women's Health, the National Center on Minority Health and Health Disparities, and any other agencies that the Director of NIH determines to be appropriate.
Coordination of activities.--The Office of Research on Women's Health shall coordinate activities under paragraph (1) among the institutes, offices, and centers of the National Institutes of Health.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
INFORMATION AND EDUCATION WITH RESPECT TO UTERINE FIBROIDS.
Uterine Fibroids Public Education Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall develop and disseminate to the public information regarding uterine fibroids, including information on-- (A) the incidence and prevalence of uterine fibroids; (B) the elevated risk for minority women; and (C) the availability, as medically appropriate, of a range of treatment options for symptomatic uterine fibroids.
Dissemination.--The Secretary may disseminate information under paragraph (1) directly, or through arrangements with nonprofit organizations, consumer groups, institutions of higher education (as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001)), Federal, State, or local agencies, or the media.
Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Uterine Fibroids Information Program for Health Care Providers.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall develop and disseminate to health care providers information on uterine fibroids, including information on the elevated risk for minority women and the range of available options for the treatment of symptomatic uterine fibroids.
Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``minority'', with respect to women, means women who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups within the meaning of section 1707 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300u-6).