This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Closure and Relocation of the Lorton Correctional Complex Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Closure and Relocation of the Lorton Correctional Complex (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall carry out the following: (1) Comprehensive plan for closing the lorton correctional complex by 2010.--Because of the serious operational and safety problems at the Lorton Correctional Complex which adversely affect the inmates of the complex, employees of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections, and residents of the District of Columbia and Fairfax County, Virginia, the Commission shall develop a comprehensive plan for closing the Lorton Correctional Complex by the year 2010 and in the plan shall identify and recommend options for the use of the land on which the complex is located.
Plan for new prison facilities located within the district of columbia.--The Commission shall develop a comprehensive plan for the establishment of new model prison facilities within the District of Columbia to replace the Lorton Correctional Complex when it is closed in accordance with the plan developed under paragraph (1).
The plan shall identify and recommend-- (A) appropriate sites for the new prison facilities, (B) strategies for financing, including Federal funding for, the new facilities, (C) plans for expeditiously phasing in the operations of the new facilities, and (D) plans for ensuring that the new facilities will be models in education, vocational training, and rehabilitation of the inmates of the facilities.
Steps for improving operations at the lorton correctional complex.--The Commission, using existing knowledge, resources and experience, shall identify and recommend appropriate strategies for improving the effectiveness and safety of operations at the Lorton Correctional Complex before it is closed under the plan developed under paragraph (1) and the new facilities are established under the plan developed under paragraph (2).
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 21 members appointed as follows: (1) The Fairfax County Board of Supervisors shall appoint 9 members.
The Mayor of the District of Columbia shall appoint 9 members.
The President shall appoint 3 members.
Requirements for Certain Members.-- (1) Members appointed by the fairfax county board of supervisors.--Of the members of the Commission appointed under subsection (a)(1)-- (A) at least one member shall be an individual who is a member of a local civic association in northern Virginia, (B) at least one member shall be an employee of the Virginia Department of Corrections who is knowledgeable about the establishment of new prison facilities, (C) at least one member shall be a member of the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors, (D) at least one member shall be a member of a chamber of commerce in northern Virginia, (E) at least one member shall be an employee of the Fairfax County Sheriff's Department, and (F) at least one member shall be an employee of the Fairfax County Police Department.
Members appointed by the mayor of the district of columbia.--Of the members of the Commission appointed under subsection (a)(2)-- (A) at least one member shall be a member of a local civic association in the District of Columbia, (B) at least one member shall be an employee of the District of Columbia Department of Corrections who is knowledgeable about the establishment of new prison facilities, (C) at least one member shall be either the Mayor of the District of Columbia or a member of the District of Columbia City Council, (D) at least one member shall be a member of a chamber of commerce in the District of Columbia or the Washington Board of Trade, and (E) at least 2 members shall be employees of the District of Columbia Metropolitan Police Department.
Members appointed by the president.--Of the members of the Commission appointed under subsection (a)(3)-- (A) one member shall be the Director of the Bureau of Prisons, and (B) one member shall be the Director of the National Institute of Corrections.
Continuation of Membership.-- (1) General rule.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), if a member was appointed to the Commission because the member was an officer or employee of any government or if member is appointed to the Commission and later becomes an officer or employee of a government, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 30-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be such an officer or employee or becomes such an officer or employee, as the case may be.
Exception.--Service as a member of the Commission shall not be discontinued because of paragraph (1) if an individual has served as a member of the Commission for not less than 3 months.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Quorum.--11 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by a majority of the members of the Commission.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, have a Director who shall be appointed by the Commission and paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule.
Appointment and Pay of Staff.--The Commission may appoint personnel as it considers appropriate without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointment to the competitive service.
Such personnel shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under section 3.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out section 3.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission to the extent otherwise permitted by law.
Gifts and Donations.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Interim Reports.--The Commission shall submit to the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors, the Mayor of the District of Columbia, and appropriate Committees of Congress interim reports.
Such reports shall be submitted at the end of the 6th and 12th month after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Final Report.--The Commission shall transmit a final report to the Fairfax County Board of Supervisors, the Mayor of the District of Columbia, the President, and appropriate committees of the Congress not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for legislation or administrative actions it considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after submitting its final report pursuant to section 7.
To carry out this Act there is authorized to be appropriated an amount not to exceed $1,000,000.