This Act may be cited as the ``Nuclear Non-Proliferation Policy Act of 1998''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States has been a leader in seeking to contain the spread of nuclear weapons technology and materials.
With the end of the Cold War and the breakup of the Soviet Union, the proliferation of nuclear weapons, especially in countries in unstable regions, is now one of the leading military threats to the national security of the United States and its allies.
The United Nations Security Council declared on January 31, 1992, that ``proliferation of all weapons of mass destruction constitutes a threat to international peace and security'' and committed to taking appropriate action to prevent proliferation from occurring.
The establishment of the United Nations Special Commission on Iraq was an important precedent to that end.
Aside from the 5 declared nuclear weapon states, a number of other nations have or are pursuing nuclear weapons capabilities.
Regional nuclear arms races pose perhaps the most likely prospect for the future use of nuclear weapons.
Deteriorating conditions at nuclear weapons complex sites and nuclear bases in Russia have raised concerns about Russia's ability to track its nuclear materials and account for its nuclear weapons.
This has increased the threat of nuclear proliferation by creating the possibility that weapons, materials, equipment, plans, or experts could fall into the hands of potential proliferators.
Belarus signed the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, as a non-nuclear weapon state, on July 23, 1993, Kazakhstan on February 14, 1994, and Ukraine on December 5, 1994.
Iraq had a substantial, clandestine nuclear weapons program which went undetected by the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) inspection process and was greatly assisted by dual-use exports from western countries, including the United States.
In October 1994, North Korea and the United States signed an agreement to exchange North Korea's existing nuclear reactors and reprocessing equipment for modern light water reactor technology that is somewhat less suited to making bombs.
However, North Korea's history of pursuing nuclear weapons capability, and the potential for political and economic crisis on the peninsula, render North Korea an area for nuclear proliferation concern.
Brazil and Argentina had substantial programs to build nuclear weapons and South Africa has admitted developing and building 6 nuclear weapons, but in response to reduced regional tensions and other factors, all 3 countries have renounced nuclear weapons and accepted IAEA safeguards for all of their nuclear facilities, and all 3 countries have acceded to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty as non-nuclear weapon states.
United States security interests and current policy and practices are consistent with the terms of the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty which, like nuclear weapons free zones in Latin America, South Asia, the Middle East, and Africa that the United States supports, can contribute to efforts to avoid regional conflicts and prevent arms races.
In 1996, the United States signed the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty.
The IAEA is a valuable tool to counter proliferation, and has taken steps to strengthen its safeguard system through its Strengthened Safeguards System program, but the effectiveness of its system to safeguard nuclear materials may be adversely affected by institutional and financial constraints.
The United States supports a policy of immobilizing some plutonium as an energy source and mixing some with low- enriched uranium as fuel that can be burned in commercial nuclear energy reactors.
Plutonium being drawn from dismantled nuclear warheads creates new challenges of storage and disposal and, if in the wrong hands, could be converted into fuel for nuclear warheads.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty, which codifies world consensus against further nuclear proliferation, has been extended indefinitely, and additional steps should be taken to strengthen the international nuclear nonproliferation regime.
The Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 declared that the United States is committed to continued strong support for the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty and to a strengthened and more effective IAEA, and provided that it is United States policy to establish more effective controls over the transfer of nuclear equipment, materials, and technology.
The goal of the United States is to end the further spread of nuclear weapons capability, roll back nuclear proliferation where it has occurred, and prevent the use of nuclear weapons anywhere in the world.
To that end the United States should adopt a comprehensive nuclear nonproliferation policy.
COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR NONPROLIFERATION POLICY.
In order to end nuclear proliferation and reduce current nuclear arsenals and supplies of weapons-usable nuclear materials, it shall be the policy of the United States to pursue the following objectives: (1) Reach a verifiable agreement with the Russian Federation to place all fissile materials from such weapons under bilateral or international controls, or both.
Ratify the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty by the end of calendar year 1998, and press North Korea, India, and Pakistan to sign that treaty.
Reach a verifiable agreement with the Russian Federation to end the production of new types of nuclear warheads.
Begin formal negotiations to reach a verifiable multilateral agreement to reduce the strategic nuclear arsenals of the United States and the Russian Federation to within a range of 2,000 to 2,500 each, with lower levels for the United Kingdom, France, and the People's Republic of China.
Conclude additional enforceable multilateral agreements to significantly and continuously reduce the nuclear arsenals of all countries through a stage-by-stage process.
Reach an immediate multilateral agreement with Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty member states to halt permanently the production of weapons usable fissile materials, and achieve worldwide agreements to-- (A) end by January 1, 2008, the production of fissile materials for any purpose; (B) place existing stockpiles of such materials under bilateral or international controls; and (C) require all countries to place all of their nuclear facilities dedicated to peaceful purposes under IAEA safeguards.
Strengthen IAEA safeguards to more effectively verify that countries are complying with their nonproliferation commitments and provide the IAEA with the political, technical, and financial support necessary to implement the necessary safeguard reforms.
Strengthen nuclear and dual-use export controls in the United States and other nuclear supplier nations, impose sanctions on individuals, companies, and countries which contribute to nuclear proliferation, provide increased public information on nuclear export licenses approved in the United States, and ratify the model protocol of the IAEA's Strengthened Safeguards System program.
Reduce incentives for countries to pursue the acquisition of nuclear weapons by seeking to reduce regional tensions and to strengthen regional security agreements, and encourage the United Nations Security Council to increase its role in enforcing international nuclear nonproliferation agreements.
Conclude a separate agreement with the other nuclear weapon states to adopt a policy of ``no first use'' and to assist immediately any country which is a party to the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty should the use of nuclear weapons be initiated against such country.
Conclude a verifiable bilateral agreement with the Russian Federation under which both countries withdraw from their arsenals and dismantle all tactical nuclear weapons, and seek to extend to all nuclear weapon states this zero option for tactical nuclear weapons.
Ratify the South Pacific Nuclear Free Zone Treaty and the African Nuclear Weapons Free Zone Treaty.
Continue to monitor North Korea's activities relating to replacing its nuclear reactors with light water reactors to ensure that North Korea does not resume its weapons development program.
Begin formal negotiations on START III between the United States and the Russian Federation before START II enters into force.
REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF POLICY.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and not later than February 1 of each year thereafter, the President shall submit to the Congress a report on-- (1) the actions the United States has taken during the preceding 12-month period and the actions the United States plans to take during the succeeding 12-month period to implement each of the policy objectives set forth in this Act; (2) actions which have been taken by the Russian Federation, by the other former Soviet republics, and by other countries and institutions to achieve those policy objectives; and (3) obstacles that have been encountered in seeking to implement those policy objectives.
Each such report shall be submitted in unclassified form, with a classified appendix if necessary.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``fissile materials'' means highly enriched uranium and plutonium; (2) the term ``highly enriched uranium'' means uranium enriched to 20 percent or more in the isotope U-235; (3) the term ``IAEA'' means the International Atomic Energy Agency; (4) the term ``IAEA safeguards'' means the safeguards set forth in an agreement between a country and the IAEA, as authorized by Article III(A)(5) of the Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency; (5) a policy of ``no first use'' of nuclear weapons means a commitment not to be the first to use nuclear weapons in a conflict; (6) the term ``non-nuclear weapon state'' means any country that has not acquired nuclear weapons or their components; (7) the term ``Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty'' means the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, signed at Washington, London, and Moscow on July 1, 1968; (8) the term ``nuclear weapon state'' means any country that is a nuclear-weapon state, as defined by Article IX(3) of the Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, signed at Washington, London, and Moscow on July 1, 1968; (9) the term ``START I treaty'' means the Treaty on the Reduction of Strategic Offensive Arms, signed by the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics on July 31, 1991; (10) the term ``START II treaty'' means the Treaty on Further Reductions and Limitations of Strategic Offensive Arms, signed by the United States and the Russian Federation on January 3, 1993; and (11) the term ``START III treaty'' means the Treaty on Further Reductions and Limitations of Strategic Offensive Arms, as discussed between President Clinton and President Yeltsin at the summit meeting held in Helsinki, Finland in March of 1997.