SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Corps of Engineers Reform Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.-- Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--PROJECT PLANNING Sec.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Army Corps of Engineers is the primary Federal agency responsible for developing and managing the Nation's harbors, waterways, shorelines, and water resources.
Scarce Federal resources require more efficient use of Corps of Engineers funding and greater oversight of Corps of Engineers analyses.
Demand for recreation, clean water, and healthy wildlife habitat must be reflected in the Corps of Engineers project planning process.
The social and environmental impacts of dams, levees, shoreline stabilization structures, and other projects must be adequately mitigated.
Affected interests must play a larger role in Corps of Engineers project development.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To ensure that the Nation's water resources investments are economically justified and enhance the environment.
To provide independent review of Corps of Engineers feasibility studies.
To ensure that mitigation for Corps of Engineers projects is successful and cost-effective.
To enhance the involvement of affected interests in Corps of Engineers feasibility studies.
To revise Corps of Engineers planning principles to meet the economic and environmental needs of riverside and coastal communities.
In this Act, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
TITLE I--PROJECT PLANNING SEC.
Title IX of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4183 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Projects Subject to Independent Review.--The Secretary shall ensure that feasibility reports for the following water resources projects are subject to review by an independent panel of experts established under this section: ``(1) Projects with an estimated total cost of more than $25,000,000, including mitigation costs.
Projects that are controversial, as described in subsection (f).
Office of Independent Review.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Corps of Engineers an Office of Independent Review (in this section referred to as the `Office').
Director.-- ``(A) Appointment.--The head of the Office shall be the Director of the Office of Independent Review (in this section referred to as the `Director'), who shall be appointed by the Secretary for a term of 3 years.
Qualifications.--The Secretary shall select the Director from among individuals who are distinguished scholars.
Terms.--An individual may not serve for more than 1 term as the Director.
Duties.--The Director shall establish a panel of experts to review each project subject to review under subsection (a).
Establishment of Panels.-- ``(1) Membership.--A panel of experts established by the Director for a project shall be composed of not less than 5 and not more than 9 independent experts who represent a balance of areas of expertise, including biologists, engineers, and economists.
Limitation on appointments.--The Director shall not appoint an individual to serve on a panel of experts for a project if the individual has a financial or close professional association with any organization or group with a strong financial or organizational interest in the project.
Consultation.--The Director shall consult with the National Academy of Sciences in developing lists of individuals to serve on panels of experts under this section.
Compensation.--An individual serving on a panel of experts under this section shall be compensated at a rate of pay to be determined by the Secretary.
Travel expenses.--An individual serving on a panel of experts under this section shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Duties of Panels.--A panel of experts established for a project under this section shall-- ``(1) review the feasibility report prepared for the project after the identification of a preferred alternative; ``(2) receive written and oral comments of a technical nature concerning the project from the public; and ``(3) submit to the Secretary a report containing the panel's economic, engineering, and environmental analyses of the project, including the panel's conclusions on the feasibility report, with particular emphasis on areas of public controversy.
Duration of Project Reviews.--A panel of experts shall complete its review of a project under this section not later than 180 days after the date of establishment of the panel.
Controversial Projects.--For purposes of subsection (a), a project shall be considered to be a controversial project if-- ``(1) the Secretary determines that the project is subject to a substantial degree of public controversy; ``(2) the affected State objects to the project; or ``(3) pursuant to the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (16 United States Code 661 et sequentes), the United States Fish and Wildlife Service determines that the project is likely to have a significant adverse effect on fish and wildlife after taking into account any proposed mitigation plan.
Recommendations of Panel.--After receiving a report on a project from a panel of experts under this section, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) consider any recommendations contained in the report; ``(2) make the report available for public review; and ``(3) include a copy of the report in any report transmitted to Congress concerning the project.
Costs.--The cost of conducting a review of a project under this section shall not exceed $250,000 and shall be considered as part of the total cost of the project.
The Secretary may waive the $250,000 limitation in the preceding sentence for good cause.''.
In General.--Section 905 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2282) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Stakeholder Advisory Group.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a stakeholder advisory group to assist the Secretary with the development of each feasibility study under subsection (a) and to enhance public participation in the feasibility study.
Membership.--The membership of the advisory group shall include balanced representation of social, economic, and environmental interest groups.
Applicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (15 United States Code App.)
shall apply to the advisory group.''.
Title IX of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4183 et sequentes) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``The Secretary shall monitor the economic and environmental results (including the results of mitigation) of each water resources project with an estimated total cost of more than $25,000,000, for a period of not less than 15 years, and shall provide annual reports to Congress on the performance of the project.
The cost of such monitoring shall be a Federal expense.''.
Title IX of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4183 et sequentes) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``The Secretary shall not recommend an initial recommended plan for a proposed project until all project costs, including mitigation costs, have been calculated.''.
Section 209 of the Flood Control Act of 1970 (42 United States Code 1962-2) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
CONGRESSIONAL STATEMENT OF OBJECTIVES.
In General.--It is the intent of Congress that economic development and environmental protection and restoration be co-equal goals of water resources planning and development.
Revision of Principles and Guidelines.--The Secretary shall revise the principles and guidelines for flood control projects-- ``(1) to incorporate-- ``(A) a national ecological restoration account; ``(B) a national economic development account; and ``(C) an optimum trade-off plan to maximize the benefits of the accounts; ``(2) to incorporate new techniques in risk and uncertainty analysis; ``(3) to eliminate biases and disincentives for nonstructural flood damage reduction projects; ``(4) to incorporate new analytical techniques; and ``(5) to encourage, to the maximum extent practicable, the restoration of aquatic ecosystems.
Update of Guidance.--The Secretary shall update the Guidance for Conducting Civil Works Planning Studies (ER 1105-2-100) to comply with this section.''.
Section 905(b) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2282(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(b) Before initiating'' and inserting the following: ``(b) Reconnaissance Studies.-- ``(1) In general.--Before initiating''; (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Review by environmental advisory board.--The Environmental Advisory Board of the Corps of Engineers shall review all reconnaissance studies performed under this subsection to assess whether a proposed project is likely to have environmental impacts that cannot be successfully or cost- effectively mitigated and shall make recommendations to the Secretary based on the review.
The Secretary shall consider the recommendations of the Environmental Advisory Board on a project before recommending that a feasibility study be conducted for the project based on a reconnaissance report.
''; and (3) by aligning the remainder of the text of paragraph (1) (as designated by paragraph (1) of this subsection) with paragraph (2) (as added by paragraph (2) of this subsection).
Section 906(d) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2283(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(d) After the date'' and inserting the following: ``(d) Mitigation Plans as Part of Project Proposals.-- ``(1) In general.--After the date''; (2) in the first sentence of paragraph (1) (as so designated) by inserting ``fully'' before ``mitigate''; (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Standards for mitigation.--To mitigate losses to fish and wildlife resulting from a water resources project, the Secretary shall meet the highest standards typically required of private parties under related Federal programs and shall, at a minimum, acquire and restore an acre of habitat to replace each acre of habitat negatively impacted by the project.
If the project negatively impact resources other than aquatic and terrestrial habitat, the Secretary shall take steps to ensure that impacted resources, such as fish killed by vessels, are replaced on at least a one-to-one basis.
Design of mitigation projects.--The Secretary shall design mitigation projects to reflect contemporary understanding of the importance of spatial distribution of habitat and the natural hydrology of aquatic ecosystems, and shall fully mitigate the adverse hydrologic impacts of projects.
Recommendation of projects.--The Secretary shall not recommend a water resources project alternative or choose a project alternative in any final record of decision, environmental impact statement, or environmental assessment completed after the date of enactment of this paragraph unless the Secretary determines that the mitigation plan for the alternative will cost-effectively and successfully mitigate the adverse impacts of the project on aquatic resources and fish and wildlife.
Completion of mitigation before construction of new projects.--The Secretary shall complete all planned mitigation in a particular watershed before constructing any new water resources project in that watershed.
''; and (4) by aligning the remainder of the text of paragraph (1) (as designated by paragraph (1) of this subsection) with paragraphs (2) through (5) (as added by paragraph (3) of this subsection).
Section 906(a)(1) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2283(a)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``To ensure concurrent mitigation, the Secretary shall complete 50 percent of required mitigation before beginning project construction, and shall use a proportionate amount of project construction funding to complete the required mitigation.