This Act may be cited as the ``Defense Women's Health Improvement Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE SEC.
PRIMARY AND PREVENTIVE HEALTH-CARE SERVICES FOR WOMEN.
Female Members and Retirees of the Uniformed Services.--(1) Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1074c the following new section: ``Sec.
Primary and preventive health-care services for women ``Female members and former members of the uniformed services who are entitled to medical care under section 1074 or 1074a of this title shall be furnished with primary and preventive health-care services for women as part of such medical care.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1074c the following new item: ``1074d.
Primary and preventive health-care services for women.''.
Female Dependents.--Section 1077(a) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) Primary and preventive health-care services for women.''.
Definition.--Section 1072 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) The term `primary and preventive health-care services for women' means health-care services provided to women, including counseling, relating to the following: ``(A) Papanicolaou tests (pap smear).
Breast examinations and mammography.
Comprehensive reproductive health care, including care related to pregnancy.
Infertility and sexually transmitted diseases, including prevention.
Physical or psychological conditions arising out of acts of sexual violence.''.
REPORT ON THE PROVISION OF HEALTH-CARE SERVICES TO WOMEN.
Report Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall prepare a report evaluating the provision of health-care services through military medical treatment facilities and the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services to female members of the uniformed services and female covered beneficiaries eligible for health care under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code.
Contents.--The report required by subsection (a) shall contain the following: (1) A description of the medical personnel of the Department of Defense who provided health-care services during fiscal year 1993 to female members and covered beneficiaries, including-- (A) the number of such personnel (including both the number of individual employees and the number of full-time employee equivalents); (B) the professional qualifications or specialty training of such personnel; and (C) the medical facilities to which such personnel were assigned.
A description of any actions, including the use of special pays and incentives, taken by the Secretary during fiscal year 1993-- (A) to ensure the retention of the medical personnel described in paragraph (1); (B) to recruit additional personnel to provide health-care services to female members and female covered beneficiaries; and (C) to replace departing personnel who provided such services.
A description of any existing or proposed programs to encourage specialization of health care professionals in fields related to primary and preventive health-care services for women.
An assessment of any difficulties experienced by military medical treatment facilities or the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services in furnishing primary and preventive health-care services for women and a description of those actions taken by the Secretary to resolve such difficulties.
An assessment of the extent to which gender-related factors impede or complicate diagnoses (such as inappropriate psychiatric referrals and admissions) made by medical personnel described in paragraph (1).
A description of the actions taken by the Secretary to foster and encourage the expansion of research relating to health care issues of concern to female members of the uniformed services and female covered beneficiaries.
Population Study of the Need of Female Members and Female Covered Beneficiaries for Health-Care Services.--(1) As part of the report required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall conduct a study to determine the needs of female members of the uniformed services and female covered beneficiaries for health-care services, including primary and preventive health-care services for women.
The study shall examine the health needs of current members and covered beneficiaries and future members and covered beneficiaries based upon the anticipated size and composition of the Armed Forces in the year 2000 and should be based on the demographics of society as a whole.
Submission and Revision.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit the report required by subsection (a) to Congress not later than April 1, 1994.
The Secretary shall revise and resubmit the report to Congress not later than April 1, 1999.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``primary and preventive health care services for women'' has the meaning given such term in paragraph (6) of section 1072 of title 10, United States Code, as added by section 101(c)).
The term ``covered beneficiary'' has the meaning given such term in paragraph (5) of such section.
TITLE II--WOMEN'S HEALTH RESEARCH SEC.
DEFENSE WOMEN'S HEALTH RESEARCH CENTER.
Establishment of the Center.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a Defense Women's Health Research Center (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Center'') in the Department of the Army.
The Center shall be under the authority of the Army Health Services Command.
Purposes.--(1) The Center shall be the coordinating agent for multidisciplinary and multiinstitutional research within the Department of Defense on women's health issues related to service in the Armed Forces.
The Center shall be dedicated to development and application of new knowledge, procedures, techniques, training, and equipment for the improvement of the health of women in the Armed Forces.
In carrying out or sponsoring research studies, the Center shall provide that the cohort of women in the Armed Forces shall be considered as a control groups.
The Center shall support the goals and objectives recognized by the Department of Defense under the plan of the Department of Health and Human Services designated as ``Healthy People 2000''.
The Center shall support initiation and expansion of research into matters relating to women's health in the military, including the following matters as they relate to women in the military: (A) Combat stress and trauma.
Exposure to toxins and other environmental hazards associated with military hardware.
Psychology related stresses in warfare situations.
Reproductive health, including pregnancy.
Infertility and sexually transmitted diseases.
Mental health, including post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.
Menopause, osteoporosis, Alzheimer's disease, and other conditions and diseases related to aging.
Sexual violence and related trauma.
Human factor studies related to women in combat.
Preparation of a Plan.--The Secretary of Defense, acting through the Secretary of the Army and in coordination with the other military departments, shall prepare a plan for the implementation of this section.
The plan shall be submitted to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives before May 1, 1994.
Requirements Relating to Establishment of Center.--(1) The Secretary shall provide for the establishment of the Center at an existing Army facility.
The Center may be established only at a facility having the following characteristics: (A) A physical plant immediately available to serve as headquarters for the medical activities to be carried out by the Center.
Ongoing fellowship and residency programs colocated with ongoing collaborative health-related and interdisciplinary research of (i) a facility of the Department of Veterans Affairs, (ii) an accredited university with specialties in medical research and clinical diagnostics, and (iii) a hospital owned and operated by a municipality.
A technologically modern laboratory capability at the site and at the affiliated sites referred to in subparagraph (B), with the capability to include state-of-the-art clinical diagnostic instrumentation, data processing, telecommunication, and data storage systems.
Compatibility with and capability to effectively expand its existing mission in accordance with the mission of the Center under this section.
Maximum multi-State geographic jurisdiction to permit regional health-related issues to be researched and integrated into national military databases.
An existing relationship for the provision of services to Native Americans through the Indian Health Service.
Activities for Fiscal Year 1994.--During fiscal year 1994, the Center shall address the following: (1) Program planning, infrastructure development, baseline information gathering, technology infusion, and connectivity.
Management and technical staffing.
Data base development of health issues related to service on active duty as compared to service in the National Guard or Reserves.
Research protocols, cohort development, health surveillance and epidemiologic studies.
CONTINUATION OF ARMY BREAST CANCER RESEARCH PROGRAM.
During fiscal year 1994, the Secretary of the Army shall continue the breast cancer research program established in the second and third provisos in the paragraph in title IV of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-396; 106 United States Statutes at Large 1890) under the heading ``Research, Development, Test, and Evaluation, Army'' .
INCLUSION OF WOMEN AND MINORITIES IN CLINICAL RESEARCH PROJECTS.
General Rule.--In conducting or supporting clinical research, the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that-- (1) women who are members of the Armed Forces are included as subjects in each project of such research; and (2) members of minority groups who are members of the Armed Forces are included as subjects of such research.
Waiver Authority.--The requirement in subsection (a) regarding women and members of minority groups who are members of the Armed Forces may be waived by the Secretary of Defense with respect to a project of clinical research if the Secretary determines that the inclusion, as subjects in the project, of women and members of minority groups, respectively-- (1) is inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects; (2) is inappropriate with respect to the purpose of the research; or (3) is inappropriate under such other circumstances as the Secretary of Defense may designate.
Requirement for Analysis of Research.--In the case of a project of clinical research in which women or members of minority groups will under subsection (a) be included as subjects of the research, the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the project is designed and carried out so as to provide for a valid analysis of whether the variables being tested in the research affect women or members of minority groups, as the case may be, differently than other persons who are subjects of the research.
REPORT ON RESEARCH RELATING TO FEMALE MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES AND FEMALE COVERED BENEFICIARIES.
Not later than July 1 of each of 1995, 1996, and 1997, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report containing-- (1) a description (as of May 31 of the year in which the report is submitted) of the status of any health research that is being carried out by or under the jurisdiction of the Secretary relating to female members of the uniformed services and female covered beneficiaries under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code; and (2) recommendations of the Secretary as to future health research (including a proposal for any legislation relating to such research) relating to such female members and covered beneficiaries.
TITLE III--WOMEN'S HEALTH EDUCATION SEC.
WOMEN'S HEALTH CURRICULUM ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
The Secretary of Defense shall establish at the Federal Reporter Edward Hebert School of Medicine of the Uniformed Services University of the Health Sciences a women's health curriculum advisory committee to promote the comprehensive integration of women's health issues into the curriculum at the University.
The committee shall include the surgeon general of each of the military departments and the dean of the School of Medicine.
The committee shall be established by April 1, 1994.