This Act may be cited as the ``Deep Creek-Yampatika Ute Wilderness Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Certain areas located in the White River National Forest and the Bureau of Land Management, Glenwood Springs Resource Area, in Colorado along Deep Creek should be protected and enhanced for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations, including the areas making up the rugged and remote limestone gorge formed by Deep Creek on the White River Plateau of the White River National Forest in Garfield and Eagle Counties, Colorado, which have wilderness values and offer unique and valuable scenic, geological, scientific, and recreational opportunities.
The unique high elevation riparian areas and natural and wildlife components, enhanced by the rural western setting of the area, provide extensive opportunities for primitive recreational activities, are publicly used for hiking, cave exploration, and solitude, and are worthy of additional protection as a wilderness area.
Deep Creek carves a rugged and remote limestone gorge, forming a dramatic pristine canyon over 2,500 feet deep and 13 miles long.
The limestone strata have created ideal conditions for the formation of caves, many of which are among Colorado's most outstanding.
There are both absolute and conditional decreed water rights appertaining to waters upstream and downstream from the Wilderness Area.
These rights are private property rights and are entitled to protection.
It is possible to provide for proper management and protection of the wilderness values of the Wilderness Area in ways that provide for the reasonable development of the upstream and adjacent water rights.
Out of respect for the native Ute people who frequented the area near Trappers Lake and the Deep Creek headwaters for centuries, the Wilderness Area shall be known as the Deep Creek-Yampatika Ute Wilderness.
Colorado law authorizes the Colorado Water Conservation Board to hold instream flow rights in order to protect the natural environment.
Establishment and/or augmentation of such an instream flow right for Deep Creek, abandonment of existing conditional rights appertaining to waters upstream from the Wilderness Area, and/or conversion to such instream flow rights of existing absolute water rights appertaining to such waters would be beneficial to the protection of the resources and values of the Wilderness Area.
There are no known water resource facilities or projects, or rights-of-way or access routes serving water resource facilities or projects, within the Wilderness Area.
Therefore, it is not necessary to include provisions in this Act for access, operation, routes, maintenance, or repair for water resource facilities or projects.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations the unique and nationally important values of the Federal lands depicted on the Map, including wilderness, geological, natural, scientific, recreational, environmental, biological, and scenic resources of such Federal lands, by establishing the Deep Creek- Yampatika Ute Wilderness Area in the State of Colorado.
In this Act: (1) Wilderness area.--The term ``Wilderness Area'' means the Deep Creek-Yampatika Ute Wilderness Area established by section 4.
Map.--The term ``Map'' means the map entitled ``Proposed Deep Creek-Yampatika Ute Wilderness Area'' and dated February 25, 2002.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means-- (A) the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service, with regard to lands over which that Secretary has jurisdiction; and (B) the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, with regard to lands over which that Secretary has jurisdiction.
DEEP CREEK-YAMPATIKA UTE WILDERNESS AREA DESIGNATION.
In General.--In furtherance of the Wilderness Act, there is established the Deep Creek-Yampatika Ute Wilderness Area in the State of Colorado.
Areas Included.--The Wilderness Area shall consist of approximately 7,350 acres of Federal land as generally depicted on the Map.
Effective Date.-- (1) Determination.--Subsections (a) and (b) shall take effect upon a determination by the Secretary of Agriculture that-- (A) conditional water rights described in section 6(e)(3)(A)(i) have been canceled or abandoned; (B) absolute water rights described in section 6(e)(3)(A)(ii) have been conveyed to the Colorado Water Conservation Board for conversion to instream flows under Colorado law; or (C) the Colorado Water Conservation Board has made a final determination regarding whether or not instream flow levels in Deep Creek are adequate.
Notice.--As soon as practicable after making a determination under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Agriculture shall publish notice of that determination in the Federal Register.
Wilderness Area.--After making a determination under section 4(c), the Secretary, shall manage the Wilderness Area in a manner that-- (1) conserves, protects, and enhances the resources of the Wilderness Area; and (2) is in accordance with-- (A) the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), except that, with respect to any wilderness areas designated by this Act, any reference in the Wilderness Act to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference to the date of the enactment of this Act; (B) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (C) other applicable law, including this Act.
Withdrawals.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal lands within the Wilderness Area are withdrawn from-- (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) the operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, and geothermal leasing laws, and all amendments thereto.
Aerial Navigation Training Exercises.-- (1) In general.--The Colorado Army National Guard, through the High Altitude ARNG Aviation Training Site, shall continue to be allowed to conduct aerial navigation training maneuver exercises over and upon the lands within the Wilderness Area in a manner consistent with the memorandum of understanding dated August 4, 1987, among the Colorado Army National Guard, the Bureau of Land Management, and the United States Forest Service as interpreted and implemented prior to the date of the enactment of this Act.
Review and modification of memorandum of understanding.--The memorandum of understanding referred to in paragraph (1) may be modified subject to the agreement of all parties thereto.
The parties to the memorandum of understanding shall review the memorandum and associated annual operating plan not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter while the memorandum of understanding is in effect.
The review shall include consideration of alternative locations over National Forest System lands and lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management outside of the Wilderness Area for the conduct of activities identified in the memorandum.
If the Colorado Army National Guard identifies such an alternate location outside of the Wilderness Area that meets its aerial training needs, the memorandum of understanding shall be modified accordingly, subject to the agreement of all parties thereto.
Hunting and Fishing.--Nothing in this Act shall affect the authority of the Colorado Division of Wildlife to regulate hunting or fishing in the Wilderness Area.
Grazing.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the Secretary shall issue and administer any grazing leases or permits in the Wilderness Area in accordance with the same laws (including regulations) and Executive orders followed by the Secretary in issuing and administering grazing leases and permits on other land under the jurisdiction of the Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management, respectively.
Grazing in wilderness area.-- (A) Forest service lands.--Grazing of livestock in the Wilderness Area on lands that are under the jurisdiction of the Forest Service shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(4)), in accordance with the guidelines set forth under the heading ``Grazing in National Forest Wilderness'' in House Report 96-617 of the 96th Congress.
BLM lands.--Grazing of livestock in the Wilderness Area on lands that are under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(4)), in accordance with the guidelines set forth in Appendix A of House Report 101-405 of the 101st Congress.
No Buffer Zones.--Congress does not intend for the establishment of the Wilderness Area to lead to the creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones around the Wilderness Area.
The fact that there may be activities or uses on lands outside the Wilderness Area that would not be allowed in the Wilderness Area shall not preclude such activities or uses on such lands up to the boundary of the Wilderness Area consistent with other applicable laws.
WATER RIGHTS AND MANAGEMENT.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``water resource facility'' means irrigation and pumping facilities, reservoirs, water conservation works, aqueducts, canals, ditches, pipelines, wells, hydropower projects and transmission and other ancillary facilities, and other water diversion, storage, and carriage structures.
Restrictions on Rights and Disclaimer of Effect.-- (1) Restrictions on rights.--Neither the Secretary of Agriculture nor the Secretary of the Interior, nor any other officer, employee, representative, or agent of the United States, nor any other person, shall assert in any court or agency, nor shall any court or agency consider, any claim to or for water or water rights in the State of Colorado, which is based on any construction of any portion of this Act, or the designation of any lands as wilderness by this Act, as constituting an express or implied reservation of water or water rights.
Disclaimer of effect.--(A) Nothing in this Act shall-- (i) be construed as a recognition, disclaimer, relinquishment, or reduction of any water rights of the United States in the State of Colorado existing before the date of the enactment of this Act; or (ii) be construed as constituting an interpretation of any other Act or any designation made by or pursuant thereto.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as establishing a precedent with regard to any future wilderness designations.
New or Expanded Projects.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, on and after the date of the enactment of this Act, neither the President nor any other officer, employee, or agent of the United States shall fund, assist, authorize, or issue a license or permit for the development of any new water resource facility within lands designated wilderness pursuant to this Act.
Interstate Compacts.--Nothing in this Act, and nothing in any previous Act designating any lands as wilderness, shall be construed as limiting, altering, modifying, or amending any of the interstate compacts or equitable apportionment decrees that apportion water among and between the State of Colorado and other States.
Except as expressly provided in this section, nothing in this Act shall affect or limit the development or use by existing and future holders of vested water rights of Colorado's full apportionment of such waters.
Stream Flows.-- (1) Recommendations.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall consult with the Colorado Water Conservation Board regarding instream flow protection recommendations on Deep Creek within the Wilderness Area and shall do so in accordance with Colorado law and in consultation with interested parties and local elected officials.
Restatement of current law.--As provided by Federal and Colorado State law, the Secretary may continue to enter into enforcement agreements with the Colorado Water Conservation Board for monitoring and protecting instream flows.
Grants for compensation relating to water rights.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of Agriculture may make a grant to the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Colorado for the following purposes: (i) Conditional water rights.--Compensating willing parties for canceling or otherwise abandoning conditional water rights within or upstream of the Wilderness Area which would protect the natural environment within the Wilderness Area.
Absolute water rights.--Compensating willing parties for conveying absolute water rights within or upstream of the Wilderness Area to the Colorado Water Conservation Board for conversion to instream flows under Colorado law.
Enforceable agreement.--Compensation under clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A) shall be given pursuant to an enforceable agreement between the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Colorado and the willing party setting out the fair market value for the conditional water rights to be canceled or abandoned, or the absolute water rights to be conveyed, as applicable.
The fair market value shall be determined by an independent appraisal, performed by an appraiser to be mutually agreed upon by the Secretary of Agriculture, the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Colorado, and the willing party.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for the purposes of this paragraph $300,000.
MAP AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a copy of the Map and a legal description of the Wilderness Area.
Force and Effect.--The Map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the Map and the legal description.
Public Availability.--Copies of the Map and the legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the following: (1) The Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
The Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
The Office of the State Director of the Bureau of Land Management in Colorado and the Glenwood Springs Resource area Office in Glenwood Springs, Colorado.
The Office of the Regional Forester of the Forest Service in Colorado, and of the White River National Forest, Forest Ranger Office in Glenwood Springs, Colorado.
Map Controlling.--In the case of a discrepancy between the Map and the descriptions, the Map shall control.
Nothing in the Act shall preclude or restrict the authority of the Secretary to evaluate the suitability of roadless and unroaded areas adjacent to the Wilderness Area for inclusion in the National Wilderness Preservation System or to make recommendations to Congress for such inclusions.