This Act may be cited as the ``Wastewater Treatment Operator Training and Certification Act of 1993''.
Section 109 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1259) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
National Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator shall develop and implement a national program to train individuals in the operation of municipal and industrial wastewater treatment works and other facilities with a water pollution control purpose.
Requirements for training program.--The training program under this section shall include-- ``(A) the preparation of undergraduate students enrolled in institutions of higher education to enter an occupation that involves the design, operation, and maintenance of wastewater treatment works; ``(B) inservice training to improve and advance the knowledge and skills of individuals employed in fields related to the design, operation, and maintenance of wastewater treatment works; and ``(C) preservice training to be provided to high school graduates who are not employed to carry out the operation and maintenance of a wastewater treatment works at the time the training is provided.
Training Program Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator shall make grants to, or offer to enter into contracts with, the appropriate officials of institutions of higher education, or combinations of the institutions, and State agencies to support the development and implementation of wastewater treatment training programs pursuant to this section.
Guidance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of paragraph (5), the Administrator shall publish guidance that specifies the minimum elements of the wastewater training programs referred to in paragraph (1).
The guidance shall indicate the relative emphasis that shall be given to-- ``(A) facility design, operation, and maintenance; ``(B) undergraduate, inservice, and preservice training; and ``(C) training for industrial and municipal facilities.
Solicitation of proposals.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of paragraph (5), the Administrator shall solicit proposals from institutions of higher education, or combinations of the institutions, and State agencies to provide training services.
Training grants.--The Administrator shall, to the extent adequate funds are available, award training grants to institutions of higher education, or combinations of the institutions, and State agencies for each fiscal year.
Considerations for awarding grants.--In awarding a training grant under this subsection, the Administrator shall consider-- ``(A) the demonstrated capability of the applicant to provide training services; ``(B) the degree to which the proposed program is consistent with the guidance published pursuant to paragraph (2); ``(C) the results of any evaluation conducted pursuant to paragraph (7); and ``(D) the degree to which the geographic area to be served by the program that is the subject of the grant proposal will, in combination with other programs funded pursuant to this section, ensure the reasonable availability of training programs throughout the United States.
Allocation of grants.--In allocating available grant funds among training programs, the Administrator shall consider the need for training in the area served, as reflected in the report to Congress issued pursuant to section 112(b).
Review and evaluation.--The Administrator shall provide for the review and evaluation of each training program that receives funding pursuant to this section not later than 3 years after the program initially receives the funding, and every 3 years thereafter.
Training Needs.--The Administrator shall develop and maintain a system for forecasting the supply of, and demand for, various professional and other occupational categories needed for the prevention, reduction, and elimination of water pollution in each region, State, or area of the United States.''.
In General.--Section 110 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1260) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.-- ``(1) Certification.--The Chief Operator of a publicly owned treatment works that has a permit issued pursuant to section 402, and such additional personnel as may be designated by the Administrator, shall be required to be certified as proficient pursuant to this section by a State that has a certification program that is approved by the Administrator.
Effective date.--The requirement referred to in paragraph (1) shall become effective on the date that is 4 years after the date of enactment of paragraph (4), unless the Administrator extends the effective date pursuant to paragraph (3).
Extension.--The Administrator may extend the effective date of the requirement referred to in paragraph (1) for a period of not to exceed 3 years on a facility-specific basis if the Administrator determines that, with respect to a facility, adequate opportunity to seek certification did not exist during the period described in paragraph (2).
Certification granted to individual.--Each certification of proficiency issued by the appropriate official of a State under this section shall be granted to the individual that receives the certification and shall not be granted to the treatment works where the individual is employed.
Period of certification.--A certification of proficiency issued under this section shall be effective during the 5-year period beginning on the date of certification.
An individual may be recertified on termination of the 5-year period (and on termination of each subsequent 5-year period) if the individual complies with inservice training and related education requirements for the certification.
Statutory construction.--Nothing in this section is intended to be construed to prevent a State from requiring more frequent certification than is specified in paragraph (5).
Guidelines.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall publish guidelines specifying minimum standards for certification of operators by a State pursuant to this section.
Requirements for guidelines.-- ``(A) In general.--The guidelines described in paragraph (1) shall specify minimum standards for a Chief Operator of a publicly owned treatment works and for such additional personnel as the Administrator determines appropriate for proficiency certification.
Additional standards.--In addition to the standards referred to in subparagraph (A), the guidelines shall establish such additional standards as the Administrator determines necessary to ensure proficiency in the operation of large, complex treatment systems.
The guidelines may provide for onsite assessment in any case in which the assessment is necessary to determine proficiency.
Treatment works operator's manual.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall publish a treatment works operator's manual that describes essential knowledge and skills of-- ``(A) a Chief Operator; and ``(B) such additional personnel as the Administrator determines appropriate to receive operator proficiency certification.
State Programs.-- ``(1) In general.--Beginning on the date of publication of the guidelines under subsection (b), the Governor of a State may submit to the Administrator, in such form as the Administrator may require, a certification program under this section.
Program approval.-- ``(A) In general.--The Administrator shall review and approve or disapprove a program submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) not later than 90 days after the submittal of the application.
The Administrator shall approve the application on the basis of a determination that-- ``(i) the State certification program will be consistent with the guidelines published pursuant to subsection (b); ``(ii) the State has committed to implement the program by not later than 1 year after the date of approval of the application; and ``(iii) the State agrees to provide to the Administrator such information concerning the program as the Administrator may request.
Programs in effect before the submittal of an application.--With respect to any State that submits an application pursuant to this subsection concerning a State certification program that was implemented before the date of submittal of the application, in making a decision whether to approve the application, the Administrator may consider the effectiveness of the program in effect on the date of submittal of a program pursuant to this subsection.
Disapproval of program.--In any case in which the Administrator disapproves a program, the Administrator shall provide to the State a written statement of the reasons for disapproval.
The State may, not later than 90 days after receipt of the statement of the Administrator, submit to the Administrator such modifications to the application as may be necessary.
Not later than 30 days after receipt of the revised application, the Administrator shall approve or disapprove the revised application.
Additional requirements.--A State may establish a certification requirement in addition to the requirements established pursuant to this section.''.
Enforcement.--Section 309(g)(1)(A) of such Act (33 United States Code 1319(g)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting ``110(a),'' after ``violated section''.
Relationship to Training Grant Program.--Section 111(3) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1261(3)) is amended by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the following new subparagraph: ``(C) that the institution is participating in, or has participated in, the training grant program under section 109(b); and''.
Representation of Minorities and Women.--Section 111(3)(D) of such Act (33 United States Code 1261(3)(D)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i); and (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, and (iii) the institution will make reasonable efforts to ensure representation of minorities and women in the program.''.
Section 112 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1262) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1), by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``The term shall include any community college, technical college, or State environmental agency.
''; (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following new subsection: ``(b) The Administrator shall, not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Wastewater Treatment Operator Training and Certification Act of 1993, and not less frequently than every 2 years thereafter, submit a report to Congress concerning the implementation of training, certification, and scholarship programs under sections 109, 110, and 111.
Each report submitted to Congress under this subsection shall include a forecast of the supply of, and demand for, water pollution control professionals.
''; and (3) in subsection (c)-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Environmental Protection Agency to carry out sections 109 and 111, $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1994 through 2000.