This Act may be cited as the ``Kids, Homes, and Grandparents Act of 1996''.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to $500 multiplied by the number of qualifying children of the taxpayer.
Qualifying Child.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualifying child' means any individual if-- ``(1) the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151 with respect to such individual for the taxable year, ``(2) such individual has not attained the age of 18 as of the close of the calendar year in which the taxable year of the taxpayer begins, and ``(3) such individual bears a relationship to the taxpayer described in section 32(c)(3)(B).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
DEDUCTION IF PARENT OR GRANDPARENT RESIDES WITH TAXPAYER.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
TAXPAYERS WITH WHOM PARENT OR GRANDPARENT RESIDES.
In General.--In the case of an individual who maintains a household which includes as a member one or more parents or grandparents of such individual who have as the principal place of their abode the home of such individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction the product of-- (1) $1000, and (2) the number of such parents and grandparents.
Parent or Grandparent.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `parent or grandparent' means, with respect to any individual, any ancestor of the individual or of the individual's spouse or former spouse.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `ancestor' includes a stepmother or stepfather.''
Deduction Allowable Whether or Not Taxpayer Itemizes.-- Subsection (a) of section 62 of such Code is amended by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraph: ``(16) Taxpayers with whom parent or grandparent resides.-- The deduction allowed by section 220.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 220 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Taxpayers with whom parent or grandparent resides.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
REDUCTION OF TAX ON QUALIFIED PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE GAIN.
In General.--Section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed on individuals) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Reduction in Capital Gains Rate Applied to Qualified Principal Residence Gain.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual, if any taxable income of the taxpayer would be taxed at a rate in excess of 15 percent (determined without regard to this subsection) for any taxable year and such taxpayer has qualified principal residence gain for such taxable year-- ``(A) subsection (h) shall not apply to such taxable year, and ``(B) the tax imposed by this section for such taxable year shall not exceed the sum of-- ``(i) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this subsection had not been enacted on taxable income reduced by the amount of the net capital gain, ``(ii) 15 percent of qualified principal residence gain, and ``(iii) the sum of-- ``(I) 15 percent of the excess (if any) of the maximum amount of income subject to the 15 percent rate bracket applicable to the taxpayer over the amounts taken into account under clauses (i) and (ii), and ``(II) 28 percent of the excess (if any) of taxable income over the amounts taken into account under subclause (I) and clauses (i) and (ii).
Qualified principal residence gain.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified principal residence gain' means the amount of gain from the sale or exchange of a qualified principal residence during the taxable year, reduced by-- ``(i) the amount of gain not included in gross income pursuant to an election under section 121 (relating to one-time exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence by individual who has attained age 55) with respect to such sale or exchange, and ``(ii) the amount of gain not recognized with respect to such sale or exchange under section 1034 (relating to rollover of gain on sale of principal residence).
Limitation.--In no event may the qualified principal residence gain exceed the lesser of-- ``(i) $90,000, or ``(ii) the net capital gain for the taxable year.
Qualified principal residence.--The term `qualified principal residence' means a principal residence (within the meaning of section 1034) with respect to which the taxpayer meets the requirements of 121(a)(2) (determined after the application of section 121(d)).
Property used in part as principal residence.--Rules similar to the rules of section 121(d)(5) shall apply.
Coordination with investment income election.--For purposes of this subsection, the net capital gain for any taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which the taxpayer elects to take into account as investment income for the taxable year under section 163(d)(4)(B)(iii).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to gain from sales or exchanges of principal residences after December 31, 1996, for taxable years beginning after such date.
INDEXED BASIS OF PRIMARY RESIDENCE.
In General.--Part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis rules of general application) is amended by inserting after section 1021 the following new section: ``SEC.
ADJUSTED BASIS OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
In General.--In the case of an individual, the adjusted basis for determining the gain from the sale or exchange of the principal residence (within the meaning of section 1034) of such individual shall be the indexed basis of such principal residence.
Indexed Basis.--For purposes of this section, the indexed basis of any principal residence is the sum of-- ``(1) the adjusted basis (determined without regard to this section) of such residence, and ``(2) the applicable inflation adjustment.
Applicable Inflation Adjustment.--For purposes of this section, the term `applicable inflation adjustment' means, for any principal residence, an amount equal to the product of-- ``(1) the adjusted basis (determined without regard to this section) of such residence, and ``(2) the percentage (if any) by which-- ``(A) the gross domestic product deflator for the last calendar quarter ending before such residence is sold or exchanged, exceeds ``(B) the gross domestic product deflator for the last calendar quarter ending before such residence was acquired by the taxpayer.
The percentage under paragraph (2) shall be rounded to the nearest \1/ 10\ of 1 percentage point.
Gross Domestic Product Deflator.--For purposes of this section, the gross domestic product deflator for any calendar quarter is the implicit price deflator for the gross domestic product for such quarter (as shown in the last revision thereof released by the Secretary of Commerce before the close of the following calendar quarter).
Treatment of Improvements to Property.--If there is an addition to the adjusted basis of a principal residence during a taxable year by reason of an improvement to such residence, and the aggregate amount thereof during the taxable year with respect to such residence is $1,000 or more, such improvement shall be separately indexed under subsections (b) and (c) as if the improvement were a separate residence acquired at the close of such taxable year, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1021 the following new item: ``Sec.
Adjusted basis of principal residence.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to residences sold or exchanged after December 31, 1996, for taxable years beginning after such date.