This Act may be cited as the ``Technology Education Capital Investment Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the high technology industry is one of the fastest growing areas in the United States economy; (2) the United States is a world leader in the high technology industries, and especially in the information technology industry; (3) the continued growth and prosperity of the high technology industry is important to the continued prosperity of the United States economy; (4) an adequate supply of highly-skilled technology workers is essential for the success of advanced technologies and business entities that use information technology; (5) as of the date of enactment of this Act, there is a shortage of information technology workers and workers in other high technology industries; and (6) in the absence of a concerted effort by business entities, the Federal Government, the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof, and educational institutions, the shortage of information technology workers will continue to be a problem.
NATIONAL SCIENCE FOUNDATION EDUCATION PROGRAMS.
Informal Science Programs.--(1) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of the National Science Foundation to conduct informal science and math education programs $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000.
(A) The National Science Foundation shall expand the informal science and math education programs conducted by the Foundation that promote the understanding of science and technology through voluntary, self-directed, and life-long learning opportunities by fostering community-based and institutional math and science education programs.
In expanding such programs, the Director may give priority to providing for organizations, projects, or programs that provide inquiry-based and hands-on scientific learning opportunities for students at pre- kindergarten through secondary education levels.
Of the amount appropriated in paragraph (1), there are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of the National Science Foundation to carry out subparagraph (A) $14,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999 and 2000.
Expansion of National Advanced Scientific and Technical Education Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of the National Science Foundation to carry out the national advanced scientific and technical education program under section 3(a) of the Scientific and Advanced-Technology Act of 1992 (42 United States Code 1862i(a))-- (1) $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1999; and (2) $60,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
TECHNOLOGY EDUCATION STATE STIMULUS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of Education may make grants to States to provide supplementary scholarships to students for study leading to a postsecondary degree in science, math, engineering, or a related field.
Such scholarships may be awarded by a State entity such as the State higher education system, the State scholarship commission, or an equivalent State entity.
Eligibility.--(1) A scholarship awarded under subsection (a) may be applied to any technology-related degree program offered at an accredited institution of higher learning, including a college, university, community college, or vocational-training institution.
A scholarship awarded under subsection (a) may not, when combined with other sources of financial assistance, exceed the cost of tuition and related expenses of the qualified degree program of the recipient.
Matching Requirement.--The Secretary of Education may not make a grant to a State under subsection (a) unless such State provides not less than one-half of the cost of the program for which the grant is provided from State funds.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Education a total of $50,000,000 for grants under this subsection.
HANDS-ON STUDENT TRAINING (H.O.S.T.)
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce may make start-up grants to institutions of higher learning to develop industry-sponsored internship programs that provide opportunities for undergraduate engineering students to receive hands-on training at local businesses.
Priorities.--Special emphasis shall be given under this section to those programs that-- (1) demonstrate a long-term financial commitment from industry participants for initiation and long-term operation of the program; (2) involve extensive input and participation by all industry participants; (3) adequately financially compensate student participants; and (4) encourage technology education.
Restrictions.--(1) Not more than one grant may be awarded to an entity under subsection (a).
Awards under subsection (a) may be applied to expenses related to the creation of the programs described in that subsection, including the recruitment of businesses or organizations to participate in such programs.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce a total of $2,000,000 for grants under this subsection.
PERMANENT EXTENSION OF EMPLOYER-PROVIDED EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE; RESTORATION OF EXCLUSION FOR GRADUATE LEVEL ASSISTANCE.
Exclusion Made Permanent.-- (1) In general.--Section 127 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to educational assistance programs) is amended by striking subsection (d).
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to taxable years beginning after May 31, 1998.
Restoration of Exclusion for Graduate Level Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The last sentence of section 127(c)(1) of such Code is amended by striking all that follows ``hobbies'' and inserting a period.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to expenses relating to courses beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Business entity.--The term ``business entity'' means a firm, corporation, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, or other form of enterprise.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Technology Workforce Commission established under subsection (b).
Information technology.--The term ``information technology'' has the meaning given that term in section 5002 of the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 (110 United States Statutes at Large 679).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the territories of the United States, and the District of Columbia.
Establishment of Technology Workforce Commission.-- (1) In general.--There is established a commission to be known as the Technology Workforce Commission.
Membership.-- (A) Composition.--(i) The Commission shall be composed of 21 members to be appointed as follows: (I) Seven members shall be appointed by the President, and shall be individuals who are officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Four members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, of whom one shall be a Member of Congress.
Three members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House, of whom one shall be a Member of Congress.
Four members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, of whom one shall be a Member of Congress.
Three members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate, of whom one shall be a Member of Congress.
Of the members appointed under clauses (i)(II) through (i)(V)-- (I) Seven shall be individuals employed in high technology business entities; and (II) Three shall be representatives of State governments.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made by the date that is 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Period of appointment; vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Commission shall select a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its members.
Duties of Commission.-- (1) Study.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the shortage of technology workers in the United States.
Matters studied.--The matters studied by the Commission shall include an examination of-- (i) the causes of the shortage of technology workers in the United States; (ii) possible solutions to address the shortage referred to in clause (i); and (iii) the relative efficacy of programs in the United States and foreign countries to provide for an increase in the number of technology workers, with special emphasis on programs that provide for secondary education or postsecondary education in a program other than a 4-year baccalaureate program (including associate degree programs and graduate degree programs).
Public hearings.--As part of the study conducted under this subsection, the Commission shall hold public hearings concerning the issues referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (B).
Existing information.--To the extent practicable, in carrying out the study under this subsection, the Commission shall identify and use existing information related to the issues referred to in clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (B).
Consultation with chief information officers council.--In carrying out the study under this subsection, the Commission shall consult with the Chief Information Officers Council established under Executive Order No.
Report.--Not later than one year after the initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and the Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
Facilitation of exchange of information.--In carrying out the study under this subsection, the Commission shall, to the extent practicable, facilitate the exchange of information concerning the issues that are the subject of the study among-- (A) officials of the Federal Government and the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof; and (B) educators from Federal, State, and local institutions of higher education and secondary schools.
Powers of the Commission.-- (1) Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information from federal agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Commission Personnel Matters.-- (1) Compensation of members.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (A) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Termination of Commission.--The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under this subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated $750,000 for fiscal year 1999 to the Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.