This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Homesteading Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) rural areas are suffering from-- (A) an out-migration of workers and loss of population at a significantly higher rate than the rest of the United States; and (B) higher rates of poverty and unemployment than the rest of the United States; (2) rural areas have not enjoyed the same growth in the technology industry as other areas of the United States; (3) recruiting high-skilled workers to rural areas has been particularly difficult; and (4) in order to allow rural areas to participate fully in the unprecedented economic prosperity of the rest of the United States, high-skilled workers have to be recruited specially to these areas of the United States.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR RURAL AMERICA.
Establishment of Program.-- (1) Coordination of use of h-1b fees with development of high-tech jobs.--There is established a program under which the Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct up to 6 demonstration projects involving the employment of H-1B workers in rural areas, which projects shall serve to coordinate the use of employer-paid immigration fees with the development of high- tech employment opportunities in those areas.
Grant authority.-- (A) Authorization.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to implement the program established by paragraph (1) through the award of grants to economic development planning districts in rural areas.
Application procedures.--Each economic development planning district desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary of Agriculture at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by or containing such information as the Secretary shall reasonably require.
Calculation of grant amount.--The amount of each grant awarded under this paragraph to an economic development planning district in a fiscal year shall equal the total amount of fees paid by employers under section 214(c)(9) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1184(c)(9)) in that fiscal year with respect to the employment in that district of H-1B workers described in section 4(a).
Designation of grant applicant and recipient.-- For each economic development planning district, the Secretary of Agriculture shall designate a single entity for purposes of applying for and receiving grant funds under this section.
Uses of grant funds.--Grants awarded under paragraph (2) shall be available only for providing education, training, equipment, and infrastructure in connection with the employment of H-1B workers within that district.
Memorandum of Understanding.--For purposes of eligibility for a demonstration project under the program established by this section, the designated planning district may enter into a memorandum of understanding with 1 or more economic development planning districts in an adjacent State.
Economic Development Planning District Defined.--In this section, the term ``economic development planning district'' means an area designated by the Secretary of Agriculture that meets following criteria: (1) Location of districts.--The district is situated in a State that shares an international border with Canada.
Resolution of support.--The counties or municipalities, or corporations established pursuant to Public Law 92-203, as amended, that comprise the district have signed a resolution of support to bring high-tech development into the district.
Declaration of need.--The district has executed a declaration of need confirming that the district has experienced-- (A) an outmigration of at least 20 percent of its population over the past 30 years; (B) unemployment rates or poverty rates that are substantially above the national average rate for unemployment or poverty, respectively; or (C) has a population that is 10 percent or more Native American.
Partnership with industry or institutions of higher education.--The district has established a partnership with industry, or an institution of higher education, to recruit high-skilled workers into the district.
Incentive package.--The district has developed an incentive package for high-skilled workers, including job offers, and other financial benefits.
Training program.--The district has established a training program for workers living in the district.
ALLOCATION OF H-1B VISAS.
In General.--Effective October 1, 2001, of the total number of aliens who may be issued visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status under section 101(a)(15)(H)(i)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act each fiscal year, not to exceed 12,000 aliens may be issued H-1B visas or otherwise provided nonimmigrant status under that section for employment in demonstration projects conducted under the program established by section 3, of which number not to exceed 2,000 aliens may be accorded such status for employment in any single demonstration project conducted under that program.
H-1B Nonimmigrant Petition Fees.-- (1) Establishment of account.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury of the United States a separate account, which shall be known as the ``Twenty-first Century Homesteading Account''.
Deposit of fees.--Notwithstanding section 286(s) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1356(s)), fees collected under section 214(c)(9) of that Act (8 United States Code 1184(c)(9)) with respect to the employment of H-1B workers described in subsection (a) shall be deposited as offsetting receipts into the account.
Use of fees.--Fees deposited into the account shall remain available to the Secretary of Agriculture until expended to carry out demonstration projects conducted under the program established by section 3.
Nothing in this Act shall supersede, amend, or repeal the procedures under which an employer must file an application with the Secretary of Labor for an H-1B visa for a nonimmigrant in a specialty occupation.
In this Act: (1) H-1B visa.--The term ``H-1B visa'' means a visa issued under section 101(a)(15)(H)(i)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
H-1B worker.--The term ``H-1B worker'' means an alien who holds a valid H-1B visa or who otherwise has been provided nonimmigrant status under section 101(a)(15)(H)(i)(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a))).
Native american.--The term ``Native American'' means-- (A) an Indian, as defined in section 4(d) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(d)); and (B) an Alaska Native, within the meaning provided for the term ``Native'' in section 3(b) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1602(b)).
Rural area.--The term ``rural area'' means an area that is located-- (A) outside a standard metropolitan statistical area; or (B) within a community that has a population of 50,000 individuals or fewer.