This Act may be cited as the ``Work-Life Balance Award Act''.
In this Act: (1) Employer.--The term ``employer''-- (A) means any person (as defined in section 3(a) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 202(a))) engaged in commerce or in any industry or activity affecting commerce; and (B) includes any agency of a State, or political subdivision thereof.
The term does not include the Government of the United States or any agency thereof.
Work-life balance policy.--The term ``work-life balance policy'' means a workplace practice designed to enable employees to achieve a satisfactory work-life balance.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Labor.
In General.--There is established in the Department of Labor an annual award to be known as the Work-Life Balance Award (hereinafter referred to as the ``Award'') for employers that have developed and implemented work-life balance policies.
Plaque.--The Award shall be evidenced by a plaque bearing the title ``Work-Life Balance Award''.
Application.-- (1) In general.--An employer desiring consideration for an Award shall submit an application to the Work-Life Balance Advisory Board established under section 4, at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as such Board may require.
Reapplication.--An employer may reapply for an Award, regardless of whether the employer has been a previous recipient of such Award.
Display on Web Site.--The Secretary shall make publically available on its Web site the names of each recipient of the Award.
Presentation of Award.--After receiving recommendations from the Board established under section 4, the Secretary (or the Secretary's designee) shall present annually the Award to employers that meet the criteria developed under section 4(b)(1).
WORK-LIFE BALANCE ADVISORY BOARD.
Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Labor a Work-Life Balance Advisory Board (hereinafter referred to as the ``Board'').
Duties.--The Board shall-- (1) subject to the approval by the Secretary, not later than 180 days after the initial meeting described under subsection (f)(1)(B), develop criteria to determine recipients of the Award.
In developing such criteria, such Board shall-- (A) identify those work-life balance policies, which if properly implemented, will permit employees to achieve a work-life balance; (B) take into consideration an employer's record of compliance, or noncompliance, with Federal and State labor laws; and (C) seek input from all interested parties to assist in making a determination of the recipients of the Award, including input from stakeholders; (2) develop a process for receiving and processing applications; (3) recommend recipients of the Award from among those applications submitted to the Board in accordance with section 3(c); (4) present to the Secretary the names of the employers that the Board recommends as recipients of the Award in accordance with the criteria developed under paragraph (1); and (5) set an annual timetable for fulfilling the duties described under this subsection.
Revisions.--The Board, subject to the approval of the Secretary, may make revisions, as appropriate, to the criteria developed under subsection (b)(1) from time to time.
Membership.-- (1) Numbers and appointment.--Subject to paragraphs (2) through (5), the Board shall be composed of 9 members appointed by the Secretary as follows: (A) 1 member, who shall serve as chairperson of the Board, representing the public.
1 member representing a State or local government.
1 member representing a nonprofit employer.
2 members representing private industry or industry organizations.
2 members representing labor organizations.
2 members representing families and children.
Recommendations.--In appointing any member of the Board under paragraph (1) who is not the chairperson of such Board, the Speaker and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, and the majority and minority leader of the Senate, each shall submit to the Secretary recommendations with the names of proposed members of the Board, and from such submissions the Secretary shall appoint the members of the Board in accordance with such paragraph.
Limitation.--The Secretary may not appoint any Member of Congress to the Board.
Political affiliation.--Not more than 4 members of the Board appointed under paragraph (1) may be of the same political party.
Qualifications.--Members of the Board shall be individuals with knowledge of and experience with work-life balance policies.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided under paragraphs (2) and (3), each member of the Board shall be appointed for 2 years and may be reappointed.
Terms of initial appointees.--As designated by the Secretary at the time of appointment, of the members of the Board first appointed, 4 shall each be appointed for a 2-year term and the remainder shall each be appointed for a 3-year term.
Vacancies.--Any member of the Board appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
Operations.-- (1) Meetings.-- (A) In general.--Except for the initial meeting of the Board under subparagraph (B), the Board shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Initial meeting.--The Board shall conduct its first meeting not later than 90 days after the appointment of all of its members.
Voting and rules.--A majority of members of the Board shall constitute a quorum to conduct business.
The Board may establish by majority vote any other rules for the conduct of the business of the Board, if such rules are not inconsistent with this section or other applicable law.
The Secretary may prescribe regulations to carry out the purposes of this Act.