This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Attorney Fee Payment System Improvement Act of 2002''.
CAP ON ATTORNEY ASSESSMENTS.
In General.--Section 206(d)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 406(d)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting ``, except that the maximum amount of the assessment may not exceed $75'' after ``subparagraph (B)''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply with respect to fees for representation of claimants which are first required to be certified or paid under section 206 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 406) on or after the first day of the first month that begins after 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF ATTORNEY FEE PAYMENT SYSTEM TO TITLE XVI CLAIMS.
In General.--Section 1631(d)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1383(d)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), in the matter preceding clause (i)-- (A) by striking ``section 206(a)'' and inserting ``section 206''; (B) by striking ``(other than paragraph (4) thereof)'' and inserting ``(other than subsections (a)(4) and (d) thereof); and (C) by striking ``paragraph (2) thereof'' and inserting ``such section''; (2) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ``in subparagraphs (A)(ii)(I) and (C)(i),'' and inserting ``in subparagraphs (A)(ii)(I) and (D)(i) of subsection (a)(2)'', and by striking ``and'' at the end; (3) by striking subparagraph (A)(ii) and inserting the following: ``(ii) by substituting, in subsections (a)(2)(B) and (b)(1)(B)(i), the phrase `section 1631(a)(7)(A) or the requirements of due process of law' for the phrase `subsection (g) or (h) of section 223'; ``(iii) by substituting, in subsection (a)(2)(C)(i), the phrase `under title II' for the phrase `under title XVI'; ``(iv) by substituting, in subsection (b)(1)(A), the phrase `pay the amount of such fee' for the phrase `certify the amount of such fee for payment' and by striking, in subsection (b)(1)(A), the phrase `or certified for payment'; and ``(v) by substituting, in subsection (b)(1)(B)(ii), the phrase `deemed to be such amounts as determined before any applicable reduction under section 1631(g), and reduced by the amount of any reduction in benefits under this title or title II made pursuant to section 1127(a)' for the phrase `determined before any applicable reduction under section 1127(a))'.
''; and (4) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following new subparagraphs: ``(B) Subject to subparagraph (C), if the claimant is determined to be entitled to past-due benefits under this title and the person representing the claimant is an attorney, the Commissioner of Social Security shall pay out of such past-due benefits to such attorney an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(i) so much of the maximum fee as does not exceed 25 percent of such past-due benefits (as determined before any applicable reduction under section 1631(g) and reduced by the amount of any reduction in benefits under this title or title II pursuant to section 1127(a)), or ``(ii) the amount of past-due benefits available after any applicable reductions under sections 1631(g) and 1127(a).
(i) Whenever a fee for services is required to be paid to an attorney from a claimant's past-due benefits pursuant to subparagraph (B), the Commissioner shall impose on the attorney an assessment calculated in accordance with clause (ii).
(I) The amount of an assessment under clause (i) shall be equal to the product obtained by multiplying the amount of the representative's fee that would be required to be paid by subparagraph (B) before the application of this subparagraph, by the percentage specified in subclause (II), except that the maximum amount of the assessment may not exceed $75.
The percentage specified in this subclause is such percentage rate as the Commissioner determines is necessary in order to achieve full recovery of the costs of determining and approving fees to attorneys from the past-due benefits of claimants, but not in excess of 6.3 percent.
The Commissioner may collect the assessment imposed on an attorney under clause (i) by offset from the amount of the fee otherwise required by subparagraph (B) to be paid to the attorney from a claimant's past-due benefits.
An attorney subject to an assessment under clause (i) may not, directly or indirectly, request or otherwise obtain reimbursement for such assessment from the claimant whose claim gave rise to the assessment.
Assessments on attorneys collected under this subparagraph shall be deposited in the Treasury in a separate fund created for this purpose.
The assessments authorized under this subparagraph shall be collected and available for obligation only to the extent and in the amount provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Amounts so appropriated are authorized to remain available until expended, for administrative expenses in carrying out this title and related laws.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to fees for representation of claimants which are first required to be certified or paid under section 1631(d)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1383(d)(2)) on or after the first day of the first month that begins after 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act.