This Act may be cited as the ``Railroad Shipper Protection Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the railroad industry has consolidated dramatically since passage of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980 (94 United States Statutes at Large 1895 et sequentes), leaving the railroad industry with only a few major carriers and providing shippers with limited competitive options; (2) the financial health of the railroad industry has improved substantially since the passage of the Staggers Rail Act of 1980; (3) due partly to the continued consolidation of the railroad industry, captive rail shippers-- (A) continue to exist; and (B) are increasing in number; and (4) rail shippers, including captive rail shippers, will benefit from increased competition among railroads and a streamlined process under which the Surface Transportation Board determines the reasonableness of captive rail shipper rates.
In this Act: (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Surface transportation board.--The term ``Surface Transportation Board'' or ``Board'' means the Surface Transportation Board established under section 701 of title 49, United States Code.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to clarify the rail transportation policy of the United States; (2) to ensure rail competition for shippers in geographic areas in which rail competition is physically available; (3) to ensure reasonable rates for captive rail shippers; and (4) to remove unnecessary regulatory burdens from the rate reasonableness process of the Surface Transportation Board.
CLARIFICATION OF RAIL TRANSPORTATION POLICY.
Section 10101 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``In regulating''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Primary Objectives.--The primary objectives of the rail transportation policy of the United States shall be-- ``(1) to ensure effective competition among rail carriers at origin and destination; and ``(2) to maintain reasonable rates in the absence of effective competition.''.
REQUIREMENT OF RAILROADS TO ESTABLISH RATES TO FACILITATE RAIL TO RAIL COMPETITION.
Establishment of Rate.--Section 11101(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Upon the request of a shipper, a rail carrier shall establish a rate for transportation requested by the shipper between any 2 points on the system of that rail carrier where traffic originates, terminates, or may be interchanged.
A rate established under the preceding sentence shall apply to the shipper that makes the request for the rate without regard to whether the rate established is for part of a through transportation route between an origin and a destination or whether the shipper has made arrangements for transportation over any other part of that through route.''.
Review of Reasonableness of Rate.--Section 10701(d) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) If a rail carrier establishes a rate for transportation between any 2 points on the system of that rail carrier where rail traffic originates, terminates, or may be interchanged, the shipper may challenge the reasonableness of-- ``(A) that rate; or ``(B) the aggregate rate between origin and destination (if the rate established is for part of a through route).''.
SIMPLIFIED STANDARD FOR MARKET DOMINANCE.
Section 10707(d) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (2); (2) by striking ``(1)(A)'' and inserting ``(3)''; (3) by striking ``(B) For purposes'' and inserting ``(4) For purposes''; and (4) by inserting before paragraph (3), as redesignated, the following: ``(1) In making a determination under this section, the Board shall find that the rail carrier establishing the challenged rate referred to in subsection (b) has market dominance over the transportation to which the rate applies if that rail carrier-- ``(A) is the only rail carrier serving the origin, destination, or intermediate portion of the route involved; and ``(B) does not prove to the Board that the rate charged results in a revenue-variable cost percentage for that transportation that is less than 180 percent.
In making a market dominance determination under this section in any case in which 2 or more rail carriers provide service at an origin or destination, the Board shall consider only transportation competition at that origin or destination.''.
Rail Transportation Policy.--Section 10101(3) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``, as determined by the Board;''.
Authority for Revenue Adequacy Determination.--Section 10704(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``(a)(1)'' and inserting ``(a)''; and (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3).
REDUCTION OF PROCEDURAL BARRIERS FACED BY SMALL SHIPPERS.
Administrative Relief.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Surface Transportation Board shall-- (1) review the rules and procedures applicable to rate complaints and other complaints filed with the Board by small shippers; (2) identify any such rules or procedures that are unduly burdensome to small shippers; and (3) take such action, including rulemaking, as is appropriate to reduce or eliminate the aspects of the rules and procedures that the Board determines under paragraph (2) to be unduly burdensome to small shippers.
Legislative Relief.--The Board shall notify the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives if the Board determines that additional changes in the rules and procedures described in subsection (a) are appropriate and require commensurate changes in statutory law.
In making that notification, the Board shall make recommendations concerning those changes.