This Act may be cited as the ``Shipping Relief for Agriculture Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Efficient, competitive, broadly available waterborne cargo transportation service is imperative to American agriculture and an essential component of a national intermodal transportation system, and such services should be promoted by the United States.
The cost of building ships in the United States is so uncompetitive with international shipbuilders that it is effectively prohibiting the growth and modernization of the Jones Act fleet.
The decline of ships of over 1,000 tons in the Jones Act fleet, and the resulting decrease in the number of seamen, represents a dimunition in emergency sealift capacity in times of national emergency.
In the last several decades, the size of the active United States domestic deepwater fleet has shrunk substantially, to a total today of only 118 self-propelled oceangoing vessels of over 1,000 tons and 59 vessels in the Great Lakes.
No Jones Act bulk carriers operate on either coast of the United States.
The result has been shipping shortages, higher prices, and significant commercial transportation inefficiencies, all of which can be alleviated, without any cost to the taxpayer, by increasing competition in domestic deepwater shipping.
Such inefficiencies undermine the competitive position of a broad range of American businesses, particularly in potential domestic markets, versus their foreign competition.
These shipping shortages and higher-than-market prices have led to the loss of American jobs to overseas competitors able to purchase transportation services on the international market.
Lack of access to adequate deepwater commercial waterborne transportation alternatives suppresses economic activity in an amount of between $4,200,000,000 and $10,000,000,000 annually and causes the loss of associated tax revenue, according to a study by the United States International Trade Commission.
Similarly, allowing domestic transportation service providers to purchase their vessels on the international market without penalty will lower their operating expenses, creating savings which they can pass on to their customers in the form of lower prices and improved efficiency.
Expansion of the Jones Act fleet will create more jobs for United States seamen and longshore workers.
LIMITATION ON APPLICATION OF COASTWISE TRADE RESTRICTION ON TRANSPORTATION OF CERTAIN AGRICULTURAL, BULK, OR FOREST PRODUCT CARGO BY FREIGHT VESSELS.
Amendment to the Merchant Marine Act, 1920.--Section 27 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920 (46 United States Code App.
883), is amended by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1) Any requirement under this section that a vessel must be constructed in the United States shall not apply with respect to deepwater transportation of qualified cargo by a freight vessel, if the vessel-- ``(A) is documented under the laws of the United States; ``(B) is owned by persons who are citizens of the United States; and ``(C) otherwise complies with this section with respect to that transportation.
In this subsection-- ``(A) the term `deepwater transportation' means any combination of-- ``(i) transportation outside the Boundary Line; ``(ii) transportation on the Great Lakes; and ``(iii) such transportation inside the Boundary Line as is necessary to enter or depart from a port in the United States; ``(B) the term `qualified cargo' means noncontainerized, nonliquid merchandise that is agricultural cargo, bulk cargo, or forest products; ``(C) the term `agricultural cargo' includes grains, livestock, fertilizer, seed, and other bulk agricultural inputs; ``(D) each of the terms `bulk cargo' and `forest products' has the meaning that term has under section 3 of the Shipping Act of 1984 (46 United States Code App.
1702)); and ``(E) each of the terms `Boundary Line' and `freight vessel' has the meaning that term has under section 2101 of title 46, United States Code.''.
Amendment to Title 46, United States Code.--Section 12106 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f)(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a)(2), a certificate of documentation for a freight vessel that was not built in the United States may be endorsed with a coastwise endorsement under this subsection if the vessel-- ``(A) is eligible for documentation; and ``(B) otherwise qualifies under the laws of the United States to be employed in coastwise trade authorized by the endorsement.
Coastwise trade authorized by a coastwise endorsement under this subsection shall consist solely of deepwater transportation of qualified cargo (as those terms are defined in section 27(b)(2)).