This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Prevention Act''.
PREVENTION OF FETAL ALCOHOL SYNDROME; PROGRAM OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE ON ALCOHOL ABUSE AND ALCOHOLISM.
Subpart 14 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285n et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``fetal alcohol syndrome ``Sec.
In General.--The Director of the Institute shall establish a program for the conduct and support of research and training, the dissemination of health information, and other programs with respect to the cause, diagnosis, prevention, and treatment of fetal alcohol syndrome and the related condition known as fetal alcohol effects (which syndrome and effects are referred to collectively in this section as `fetal alcohol conditions').
Interagency Coordinating Committee.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (6), the Secretary shall establish a committee to be known as the Interagency Coordinating Committee on Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (in this subsection referred to as the `Coordinating Committee').
Duties.--With respect to fetal alcohol conditions, the Coordinating Committee shall-- ``(A) coordinate the activities of the National Institutes of Health; and ``(B) coordinate the aspects of all Federal health programs and activities relating to such conditions in order to assure the adequacy and technical soundness of such programs and activities, and in order to provide for the full communication and exchange of information necessary to maintain adequate coordination of such programs and activities.
Composition.--The Coordinating Committee shall be composed of-- ``(A) the directors of each of the national research institutes, and the heads of other agencies of the National Institutes of Health, that are involved in research on fetal alcohol conditions; and ``(B) representatives of all other Federal departments and agencies whose programs involve health functions or responsibilities relevant to such conditions.
Chair.--The Secretary shall designate a member of the Coordinating Committee to serve as the chair of the Committee.
The Committee shall meet at the call of the Chair, but not less than four times a year.
Annual report.-- ``(A) In carrying out paragraph (2), the Coordinating Committee shall comply with the following: ``(i) Identify and monitor all activities regarding fetal alcohol conditions that are conducted or supported by the Department of Health and Human Services and other Federal departments or agencies.
Identify the goals expected to be achieved through the activities.
Conduct evaluations of the extent to which the activities have been effective in achieving such goals.
Determine the extent to which the activities have been coordinated with each other.
Make recommendations on the activities that should be carried out, on priorities among the activities, and on the coordination of the activities.
Subject to paragraph (6)(B), the Coordinating Committee shall, for each fiscal year, prepare and submit to the Congress a report detailing the activities of the Committee in carrying out the duties of the Committee for the fiscal year.
The Coordinating Committee shall submit copies of each such report to the Secretary, the Director of NIH, the officials specified in paragraph (3)(A), and the advisory council for the Institute.
Except as provided in paragraph (6)(B), each such report shall be submitted not later than February 1 of the fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the report is prepared.
Initial intradepartmental status of committee.-- ``(A) During fiscal years 1996 and 1997, the Secretary shall ensure that individuals appointed to the Coordinating Committee under paragraph (3)(B) include only officers or employees of the Department of Health and Human Services, and that the duties of the Coordinating Committee are carried out only with respect to such Department.
The first report under subparagraph (B) of paragraph (5) shall concern fiscal years 1996 and 1997, and shall consist of the findings and recommendations made by the Coordinating Committee in applying subparagraph (A) of such paragraph to the Department of Health and Human Services.
Such report shall be submitted not later than February 1, 1998.
Prevention activities.--With respect to activities for the prevention of fetal alcohol conditions-- ``(A) the Coordinating Committee shall, as soon as is practicable after the date on which this section takes effect, develop recommendations under paragraph (5)(A) regarding the Department of Health and Human Services; and ``(B) such Committee shall, as soon as is practicable after October 1, 1997, develop recommendations under such paragraph regarding other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Certain Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--Activities under subsection (a) regarding fetal alcohol conditions shall include conducting and supporting basic and applied research, including epidemiological research; demonstrations; the training of health professionals, including the development of professional practice standards for detecting and preventing such conditions in pregnant women and for counseling such women; the evaluation of programs, including training programs; and the dissemination of diagnostic criteria.
Activities under such subsection shall include the provision of technical assistance to public and nonprofit private entities that carry out such programs.
Prevention; public awareness.-- ``(A) With respect to the prevention of fetal alcohol conditions, each of the requirements of paragraph (1) regarding the conduct and support of various types of activities shall be carried out, except to the extent inapplicable to prevention activities.
Activities conducted or supported pursuant to the preceding sentence shall include carrying out a comprehensive program to educate health professionals and the general public, and shall include programs directed toward at-risk populations.
Programs under this paragraph that are directed toward particular populations shall be provided in the language and cultural context most appropriate for the population involved.
In the conduct and support of activities under subparagraph (A), special emphasis shall be placed upon the utilization of collaborative efforts with both the public and private sectors for the purpose of-- ``(i) increasing the awareness and knowledge of health professionals and the public regarding the prevention of fetal alcohol conditions; and ``(ii) developing and disseminating to health professionals, patients and patient families, and the public information designed to encourage individuals to adopt healthful practices concerning the prevention of such conditions.
Uniform Criteria for Collection and Reporting of Data.--In order to provide for the comparability of data on fetal alcohol conditions, the Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, develop uniform criteria for the collection and reporting of such data by or through the National Institutes of Health and the other agencies of the Department of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary shall encourage the States to utilize such criteria.
Collaborative Activities.--The Secretary may require that an activity under this section be carried out in collaboration with or through one or more of the other agencies of the Department of Health and Human Services, and amounts made available under subsection (f) are available to the Secretary for such purpose.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 2000.