This Act may be cited as the ``Hospital Stay Protection Act''.
STANDARD RELATING TO HOSPITAL LENGTHS OF STAY.
Group Health Plans.-- (1) Public health service act amendments.-- (A) In general.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 703(a) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARD RELATING TO HOSPITAL LENGTHS OF STAY.
Requirement.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall ensure that inpatient coverage is provided for a period of time as is determined by a physician, in consultation with the patient, to be medically appropriate.
Prohibitions.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, may not-- ``(1) deny eligibility, or continued eligibility, to enroll or to renew coverage under the terms of the plan, solely for the purpose of avoiding the minimum coverage requirements of subsection (a); ``(2) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of a provider because such provider provided care to a participant or beneficiary in accordance with this section; ``(3) provide incentives (monetary or otherwise) to a provider to induce such provider to keep the length of inpatient stays of patients below certain levels; or ``(4) require preauthorization for determination of a length of stay.
Appeals Process and Penalty.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor shall establish-- ``(1) a process for a participant, enrollee, or beneficiary to appeal the decision of a plan or issuer; and ``(2) a penalty for plans or issuers that violate the provisions of this section.
Notice.--A group health plan under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 713(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements of this section as if such section applied to such plan.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 2723(c) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-23(c)) is amended by striking ``section 2704'' and inserting ``sections 2704 and 2706''.
Amendments to the employee retirement income security act of 1974.-- (A) In general.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARDS FOR HOSPITAL LENGTHS OF STAY.
Requirement.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall ensure that inpatient coverage is provided for a period of time as is determined by a physician, in consultation with the patient, to be medically appropriate.
Prohibitions.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, may not-- ``(1) deny eligibility, or continued eligibility, to enroll or to renew coverage under the terms of the plan, solely for the purpose of avoiding the minimum coverage requirements of subsection (a); ``(2) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of a provider because such provider provided care to a participant or beneficiary in accordance with this section; ``(3) provide incentives (monetary or otherwise) to a provider to induce such provider to keep the length of inpatient stays of patients below certain levels; or ``(4) require preauthorization for determination of a length of stay.
Appeals Process and Penalty.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish-- ``(1) a process for a participant, enrollee, or beneficiary to appeal the decision of a plan or issuer; and ``(2) a penalty for plans or issuers that violate the provisions of this section.
Notice Under Group Health Plan.--The imposition of the requirements of this section shall be treated as a material modification in the terms of the plan described in section 102(a)(1), for purposes of assuring notice of such requirements under the plan; except that the summary description required to be provided under the last sentence of section 104(b)(1) with respect to such modification shall be provided by not later than 60 days after the first day of the first plan year in which such requirements apply.''.
Conforming and clerical amendments.--(i) Section 731(c) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191(c)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 713''.
Section 732(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191a(a)) is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 713''.
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 712 the following new item: ``Sec.
Standard for hospital lengths of stay.''.
Individual Health Insurance.-- (1) In general.--Subpart 3 of part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARDS FOR HOSPITAL LENGTHS OF STAY.
In General.--The provisions of section 2706 (other than subsection (d)) shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as they apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in the small or large group market.
Notice.--A health insurance issuer under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 713(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) as if such section applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.''.
Conforming amendment.--Section 2762(b)(2) of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-62(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``section 2751'' and inserting ``sections 2751 and 2752''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Group market reforms.-- (A) In general.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply with respect to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1999.
Special rule for collective bargaining agreements.--In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and 1 or more employers ratified before such date, the amendments made by such subsections shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of-- (i) the date on which the last collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of enactment of this Act), or (ii) January 1, 1999.
For purposes of clause (i), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by such subsections shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
Individual market amendments.--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after January 1, 1999.
Coordinated Regulations.--Section 104(1) of Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 is amended by striking ``this subtitle (and the amendments made by this subtitle and section 401)'' and inserting ``the provisions of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, the provisions of parts A and C of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, and chapter 100 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986''.