This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Play Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) June 23, 1997, marks the 25th anniversary of the signing of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972 (20 United States Code 1681 et sequentes) into law, and on that day communities across the United States will honor the tremendous difference such title IX has made to women and girls in our Nation.
Since enactment in 1972, such title IX has played a vital role in expanding the athletic opportunities available to American girls and women.
Prior to the enactment of such title IX, fewer than 32,000 women competed in intercollegiate athletics, women received only 2 percent of schools' athletic budgets, and athletic scholarships for women were practically nonexistent.
In 1997, more than 110,000 women competed in intercollegiate sports, and women account for 37 percent of college varsity athletes.
While such title IX has been very successful, a significant gap remains between the athletic opportunities available to men and the athletic opportunities available to women.
According to a 1997 study by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, female college athletes receive only 23 percent of athletic operating budgets, 38 percent of athletic scholarship dollars, and 27 percent of the money spent to recruit new athletes.
While women represent 53 percent of the students attending institutions of higher education, women comprise only 37 percent of the athletes attending institutions of higher education.
There is substantial evidence that women and girls who participate in athletics have better physical and emotional health than women and girls who do not participate, and that participation in athletics can improve academic achievement.
Easily accessible information regarding the expenditures of institutions of higher education for women's and men's athletic programs will help prospective students and prospective student athletes make informed judgments about the commitment of a given institution of higher education to providing athletic opportunities to male and female students attending the institution.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to make information regarding men's and women's athletic programs at institutions of higher education easily available to prospective students and prospective student athletes; and (2) to increase the athletic opportunities available to women at institutions of higher education.
Section 485(g) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1092(g)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (3) the following: ``(4) Submission; report; information availability.--(A) Each institution of higher education described in paragraph (1) shall provide to the Secretary, within 15 days of the date that the institution makes available the report under paragraph (1), the information contained in the report.
The Secretary shall prepare a report regarding the information received under subparagraph (A) for each year by April 1 of the year.
The report shall-- ``(i) summarize the information and identify trends in the information; ``(ii) aggregate the information by divisions of the National Collegiate Athletic Association; and ``(iii) contain information on each individual institution of higher education.
The Secretary shall ensure that the report described in subparagraph (B) is made available on the Internet within a reasonable period of time.
The Secretary shall establish, within a reasonable period of time, a toll-free telephone service-- ``(i) to provide the public with information regarding reports described in subparagraph (B); ``(ii) to provide the public with information regarding the information received under subparagraph (A); and ``(iii) to respond to inquiries from the public regarding the provisions of title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
The Secretary shall use the information provided by institutions of higher education under paragraph (1) to ensure compliance with title IX of the Education Amendments of 1972.
The Secretary shall notify, not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, all secondary schools in all States regarding the availability of the information reported under subparagraph (B) and the information made available under paragraph (1), and how such information may be accessed.