This Act may be cited as the ``Work for Warriors Act of 2014''.
DIRECT EMPLOYMENT PILOT PROGRAM FOR MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVE.
Establishment.--Chapter 1601 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``CHAPTER 1601--TRAINING GENERALLY ``Sec.
Work for Warriors Program.
Work for Warriors Program ``(a) Program Authority.--The Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall carry out a pilot program (to be known as the `Work for Warriors Program') to enhance the efforts of the Department of Defense to provide job placement assistance and related employment services directly to members of the reserve components of the armed forces.
Administration.--The Work for Warriors Program shall be offered to, and administered by, the adjutants general appointed under section 314 of title 32.
Cost-Sharing Requirement.--As a condition on the provision of funds under this section to a State to support the operation of a Work for Warriors Program in the State, the State must agree to contribute an amount, derived from non-Federal sources, equal to at least 30 percent of the funds provided by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau.
Direct Employment Program Model.--The Work for Warriors Program should follow a job placement program model that focuses on working one-on-one with a member of a reserve component to cost- effectively provide job placement services, including services such as identifying unemployed and underemployed members, job matching services, resume editing, interview preparation, and post-employment follow up.
Development of the Work for Warriors Program should be informed by State direct employment programs for members of the reserve components of the armed forces, such as the programs conducted in California and South Carolina.
Assistance From Other Federal Agencies.--The Secretary of Labor may provide technical assistance to the Chief of the National Guard Bureau and State adjutants general in the development and implementation of the Work for Warriors Program.
Evaluation.--The Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall develop outcome measurements to evaluate the success of the Work for Warriors Program in a State.
Reporting Requirements.-- ``(1) Report required.--Not later than 180 days after the completion of a Work for Warriors Program conducted under subsection (a), the Chief of the National Guard Bureau shall submit to the congressional defense committees a report describing the results of the program.
The Chief shall prepare the report in coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.
Elements of report.--A report under paragraph (1) shall include the following: ``(A) A description and assessment of the effectiveness and achievements of the Work for Warriors Program, including the number of members of the reserve components hired and the cost-per-placement of participating members.
An assessment of the impact of the Work for Warriors Program and increased reserve component employment levels on the readiness of members of the reserve components.
A comparison of the Work for Warriors Program to other programs conducted by the Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs to provide unemployment and underemployment support to members of the reserve components.
Any other matters considered appropriate by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau or the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.
Limitation on Total Fiscal-Year Obligations.--The total amount obligated by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau to carry out the Work for Warriors Program for any fiscal year may not exceed $20,000,000.
Duration of Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The authority of the Chief of the National Guard Bureau to carry out the Work for Warriors Program applies during fiscal years 2015 through 2018.
Extension.--Upon the expiration of the authority under paragraph (1), the Chief of the National Guard Bureau may extend the Work for Warriors Program for not more than two additional fiscal years.''.
Table of Chapters.--The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle E of title 10, United States Code, and at the beginning of part IV of such subtitle, are each amended by striking the item relating to chapter 1601 and inserting the following new item: ``1601.
Work for Warriors Program.......................... 16101''.