This Act may be cited as the ``Full Patent Term Preservation Act of 1996''.
PATENT TERM DETERMINATION AUTHORITY.
In General.--Section 154(b) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Determination of Patent Term.-- ``(1) Basis for patent term adjustment.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the term of a patent shall be adjusted to include the period of time for which the issue of the original patent was delayed due to-- ``(i) a proceeding under section 135(a) of this title; ``(ii) the imposition of an order pursuant to section 181 of this title; ``(iii) appellate review by the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences or by a Federal court where the patent was issued pursuant to a decision in the review reversing an adverse determination of patentability; or ``(iv) an unusual administrative delay by the Office in issuing the patent.
Regulations.--The Commissioner shall prescribe regulations to govern the determination of the period of delay, including the particular circumstances determined to be an unusual administrative delay under subparagraph (A).
Limitations.-- ``(A) Maximum period of adjustment.--The total duration of all adjustments of a patent term under this subsection shall not exceed 10 years.
No patent term may be adjusted by a period greater than the actual period of time that the issue of a patent was delayed as determined by the Commissioner.
To the extent that periods of delay attributable to grounds specified in paragraph (1) overlap, the period of any adjustment granted under this subsection shall not exceed the actual number of days the issuance of the patent was delayed.
Due diligence.--The period of adjustment of the term of a patent under this subsection shall be reduced by a period equal to the time during the processing or examination of the application leading to the patent in which the applicant did not act with due diligence to conclude processing or examination of the application.
The Commissioner shall prescribe regulations establishing the circumstances that constitute a failure of an applicant to act with due diligence to conclude processing or examination of an application.
Terminal disclaimer.--No patent, the term of which has been disclaimed beyond a specified date, may be adjusted under this section beyond the expiration date specified in the disclaimer.
Notice to commissioner.--In a case in which a patent term is adjusted under this subsection, the Commissioner shall determine the period of any patent term adjustment available under this section and shall include a copy of that determination with the final notice.
The Commissioner shall prescribe regulations establishing procedures for the application for, and notification of, patent term adjustments granted by the Commissioner under this subsection.
Judicial review.--Any applicant dissatisfied with a determination by the Commissioner under paragraph (3) may have remedy by civil action in the United States Court of Federal Claims if commenced within 60 days after the mailing of the notice of allowance as the Commissioner appoints.
The initiation of a civil action under this section shall not delay the issuance of a patent.''.
Technical Clarification.--Section 156(a) of title 35, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by inserting ``, which shall include any patent term adjustment granted under section 154(b),'' after ``the original expiration date of the patent''; and (2) in paragraph (2) by inserting before the semicolon ``, except as provided under section 154(b)''.
The amendments made by section 2 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to any application filed on or after June 8, 1995.