This Act may be cited as the ``Landfill Reduction Act of 2000''.
Congress finds that: (1) While most forms of pollution are steadily being reduced in the United States, solid waste discards are projected to increase by 10 percent between 2000 and 2010, based on Environmental Protection Agency data.
American consumers and businesses spend an estimated $1 billion annually to dispose of cardboard boxes and low quality shipping pallets.
The cost of disposing of municipal solid waste has been increasing at a 7 percent annual rate.
There are regional shortages of solid waste disposal capacity, and siting new facilities is contentious for local governments.
These conditions will be exacerbated by the growth of solid waste discards.
There are already spirited interstate disputes, expressed in litigation and legislation, regarding efforts to regulate interstate shipment of solid waste.
Dozens of other nations are pursuing regulatory approaches and surtaxes to reduce the amount of solid waste from packaging.
The Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 establishes a hierarchy for handling waste, with source reduction and reuse being preferable to recycling.
It is in the national environmental and economic interest to reaffirm and emphasize the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990's priority on source reduction and reuse, without resorting to new Federal regulatory requirements or new Federal taxes.
Emerging industry has the means to dramatically reduce the amount of packaging waste, thereby conserving solid waste disposal capacity, improving the environment, and reducing unnecessary costs to consumers, local governments, and business alike.
The purpose of this Act is to provide tax incentives to encourage the utilization of reusable wooden and plastic pallets and plastic containers in order to fulfill the goals of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990, improve national environmental quality through reduced solid waste, increase economic productivity by reducing the costs associated with waste disposal, reduce inflationary pressures associated with the escalating cost of waste disposal, reduce friction among the States concerning interstate solid waste transportation, and provide a cost-efficient nonregulatory model for addressing environmental problems.
INCREASE IN AGGREGATE COST OF REUSABLE PALLETS AND CONTAINERS AND CERTAIN RELATED PROPERTY WHICH MAY BE EXPENSED.
In General.--Section 179 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to election to expense certain depreciable business assets) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Increased Expensing for Reusable Pallets and Containers and Certain Related Property.-- ``(1) In general.--The limitation under subsection (b)(1) (after the application of paragraph (2) and before the application of paragraph (3) of such subsection) shall not be less than an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(A) $500,000, or ``(B) the cost of section 179 property which is qualified reusable pallet and container property placed in service during the taxable year.
Qualified reusable pallet and container property.-- For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified reusable pallet and container property' means-- ``(i) property designed exclusively to manufacture reusable pallet and container property, ``(ii) reusable pallet and container property used exclusively to transport items manufactured or produced by the taxpayer but only if-- ``(I) such transportation is under an arrangement for the return of such property to the taxpayer for reuse, and ``(II) such property does not replace other reusable pallet and container property, ``(iii) property designed exclusively for purposes of inspecting, repairing, cleaning, or maintaining reusable pallet and container property and used exclusively for such purposes with respect to reusable pallet and container property owned or leased by the taxpayer, ``(iv) property designed exclusively to accommodate the use, or enhance the efficiency, of any reusable pallet and container property associated with harvesting, packing, handling, or storage of agricultural products, and ``(v) property which modifies a display for the retail sale of an item exclusively for purposes of permitting such item to be displayed in the reusable pallet and container property in which such item was transported.
Subsection not to apply to certain vehicles.--The term `qualified reusable pallet and container property' shall not include automobiles, vessels, aircraft, trucks, forklifts, pallet jacks, or rolling stock or other similar property.
Reusable pallet and container property.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `reusable pallet and container property' means any wooden or plastic pallet or plastic crate which is under an arrangement for the repeated return of such property to its initial purchaser, for long-term reuse.
Termination.--This subsection shall not apply to any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2008.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.