This Act may be cited as the ``Broadcast Ownership Reform Act of 1999''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The contemporary electronic mass media market provides consumers with abundant alternative sources of news, information and entertainment, including radio and television broadcast stations, cable television systems, and the Internet.
Due to the advent of digital technology, these alternative sources of electronic news, information and entertainment are converging as well as proliferating.
The simultaneous proliferation and convergence of electronic mass media renders technology-specific regulation obsolete.
The public interest demands that the Federal Communications Commission reexamine its technology-specific regulation of electronic mass media to assure that it retains its relevance in the face of the proliferation and convergence of electronic mass media.
Section 202(h) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 recognized that there is a particular public interest need for the Federal Communications Commission to periodically and comprehensively reexamine its radio and television broadcast ownership rules, which predate the proliferation and convergence of alternative competing electronic sources of news, information and entertainment.
Although the Commission has reexamined and revised its broadcast duopoly and one-to-a-market ownership rules, it has not completed long-pending reexaminations of its national television station ownership restrictions or the newspaper- broadcast cross-ownership prohibition.
The Commission's failure to simultaneously resolve all its pending broadcast cross-ownership rules fails to recognize, as Congress did in enacting section 202(h), that the proliferation and convergence of alternative electronic media implicates the bases of the national television ownership rules and the newspaper broadcast cross-ownership rules no less than the bases of the local radio and television station ownership rules.
The Commission's failure to simultaneously resolve all its broadcast cross-ownership rules will affect all potential buyers and sellers of radio and television stations in the interim, because the current restrictions will prevent networks and newspaper publishers from engaging in station transactions to the extent they otherwise might.
The Commission's failure to simultaneously resolve its pending proceedings on the national television ownership and newspaper/broadcast cross-ownership restrictions is arbitrary and capricious, because it treats similarly-situated entities-- those bound by ownership rules that predate the advent of increased competition from alternative electronic media-- differently, without any consideration of, or reasoned analysis for, this disparate treatment.
The increase in the national television audience reach limitation to 35 percent mandated by section 202(c)(1)(B) of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 was not established as the maximum percentage compatible with the public interest.
On the contrary, section 202(h) of that Act expressly directs the Commission to review biennially whether any of its broadcast ownership rules, including those adopted pursuant to section 202 of the Act, are necessary in the public interest as a result of competition.
The 35-percent national television audience reach limitation is unduly restrictive in light of competition.
The newspaper/broadcast cross-ownership restriction is unduly restrictive in light of competition.
The Commission's failure to resolve its pending proceedings on the national television ownership and newspaper/ broadcast cross-ownership restrictions simultaneously with its resolution of the proceedings on the duopoly and one-to-a- market rules does not serve the public interest.
INCREASE IN NATIONAL TELEVISION AUDIENCE REACH LIMITATION.
In General.--The Federal Communications Commission shall modify its rules for multiple ownership set forth in section 73.3555(e) of its regulations (47 Code of Federal Regulations 73.3555(e) by increasing the national audience reach limitation for television stations to 50 percent.
Further Increase.--The Commission may modify those rules to increase the limitation to a greater percentage than the 50 percent required by subsection (a) if it determines that the increase is in the public interest.
TERMINATION OF NEWSPAPER/BROADCAST CROSS-OWNERSHIP RULE.
In General.--The newspaper/broadcast cross-ownership rule under section 73.3555(d) of the Federal Communication Commission's regulations (47 Code of Federal Regulations 73.3555(d)) shall cease to be in effect after December 31, 1999, unless it is reinstated by the Commission under subsection (b) before January 1, 2000.