This Act may be cited as the ``Nursing Home Criminal Background Check Act of 2000''.
NURSING HOME CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK.
In General.--Part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 69 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 70--NURSING HOME CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK ``Sec.
Prohibition of employment of convicted felons in nursing homes.
Notification of background check requirement.
Criminal background check requirement.
Statement for criminal background check.
Criminal background check process.
Prohibition of employment of convicted felons in nursing homes ``Whoever, being a nursing facility, knowingly employs a person who has not passed the criminal background check required by this chapter in connection with that employment shall be fined not more than $5,000.
Notification of background check requirement ``Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Nursing Home Criminal Background Check Act of 2000, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall notify nursing facilities of the requirements of this chapter.
Criminal background check requirement ``Not later than 180 days after receiving the notice described in section 1442, each nursing facility shall adopt and enforce a requirement that each applicant to that facility for employment, make a statement under section 1444.
Statement for criminal background check ``The statement required under section 1443 shall be in writing and contain-- ``(1) the name, address, and date of birth appearing on a valid identification document (as defined in section 1028(d)(2) of this title) of applicant, a description of the identification document used, and the applicant's Social Security number; ``(2) a statement that such applicant has never been convicted of a crime of violence or a crime involving illegal activity relating to controlled substances (as that term is defined in the Controlled Substances Act); and ``(3) the date the statement is made.
Criminal background check process ``(a) The nursing facility shall transmit to the Attorney General each statement from an applicant that the facility receives under section 1444.
(1) The Attorney General, using information available to the Department of Justice, shall promptly determine whether the applicant has ever been convicted of a crime of violence or a crime involving illegal activity relating to controlled substances (as that term is defined in the Controlled Substances Act).
If so, the Attorney General shall, not later than 5 business days after the receipt of the statement, inform the nursing facility that the applicant did not pass the background check.
If after 5 business days the nursing facility has not been informed by the Attorney General that the applicant has been so convicted, the applicant shall be deemed to have passed the background check.
In no case shall the nursing facility or the applicant be charged a fee in connection with the background check process.
It is a complete defense to any cause of action against a nursing facility or any of its agents based on a failure or refusal to hire the applicant that the applicant did not pass the check.
Definitions ``In this chapter.-- ``(1) the term `nursing facility' means-- ``(A) any `nursing facility' as that term is defined under section 1919(a) of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396r(a)); and ``(B) any `skilled nursing facility' as that term is defined under section 1818(a) of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i-3(a)); and ``(2) the term `applicant' does not include a person seeking to enter into contract employment or employment as a licensed professional such as a doctor or nurse.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 69 the following new item: ``70.
Nursing Home Criminal Background Check................ 1441''.
Medicaid.--Section 1919 of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396r) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Nursing Home Criminal Background Check.--A nursing facility administrator shall meet the nursing home background check requirements of chapter 70 of title 18, United States Code.''.
Medicare.--Section 1819 of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i-3) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Nursing Home Criminal Background Check.--A skilled nursing facility administrator shall meet the nursing home background check requirements of chapter 70 of title 18, United States Code.''.
Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall conduct a study of the effects of background checks in nursing home settings, and report to Congress-- (1) the success of conducting background checks on nursing home employees; (2) the impact of background checks on patient care; (3) the need to conduct background checks in other settings outside nursing facilities; and (4) methods to further improve the background check system and the costs of such improvements.