This Act may be cited as the ``Advanced Manufacturing Fellowship Act of 1998''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVANCED MANUFACTURING FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM.
Title IX of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding after part G (20 United States Code 1134u et sequentes) the following new part: ``PART H--ADVANCED MANUFACTURING FELLOWSHIP PROGRAM ``SEC.
Contract Authorized.--From the funds appropriated to carry out this part, the Secretary, by contract, shall establish an advanced manufacturing fellowship program in accordance with the requirements of this part.
In carrying out such contract, the Secretary shall establish a competition to select a manufacturing association to establish such program, ``(b) Additional Contract Requirements.--The contract required by subsection (a) shall contain such provisions as are necessary to ensure that the advanced manufacturing fellowship program is conducted in accordance with the requirements of this part, including-- ``(1) provisions to ensure that any small business manufacturing enterprise that obtains an advanced manufacturing fellowship program will provide 80 percent of the cost of the salary and related benefits of the fellowship recipient; and ``(2) provisions to require such enterprises to submit, after each year of participation in the program, an evaluation of the value and benefits obtained from participation in the program.
Fellowship Awards.--The advanced manufacturing fellowship program shall provide fellowships to eligible individuals to cover 20 percent of the costs of salary and related benefits, not to exceed the salary and related benefits available to similar individuals in similar employment, for fellowship recipients for one year of employment with a small business manufacturing enterprise.
Selection Procedure.-- ``(1) Advertising fellowship.--The contractor shall take such steps as may be necessary to advertise the availability of fellowships under this part.
Enterprise Application.--Any small business manufacturing enterprise that desires to obtain an advanced manufacturing fellowship program for an eligible individual shall file an application with the contractor, containing or accompanied by such information as the contractor may require.
Competitive selection.--The contractor shall award advanced manufacturing fellowships on the basis of a competitive review of the applications received in accordance with paragraph (2).
In conducting such review, the contractor shall use the following criteria (and such other criteria as may be established by the contractor consistent with the contract under section 981): ``(A) the academic record of the fellowship applicant; ``(B) the recommendations submitted in support of the applicant; and ``(C) evidence indicating the nature of the contribution the applicant will make to the manufacturing enterprise.
Geographic limitation.--Not more than 20 advanced manufacturing fellowships shall be awarded for employment in any single State.
Fellowship awards.--The contractor shall provide for an appropriate public ceremony or ceremonies for, or other means of publicizing, the announcement of fellowship awards.
Eligibility.-- ``(1) Eligible individuals.--An individual shall be eligible for an advanced manufacturing fellowship if-- ``(A) such individual has received a masters or doctorate degree within the 5 years preceding the award in a science or engineering field of study; ``(B) such individual is a citizen of the United States; and ``(C) such individual is or will be employed by a small business manufacturing enterprise.
Small business manufacturing enterprise.--A business corporation, partnership, or other business organization shall be an eligible small business manufacturing enterprise for purposes of subsection (b)(2) if such corporation, partnership, or organization-- ``(A) has not more than 1,000 employees; and ``(B) is engaged in the manufacture of a product, or in the active development of a product that the enterprise will manufacture.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $14,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the four succeeding fiscal years.