This Act may be cited as the ``Paskenta Band Restoration Act''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Tribe'' means the Paskenta Band of Nomlaki Indians of the Paskenta Rancheria of California.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Interim Council'' means the governing body of the Tribe specified in section 7.
The term ``member'' means an individual who meets the membership criteria under section 6(b).
The term ``State'' means the State of California.
The term ``reservation'' means those lands acquired and held in trust by the Secretary for the benefit of the Tribe pursuant to section 5.
The term ``service area'' means the counties of Tehama and Glenn, in the State of California.
RESTORATION OF FEDERAL RECOGNITION, RIGHTS, AND PRIVILEGES.
Federal Recognition.--Federal recognition is hereby extended to the Tribe.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, all laws and regulations of general application to Indians and nations, tribes, or bands of Indians that are not inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Restoration of Rights and Privileges.--Except as provided in subsection (d), all rights and privileges of the Tribe and its members under any Federal treaty, Executive order, agreement, or statute, or under any other authority which were diminished or lost under the Act of August 18, 1958 (Public Law 85-671; 72 United States Statutes at Large 619), are hereby restored and the provisions of such Act shall be inapplicable to the Tribe and its members after the date of enactment of this Act.
Federal Services and Benefits.--Without regard to the existence of a reservation, the Tribe and its members shall be eligible, on and after the date of enactment of this Act, for all Federal services and benefits furnished to federally recognized Indian tribes or their members.
In the case of Federal services available to members of federally recognized Indian tribes residing on a reservation, members of the Tribe residing in the Tribe's service area shall be deemed to be residing on a reservation.
Hunting, Fishing, Trapping, and Water Rights.--Nothing in this Act shall expand, reduce, or affect in any manner any hunting, fishing, trapping, gathering, or water right of the Tribe and its members.
Indian Reorganization Act Applicability.--The Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes), shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Certain Rights Not Altered.--Except as specifically provided in this Act, nothing in this Act shall alter any property right or obligation, any contractual right or obligation, or any obligation for taxes levied.
Plan for Economic Development.--The Secretary shall-- (1) enter into negotiations with the governing body of the Tribe with respect to establishing a plan for economic development for the Tribe; (2) in accordance with this section and not later than two years after the adoption of a tribal constitution as provided in section 8, develop such a plan; and (3) upon the approval of such plan by the governing body of the Tribe, submit such plan to the Congress.
Restrictions.--Any proposed transfer of real property contained in the plan developed by the Secretary under subsection (a) shall be consistent with the requirements of section 5.
TRANSFER OF LAND TO BE HELD IN TRUST.
Lands To Be Taken in Trust.--The Secretary shall accept any real property located in Tehama County, California, for the benefit of the Tribe if conveyed or otherwise transferred to the Secretary if, at the time of such conveyance or transfer, there are no adverse legal claims to such property, including outstanding liens, mortgages, or taxes owned.
The Secretary may accept any additional acreage in the Tribe's service area pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Lands To Be Part of the Reservation.--Subject to the conditions imposed by this section, any real property conveyed or transferred under this section shall be taken in the name of the United States in trust for the Tribe and shall be part of the Tribe's reservation.
-(-c-) -L-a-n-d-s -T-o -B-e -N-o-n-t-a-x-a-b-l-e-.----A-n-y -r-e-a-l -p-r-o-p-e-r-t-y -c-o-n-v-e-y-e-d -o-r -t-r-a-n-s-f-e-r-r-e-d -t-o -t-h-e -S-e-c-r-e-t-a-r-y -a-n-d -t-a-k-e-n -i-n-t-o -t-r-u-s-t -f-o-r -t-h-e -b-e-n-e-f-i-t -o-f -t-h-e -T-r-i-b-e -u-n-d-e-r -t-h-i-s -s-e-c-t-i-o-n -s-h-a-l-l -b-e -e-x-e-m-p-t -f-r-o-m -a-l-l -l-o-c-a-l-, -S-t-a-t-e-, -a-n-d -F-e-d-e-r-a-l -t-a-x-a-t-i-o-n -a-s -o-f -t-h-e -d-a-t-e -o-f -s-u-c-h -t-r-a-n-s-f-e-r-.
Compilation of Tribal Membership Roll.--Within one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, after consultation with the Tribe, compile a membership roll of the Tribe.
Criteria for Membership.--(1) Until a tribal constitution is adopted pursuant to section 8, an individual shall be placed on the membership roll if such individual is living, is not an enrolled member of another federally recognized Indian tribe, is of Nomlaki Indian ancestry, and if-- (A) such individual's name was listed on the Paskenta Indian Rancheria distribution roll compiled on February 26, 1959, by the Bureau of Indian Affairs and approved by the Secretary of the Interior on July 7, 1959, pursuant to Public Law 85-671; (B) such individual was not listed on the Paskenta Indian Rancheria distribution list, but met the requirements that had to be met to be listed on the Paskenta Indian Rancheria list; (C) such individual is identified as an Indian from Paskenta in any of the official or unofficial rolls of Indians prepared by the Bureau of Indian Affairs; or (D) such individual is a lineal descendant of an individual, living or dead, identified in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).
After adoption of a tribal constitution pursuant to section 8, such tribal constitution shall govern membership in the Tribe.
Conclusive Proof of Paskenta Indian Ancestry.--For the purpose of subsection (b), the Secretary shall accept any available evidence establishing Paskenta Indian ancestry.
The Secretary shall accept as conclusive evidence of Paskenta Indian ancestry, information contained in the census of the Indians in and near Paskenta, prepared by Special Indian Agent John J. Terrell, in any other roll or census of Paskenta Indians prepared by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and in the Paskenta Indian Rancheria distribution list, compiled by the Bureau of Indian Affairs on February 26, 1959.
Until a new tribal constitution and bylaws are adopted and become effective under section 8, the Tribe's governing body shall be an Interim Council.
The initial membership of the Interim Council shall consist of the members of the Tribal Council of the Tribe on the date of the enactment of this Act, and the Interim Council shall continue to operate in the manner prescribed for the Tribal Council under the tribal constitution adopted December 18, 1993.
Any new members filling vacancies on the Interim Council shall meet the membership criteria set forth in section 6(b) and be elected in the same manner as are Tribal Council members under the tribal constitution adopted December 18, 1993.
Election; Time and Procedure.--Upon the completion of the tribal membership roll under section 6(a) and upon the written request of the Interim Council, the Secretary shall conduct, by secret ballot, an election for the purpose of adopting a constitution and bylaws for the Tribe.
The election shall be held according to section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 476), except that absentee balloting shall be permitted regardless of voter residence.
Election of Tribal Officials; Procedures.--Not later than 120 days after the Tribe adopts a constitution and bylaws under subsection (a), the Secretary shall conduct an election by secret ballot for the purpose of electing tribal officials as provided in such tribal constitution.
Such election shall be conducted according to the procedures specified in subsection (a) except to the extent that such procedures conflict with the tribal constitution.
The Secretary may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.