This Act may be cited as the ``Justice for Victims of Corporate Fraud Act''.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE RELIEF.
Enforcement Actions.--If in any administrative or judicial proceeding brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission against-- (1) a corporation, or any officer, director, or principal shareholder of such corporation, for any violation of the securities laws; or (2) the accounting firm performing audit services for such corporation, any subsidiary or affiliate of such firm, or any general or limited partner of such firm, subsidiary, or affiliate, for any violation of the securities laws with respect to any audit services performed for or in relation to the corporation described in paragraph (1); the Commission obtains an order providing for an accounting and disgorgement of funds, such disgorgement fund (including any addition to such fund required or permitted under this section) shall be allocated in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Priority for Former Employees of Corporation.--The Commission shall, by rule, establish an allocation system for the disgorgement fund.
Such system shall provide that, in allocating the disgorgement fund amount to the victims of the securities laws violations, the first priority shall be given to individuals who were employed by the corporation described in subsection (a)(1) or a subsidiary or affiliate of such corporation, and who were participants in an individual account plan established by such corporation, subsidiary, or affiliate.
Such allocations among such individuals shall be in proportion to the extent to which the nonforfeitable accrued benefit of each such individual under the plan was invested in the securities of such corporation, subsidiary, or affiliate.
Addition of Civil Penalties.--Any civil penalty assessed and collected in any proceeding described in subsection (a) shall be added to and become part of the disgorgement fund pursuant to section 308 of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (15 United States Code 7246), and shall be allocated pursuant to subsection (b) of this section.
Acceptance of Federal Campaign Contributions.-- (1) In general.--Section 313 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 439a) is amended by inserting before ``or may be used'' the following: ``may be transferred to any disgorgement fund which is required to be allocated in accordance with the requirements of the ``Justice for Victims of Corporate Fraud Act''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to any amounts received by a candidate at any time before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Acceptance of Additional Donations.--The Commission is authorized to accept, hold, administer, and utilize gifts, bequests, and devises of property, both real and personal, to the United States for the disgorgement fund.
Gifts, bequests, and devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the disgorgement fund and shall be available for allocation in accordance with subsection (b).
Definitions.--As used in this section: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Securities Exchange Commission.
Securities laws.--The term ``securities laws'' means the Securities Act of 1933 (15 United States Code 78a et sequentes), the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78a et sequentes), the Trust Indenture Act of 1939 (15 United States Code 77aaa et sequentes), the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 United States Code 80a-1 et sequentes), the Investment Advisers Act of 1940 (15 United States Code 80b et sequentes), the Securities Investor Protection Act of 1970 (15 United States Code 78aaa et seq.
), and the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (15 United States Code 7201 et seq.).
Disgorgement fund.--The term ``disgorgement fund'' means a disgorgement fund established in any administrative or judicial proceeding described in subsection (a).
Subsidiary or affiliate.--The term ``subsidiary or affiliate'' when used in relation to a person means any entity that controls, is controlled by, or is under common control with such person.
Officer, director, or principal shareholder.--The term ``officer, director, or principal shareholder'' means any person that is subject to the requirements of section 16 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78p) in relation to the corporation described in section 2(a), or any subsidiary or affiliate of such corporation.
Nonforfeitable; accrued benefit; individual account plan.--The terms ``nonforfeitable'', ``accrued benefit'', and ``individual account plan'' have the meanings provided such terms, respectively, in paragraphs (19), (23), and (34) of section 3 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002(19), (23), (34)).