This Act may be cited as the ``American Family Privacy Act of 1997''.
RESTRICTIONS ON PROVISION OF ACCESS TO SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT STATEMENT INFORMATION, PERSONAL EARNINGS AND BENEFITS ESTIMATE STATEMENT INFORMATION, OR TAX RETURN INFORMATION OF AN INDIVIDUAL.
Prohibition Against Making Certain Information Available Through the Internet.--No Federal officer or employee may make available through the Internet a social security account statement (or information contained in such a statement), a personal earnings and benefits estimate statement (or information contained in such a statement), a tax return, or tax return information of an individual.
Restriction on Access Without Written Consent of Individual.-- No Federal officer or employee may make available to a member of the public a social security account statement (or information contained in such a statement), a personal earnings and benefits estimate statement (or information contained in such a statement), a tax return, or tax return information of an individual without the written consent of such individual.
COMMISSION ON PRIVACY OF GOVERNMENT RECORDS.
Establishment of Commission.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Commission on Privacy of Government Records'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members appointed as follows: (A) Five members appointed by the President.
Two members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
Initial appointments.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed to the Commission not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Chairman.--There shall be a Chairman of the Commission who shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
Period of appointment.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment of a member of the Commission.
Functions of Commission.--The Commission shall investigate-- (1) the protection and privacy afforded by the Federal Government to the tax information (including any tax return and tax return information), social security information (including any social security account statement and personal earnings and benefits estimate statement), and other personal and confidential information with respect to individuals contained in Government records and documents; and (2) procedures and mechanisms through which an individual may be provided access to such information with respect to the individual without jeopardizing the privacy of the individual.
Report.--Not later than April 15, 1998, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a report containing a detailed statement of the Commission's findings and conclusions and the Commission's recommendations for administrative and legislative action.
Powers.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths to witnesses appearing before it.
Obtaining information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission in a full and timely manner.
Immunity.--The Commission is an agency of the United States for purposes of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
Contract authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for goods and services, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
Commission Procedures.-- (1) Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Delegation of authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this Act.
Personnel Matters.-- (1) Pay of members.--(A) Except as provided in paragraph (2), members shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--(A) The Commission may, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, appoint a staff director and such additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The Commission may fix the pay of the staff director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay fixed under this paragraph for the staff director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title and the rate of pay for other personnel may not exceed the maximum rate payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Other Administrative Provisions.-- (1) Postal and printing services.--The Commission may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Experts and consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of federal agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Gifts, bequests, and devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Termination of Commission.--The Commission shall terminate not later than 60 days after submitting its report to the President and the Congress pursuant to subsection (c).