SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Uniformed Services Medicare Subvention Program Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Establishment of subvention program.
Determination of reimbursement amounts.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary.--The term ``Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary'' means a beneficiary under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, who-- (A) is entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et sequentes); and (B) is enrolled in the supplementary medical insurance program under part B of such title (42 United States Code 1395j et sequentes).
TRICARE program.--The term ``TRICARE program'' means the managed health care program that is established by the Secretary of Defense under the authority of chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, principally section 1097 of such title, and includes the competitive selection of contractors to financially underwrite the delivery of health care services under the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services.
Subvention program.--The term ``subvention program'' means the program established under section 3 to reimburse the Department of Defense, from the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), for health care services provided to Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries through the managed care option of the TRICARE program.
Secretaries.--The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services acting jointly.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SUBVENTION PROGRAM.
Establishment Required.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall jointly establish a program to provide the Department of Defense with reimbursement, beginning October 1, 1997, in accordance with section 4, from the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) for health care services provided to Medicare- eligible covered military beneficiaries who agree to receive the health care services through the managed care option of the TRICARE program.
Voluntary Enrollment.--For purposes of the subvention program, enrollment of Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries in the managed care option of the TRICARE program shall be voluntary, except that the total number of Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries so enrolled shall be subject to the capacity and funding limitations specified in section 4.
Effect of Enrollment.--In the case of a Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary who enrolls in the managed care option of the TRICARE program, payments may not be made under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) other than under the subvention program for health care services provided through the managed care option, except that the Secretaries may provide exceptions for emergencies or other situations as the Secretaries consider appropriate.
TRICARE Program Enrollment Fee Waiver.--The Secretary of Defense shall waive the enrollment fee applicable to any Medicare- eligible covered military beneficiary enrolled in the managed care option of the TRICARE program for whom reimbursement may be made under section 4.
Modification of TRICARE Contracts.--In carrying out the subvention program, the Secretary of Defense may amend existing TRICARE program contracts as may be necessary to incorporate provisions specifically applicable to Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries who enroll in the managed care option of the TRICARE program.
Cost Sharing.--The Secretary of Defense may establish cost sharing requirements for Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries who enroll in the managed care option of the TRICARE program and for whom reimbursement may be made under section 4.
Expansion of Subvention Program.--The Secretaries may expand the subvention program to incorporate health care services provided to Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries under the fee-for- service options of the TRICARE program if, in the report submitted under section 713 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997 (Public Law 104-106; 110 United States Statutes at Large 2591), the Secretaries determined that such expansion is feasible and advisable.
DETERMINATION OF REIMBURSEMENT AMOUNTS.
Reimbursement of Department of Defense.-- (1) Basis of payments.--Beginning October 1, 1997, monthly payments to the Department of Defense under the subvention program shall be made from the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) on the basis that payments are made under section 1876(a) of the such Act (42 United States Code 1395mm(a)).
Amount of payments.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make payments to the Department of Defense from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund (allocated by the Secretary of Health and Human Services between each trust fund based on the relative weight that each trust fund contributes to the required payment) at a per capita rate equal to 93 percent of the applicable adjusted average per capita cost for each Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiary enrolled in the managed care option of the TRICARE program in excess of the number of such beneficiaries calculated under subsection (b) for the Department of Defense maintenance of health care effort.
Maintenance of Defense Health Care Effort.-- (1) Maintenance of effort required.--The Secretary of Defense shall maintain the Department of Defense health care efforts for Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries so as to avoid imposing on the Medicare program those costs that the Department of Defense would be expected to incur to provide health care services to Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries in the absence of the subvention program.
Estimate of prior effort.--For the first fiscal year of the subvention program, the Secretaries shall estimate the amount expended by the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1997 for providing health care items and services (other than pharmaceuticals provided to outpatients) to Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries.
For subsequent fiscal years, the amount so estimated shall be adjusted for inflation, for differences between estimated and actual amounts expended, and for changes in the Department of Defense health care budget that exceed $100,000,000.
Target for defense effort.--On the basis of the estimate made under paragraph (2), the Secretaries shall establish monthly targets of the number of Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries for whom reimbursement will not be provided to the Department of Defense under subsection (a).
Protection of Medicare Program Against Increased Costs.-- (1) Purpose.--The purpose of this subsection is to protect the Medicare program against costs incurred under subsection (a) in connection with the provision of health care services to Medicare-eligible covered military beneficiaries that would not have been incurred by the medicare program in the absence of the reimbursement requirement.
Review by comptroller general.--Not later than December 31 of each year, the Comptroller General shall determine and submit to the Secretaries and Congress a report on the extent, if any, to which the costs of the Secretary of Defense under the TRICARE program and the costs of the Secretary of Health and Human Services under the Medicare program have increased as a result of the subvention program.
Actions to prevent increased costs.--If the Secretaries determine that the trust funds under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) still incur excess costs as a result of the subvention program, the Secretaries shall take such steps as may be necessary to offset those excess costs (and prevent future excess costs), including suspension or termination of the subvention program, adjustment of the payment rate under subsection (a)(2), or an adjustment of the maintenance of effort requirements of the Department of Defense under subsection (b).