This Act may be cited as the ``New Options Petroleum Energy Conservation Act of 2006''.
CREDIT FOR ELECTRICITY PRODUCED FROM CLIMATE NEUTRAL COMBUSTION PROCESSES.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 45(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(I) any climate neutral combustion resource.''.
Climate Neutral Combustion Resource.--Subsection (c) of section 45 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(10) Climate neutral combustion resource.--The term `climate neutral combustion resource' means any matter used as a fuel in a qualified facility described in subsection (d)(11).''.
Climate Neutral Combustion Facility.--Subsection (d) of section 45 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) Climate neutral combustion facility.--In the case of a facility which burns climate neutral combustion resources to produce electricity, the term `qualified facility' means any facility which-- ``(A) captures the carbon dioxide released during combustion and uses such carbon dioxide to recover hydrocarbon fuel from below ground, ``(B) produces no atmospheric emissions of mercury or greenhouse gases and no emissions that form fine particles, smog, or acid rain, and ``(C) is owned by the taxpayer and originally placed in service after December 31, 2006.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made this section shall apply to electricity produced and sold after December 31, 2006, in taxable years ending after such date.
EXTENSION OF ENERGY CREDIT FOR SOLAR ENERGY PROPERTY.
In General.--Paragraph (2)(A)(i)(II) and paragraph (3)(A)(ii) of section 48(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to energy credit) are each amended by striking ``2008'' and inserting ``2012''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to periods after December 31, 2007, in taxable years ending after such date, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
EXTENSION OF CREDIT FOR RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENT PROPERTY.
In General.--Subsection (g) of section 25D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``2007'' and inserting ``2011''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2007.
The Secretary of Energy shall establish a program to award a prize in the amount of $1,000,000,000 to the first automobile manufacturer incorporated in the United States to manufacture and sell in the United States 60,000 midsized sedan automobiles which operate on gasoline and can travel 100 miles per gallon.
LITHIUM ION BATTERY TECHNOLOGY.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Energy $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 for the development of advanced lithium ion battery technology.
EXPENSING OF PROPERTY USED IN THE REFINING OF ETHANOL, METHANOL, AND BIODIESEL.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by inserting after section 179D the following new section: ``SEC.
ELECTION TO EXPENSE CERTAIN PROPERTY USED IN REFINING ETHANOL, METHANOL, AND BIODIESEL.
In General.--A taxpayer may elect to treat the cost of any qualified biofuel property as an expense which is not chargeable to capital account.
Any cost so treated shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year in which the property is placed in service.
Election.--An election under this section for any taxable year shall be made on the taxpayer's return of the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year.
Such election shall be made in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
Any election made under this section may not be revoked except with the consent of the Secretary.
Qualified Biofuel Property.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified biofuel property' means any property-- ``(A) used for the refining of any biofuel, and ``(B) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer.
Biofuel.--The term `biofuel' means qualified methanol or ethanol fuel (as defined in section 4041(b)(2)(B)) and biodiesel (as defined in section 40A(d)).
Dual Use Property.--In the case of any property which is used for the refining of any biofuel and for any other use, the cost of such property taken into account under subsection (a) shall be reduced by an amount which bears the same ratio to the cost of such property as such other uses bears to all uses of such property.
Coordination With 50 Percent Expensing of Refineries.-- Section 179C shall not apply to any property taken into account under subsection (a).
Recapture.--Rules similar to the rules of section 179(d)(10) shall apply with respect to any property which ceases to be qualified biofuel property.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1245(a) of such Code is amended by inserting ``179E,'' after ``179D,'' both places it appears in paragraphs (2)(C) and (3)(C).
Section 263(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (J), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (K) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting after subparagraph (K) the following new subparagraph: ``(L) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed under section 179E.''.
Section 312(k)(3)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 179D'' each place it appears in the heading and text and inserting ``179D, or 179E''.
The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 179D the following new item: ``Sec.
Election to expense certain property used in refining ethanol, methanol, and biodiesel.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act.