CASA MALPAIS NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK SECTION.
SHORT TITLE AND CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS.
This Act may be cited as the ``Casa Malpais National Historical Park Establishment Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the Casa Malpais is historically and culturally significant to the State of Arizona, the Town of Springerville and the Nation; (2) the Native American population in Arizona and New Mexico has shown strong and sincere interest in the preservation and interpretation of their heritage through the protection of the Casa Malpais; (3) the Town of Springerville has played a significant role in the preservation of the cultural resources of the Casa Malpais through a program of interpretation and preservation of the landmark; (4) the Casa Malpais National Historic Landmark was occupied by one of the largest and most sophisticated Mogollon communities in the United States; (5) the landmark includes a fifty-eight room masonry pueblo, including stairways, Great Kiva complex, and fortification walls, a prehistoric trail, and catacomb chambers where the deceased were placed; and (6) the Casa Malpais was designated as a national historic landmark by the Secretary of the Interior in 1957.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CASA MALPAIS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
In order to preserve, for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations, that area in Arizona containing the nationally significant Casa Malpais, and other significant natural and cultural resources, there is hereby established the Casa Malpais National Historical Park (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``park'') as a unit of the National Park System.
The park shall consist of approximately thirty-five acres, a map of which shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and in the office of the mayor of the Town of Springerville, Arizona.
The park shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') and the Town of Springerville, Arizona (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Town''), in accordance with section 3.
Within six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a legal description of the park with the Committee on Energy and National Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the United States House of Representatives.
Such legal description shall have the same force and legal description as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such legal description.
The legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, in the State of Arizona, and in the office of the mayor of the Town of Springerville, Arizona: Provided, That the Secretary may from time to time, after completion of the general management plan referred to in section 108(a), may make minor adjustments to the park boundary by publication of a revised map or other boundary description in the Federal Register.
ADMINISTRATION AND MANAGEMENT OF THE PARK.
(1) To achieve the purposes of this Act, the Secretary, in cooperation with the Town, shall formulate a comprehensive plan for the protection, preservation, interpretation, development and maintenance of the site.
Within eighteen months following the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall transmit the plan to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
The Secretary may, pursuant to cooperative agreement-- (1) provide technical assistance to the Town or unit of local government in the management, protection, and interpretation of the site; and (2) make periodic grants, which shall be supplemental to any other funds to which the grantee may be entitled under any other provision of law, to the Town or local unit of government for the annual costs of operation and maintenance, including but not limited to, salaries of personnel and the protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of the site.
The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with either the Town under which the Secretary may manage and interpret any lands owned by Town and the state of Arizona, respectively, within the boundaries of the Park.
In order to encourage a unified and cost effective interpretive program of the natural, cultural and recreational resources of the Casa Malpais and its environs, the Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with other Federal, State, and local public departments and agencies, Indian tribes, and nonprofit entities providing for the interpretation of these resources.
Such cooperative agreements may also provide for financial and technical assistance for the planning and implementation of interpretive programs and minimal development related to these programs.
The Secretary may participate in land use planning conducted by appropriate local authorities for lands adjacent to the park and may provide technical assistance to such authorities and affected landowners for such planning.
EXISTING TRANSMISSION OR DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorizing or requiring revocation of any interest or easement for existing transmission or distribution facilities or prohibiting the operation and maintenance of such facilities within or adjacent to the park boundary.
Within three years from the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in cooperation with the Town and the State, shall develop and transmit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the United States House of Representatives, a general management plan for the park consistent with the purposes of this Act, including, but not limited to-- (1) a statement of the number of visitors and types of public use within the park which can be accommodated in accordance with the protection and preservation of its resources; (2) a resource protection program; (3) a general interpretive program; (4) a general development plan for the park, including proposals for a visitor's center and recreation facilities, and the estimated cost thereof; and (b) The general management plan shall be prepared in consultation with the Casa Malpais National Historical Park Advisory Commission established pursuant to section 7, appropriate Indian tribes and their civil officials, the Arizona Historical Preservation Office, and other interested parties.
CASA MALPAIS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK ADVISORY COMMISSION.
There is hereby established the Casa Malpais National Historical Park Advisory Commission (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall be composed of members appointed by the Secretary on the recommendation of the mayor of Springerville for terms of 5 years as follows: (1) one member, who shall have professional expertise in history and/or archeology, appointed from recommendations submitted by the Governor of the State of Arizona; (2) one member, who shall have professional expertise in history, appointed from recommendations submitted by the mayor of the Town of Springerville, Arizona; (3) one member, who shall have professional expertise in Indian history or ceremonial activities, appointed from recommendations submitted by the Inter-Tribal Council of Arizona; (4) one member, who shall have professional expertise in outdoor recreation; (5) one member, who shall be an affected landowner; (6) one member, who shall have professional expertise in cultural anthropology; (7) one member from the general public; (8) the Mayor of the Town of Springerville or his or her designee, ex officio; and (9) the Director of the National Park Service, or his or her designee, ex officio.
Any member of the Commission may serve after the expiration of his or her term until a successor is appointed.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission, members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in Government service are allowed expenses under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
The Chair and other officers of the Commission shall be elected by a majority of the members of the Commission to serve for terms established by the Commission.
The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair or a majority of its members, but not less than twice annually.
Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Consistent with the public meeting requirements of section 10 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), the Commission shall, from time to time, meet with persons concerned with Indian history and historic preservation, and with other interested persons.
The Commission may make such bylaws, rules, and regulations as it considers necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.
Section 14(b) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission.
The Commission shall advise the Secretary and the Town on the management and development of the park, and on the preparation of the general management plan referred to in section 6(a).
The Secretary, or his or her designee, shall from time to time, but at least semiannually, meet and consult with the Commission on matters relating to the management and development of the park.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the purposes of this Act.