The purpose of this Act is to establish the preferred alternative for flood control in the Passaic River basin, New Jersey, to be implemented in place of construction of the Passaic River Tunnel, while maintaining the integrity of previously authorized Passaic River basin restoration measures.
In this Act: (1) Hazard mitigation.--The term ``hazard mitigation'' means-- (A) floodproofing; and (B) acquisition of wetland throughout the Passaic River basin for flood management purposes or retention and detention.
Oversight committee.--The term ``Oversight Committee'' means the committee established by section 3(j).
Preferred alternative.--The term ``preferred alternative'' means a qualified acquisition and hazard mitigation plan for the project.
Project.--The term ``project'' means the project for flood control, Passaic River Main Stem, New Jersey and New York, authorized by section 101(a)(18) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4607).
Qualified acquisition.--The term ``qualified acquisition'' means a purchase by the Secretary, in cooperation with State, county, and local governments, of property that has sustained excessive damage caused by at least 2 floods, including the major flood in the Passaic River basin during 1984 and any subsequent flood.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
COMPONENTS OF PASSAIC RIVER BASIN FLOOD MANAGEMENT PROGRAM.
Structures in the Floodway.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall acquire, demolish, and remove structures in the floodway of the Central Passaic River basin where excessive damage has occurred in at least 2 floods, including the flood of 1984 and any subsequent flood.
Cost sharing.--The cost of carrying out paragraph (1) shall be paid in cooperation with State, county, and local governments at a ratio of 75 percent Federal to 25 percent non- Federal.
Stabilization.--The floodway land in the Central Passaic River basin shall be stabilized as part of the ecological restoration program under section 101(a)(18)(C) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4609), and, where appropriate, wetlands shall be created.
Management.--After the land is vacated, the land shall be held in perpetuity by the most appropriate Federal or State agency, as determined in consultation with the Oversight Committee, and shall be managed as open space.
Blue acres program.--This subsection shall be carried out in conformance with the Blue Acres Program of the State of New Jersey.
Credit.--Crediting of land acquisition for the non- Federal share of the cost of the project shall remain in effect in accordance with section 101(a)(18)(C)(vii) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4609).
Additional Structures in the 10-Year Floodplain.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall acquire, demolish, and remove additional structures, or floodproof structures, to the 10-year floodplain in the floodway of the Central Passaic River basin in areas where excessive damage has occurred in at least 2 floods, including the flood of 1984 and any subsequent flood.
Cost share.-- (A) Acquisition, demolition, and removal.--Funding for an acquisition, demolition, and removal under paragraph (1) shall be shared 75 percent Federal and 25 percent State.
Floodproofing.--Funding of floodproofing under paragraph (1) shall be shared 75 percent Federal, 15 percent property owner, and 10 percent State.
Criteria.--Criteria for acquisition and floodproofing shall be developed by the Oversight Committee.
Structures in the Passaic River Basin.-- (1) To the 50-year floodplain.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall floodproof structures in the floodplain of the Central Passaic River basin to the 50-year floodplain in areas of high risk.
Cost share.--Funding of floodproofing under subparagraph (A) shall be shared 55 percent Federal, 20 percent State, and 25 percent property owner.
Remainder.--In the remainder of the floodplain to the 100-year protective flood elevation, the Secretary, in cooperation with the State of New Jersey, shall provide information on techniques to deal with flood management.
Wetlands.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall acquire-- (A) wetlands in the floodways throughout the Great Piece Meadows of the Central Passaic River basin to supplement the wetlands acquisition (approximately 5,369 acres) authorized under section 101(a)(18)(C)(vi) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4609); and (B) upland transition areas with significant wildlife or other natural values.
Management.--The Secretary shall transfer the wetlands and transition areas to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, or an appropriate State agency, which shall manage the wetlands and transition areas in accordance with proper wetlands management principles so as to ensure the ecological integrity of the wetlands and transition areas as wildlife habitat and important components of the hydrological cycle of the Passaic River basin.
Strategic Land.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall acquire strategic land in the State of New Jersey and the State of New York to prevent flooding.
Emphasis.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall emphasize land acquisition in the Highlands Province.
Cooperation.--The Secretary shall carry out this subsection in cooperation with the Palisades Interstate Park Commission, the State of New Jersey, the State of New York, and other Federal agencies (including the Forest Service, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Park Service).
Molly Ann's Brook.--The Secretary shall acquire land to prevent flooding from increasing in-- (1) the High Mountain area in Wayne, New Jersey; and (2) the urban area of the Molly Ann's Brook project in North Haledon, New Jersey.
Passaic River Restoration Project.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall complete the Passaic River Restoration Project from Little Falls to Newark Bay, New Jersey.
Riparian land and parkland development.--In cooperation with the Passaic River Restoration Steering Committee, the Secretary shall undertake acquisition of riparian land and parkland development and redevelopment in the Passaic River basin.
Urban space.--The Secretary shall acquire parcels of urban space, such as Hilltop in Essex County, New Jersey.
Streambank Restoration.--The Secretary shall complete the streambank restoration element of the project for flood control, Passaic River Main Stem, New Jersey and New York, authorized by section 101(a)(18)(B) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1990 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4608), known as the ``Joseph G. Minish Passaic River Waterfront Park and Historic Area, New Jersey''.
Remedial Actions.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall assist the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commissioners in the implementation of remedial actions for the combined sewer overflows in the lower Passaic River Basin from the Great Falls to Newark Bay.
Oversight Committee.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a committee to be known as the ``Oversight Committee'' for the implementation of the preferred alternative.
Membership.--The Oversight Committee shall be composed of 14 members, appointed as follows: (A) Corps of engineers.--The Secretary of the Army shall appoint 1 member to represent the Corps of Engineers.
Appointments by the governor of new jersey.-- The Governor of New Jersey shall appoint 12 members, as follows: (i) 2 representatives of the New Jersey legislature who are members of different political parties.
1 representative of the State of New Jersey.
2 representatives of county government.
2 representatives of local government.
1 representative of the Palisades Interstate Park Commission.
1 representative of the North Jersey District Water Supply Commission.
1 representative of each of-- (I) the Association of New Jersey Environmental Commissions; (II) the Passaic River Coalition; and (III) the Sierra Club.
Appointment by the governor of new york.--The Governor of New York shall appoint a representative of the State of New York.
Duties.-- (A) In general.--The Oversight Committee shall-- (i) supervise, review, and make recommendations on all elements of the preferred alternative; and (ii) provide guidance on appropriations for the efficient implementation of the project.
Primary considerations.--The Oversight Committee shall primarily consider flood management projects that are nonstructural and that maintain and restore the ecological integrity of the river systems.
Meetings.--The Oversight Committee shall hold meetings regularly.
Termination.--The Oversight Committee shall terminate on the date on which the preferred alternative project is completed.
Reporting.--The Oversight Committee shall annually submit to the Governor of the State of New Jersey, the Governor of the State of New York, and Congress a report describing the achievements of the project and any impediments to completion of the project.
Assistance.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the State of New Jersey, shall-- (A) cooperate with the Oversight Committee; (B) provide administrative and technical assistance to the Oversight Committee; and (C) respond to all requests and recommendations made by the Oversight Committee in a cooperative manner so as to expedite and complete the preferred alternative.
Preferred Alternative.--Congress-- (1) finds that the preferred alternative is the most appropriate solution to flooding in the Passaic River basin; and (2) directs that the preferred alternative shall be implemented immediately.
Floodway.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated $45,000,000 to begin the Federal portion of the buyout of floodway structures authorized by section 301(b)(10) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1996 (110 United States Statutes at Large 3710).
Cost share.--The $15,000,000 made available by the State of New Jersey for the Blue Acres portion of the Green Acres Bond Act of 1995, approved by the voters of the State of New Jersey, shall constitute the 25 percent non-Federal cost share.
Acquisition of Freshwater Wetlands; Floodproofing.--There are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) $3,000,000 for the acquisition of freshwater wetlands in the floodplains within the Passaic River basin; and (2) $10,000,000 for the floodproofing of structures in the floodplains within the Passaic River basin.
Acquisition of Land in the Highland Province.-- (1) Total authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated-- (A) $400,000,000 for the acquisition of land in the Highlands Province to reduce flooding in the Passaic River basin in New Jersey; and (B) $75,000,000 for the acquisition of land in the Highlands Province to reduce flooding in the Passaic River basin in New York.
Annual authorization.--Of the amounts authorized by paragraph (1)-- (A) there is authorized to be appropriated $40,000,000 for each fiscal year for acquisition of land in the State of New Jersey; and (B) there is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for each fiscal year for acquisition of land in the State of New York.
Parkland.--There is authorized to be appropriated $300,000,000 for the acquisition of land and the development and redevelopment of parkland along the Passaic River from Little Falls to Newark Bay, Kearny, of which $30,000,000 shall be made available for each fiscal year for the State of New Jersey.
Joseph G. Minish Passaic River Waterfront Park and Historic Area.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated $75,000,000 for the completion of the Joseph G. Minish Passaic River Waterfront Park and Historic Area, New Jersey.
Cost share.--The Federal share of the cost of the project described in paragraph (1) shall be 100 percent.
Preferred Alternative.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated-- (A) $1,100,000 for each fiscal year for the implementation of the preferred alternative and administration of the Oversight Committee; and (B) $5,000,000 for the acquisition of land at High Mountain.
Project budget.-- (A) In general.--For the combined sewer project in the lower Passaic River basin, a project budget shall be established of $85,000,000, of which $65,000,000 shall be the Federal share.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated, for the purpose of making a grant to the Passaic Valley Sewerage Commission-- (i) for fiscal year 1999, $22,000,000; (ii) for fiscal year 2000, $22,000,000; and (iii) for fiscal year 2001, $21,000,000.