This Act may be cited as the ``Capitalizing Workforce Development Act of 2012''.
JOB TRAINING RESOURCES GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 403(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 603(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following : ``(6) Job training resources grants.-- ``(A) Use of funds.--The Secretary shall use the funds made available under subparagraph (F) to award grants to eligible applicants on a competitive basis for the purpose of supporting the purchase, renovation, construction, or lease and improvement of real property to be used by qualified self-sustaining job programs.
Qualified self-sustaining job program.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified self- sustaining job program' means a program which-- ``(i) provides job training, job placement, or other employment-related services to individuals with employment challenges; and ``(ii) except for funds made available under this paragraph for the expenses described in subparagraph (A), does not require Federal funds for programmatic or administrative expenses relating to the provision of the services described in clause (i).
Nothing in this subparagraph shall prohibit any applicant or grantee under this paragraph from participating in any other Federal program.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this paragraph, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible applicants that demonstrate significant successful experience in establishing qualified self- sustaining job programs or, in the case of an eligible applicant described in subparagraph (D)(i), that include among their membership one or more local organizations that have been awarded a grant under section 413(h)(3)(A).
Eligible applicant.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `eligible applicant' means-- ``(i) a national organization which is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and is exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code, the mission of which is to provide employment-related services to individuals with employment challenges; ``(ii) a State or political subdivision thereof; or ``(iii) an Indian tribe or tribal organization.
Grant conditions and requirements.-- ``(i) Job placement performance goals.-- Each award of a grant under this paragraph shall be conditioned upon the establishment by the Secretary, in coordination with the grantee, of-- ``(I) the job placement performance goals for each qualified self- sustaining job program operated by the grantee that will receive the grant funds (or the subgrantee under clause (iii), if any); and ``(II) the performance assessment dates (not earlier than 1 year after the date the grant is awarded to the grantee) on which the achievement of such goals will be measured by the Secretary.
Protection of federal interest.--For all real property purchased, renovated, constructed, or improved using funds made available under this paragraph, the Secretary shall ensure the protection of the Federal Government's interest in such real property in such manner as may be prescribed by the Secretary.
Subawards.--An eligible applicant described in subparagraph (D)(i) that receives funds made available under this paragraph shall distribute such funds among its local member organizations to carry out the purposes described in subparagraph (A) with respect to qualified self-sustaining job programs.
Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated $200,000,000 for grants under this paragraph for fiscal year 2013, to remain available through fiscal year 2016.''.
Recapture Penalty.-- (1) In general.--Section 409(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 609(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(17) Penalty for failure to meet job placement performance goals of qualified self-sustaining job program.-- ``(A) In general.--If the Secretary determines that a recipient of funds under section 403(a)(6) has failed to meet the job placement performance goals established under section 403(a)(6)(E)(i) as of any performance assessment date established under section 403(a)(6)(E)(i)(II), the Secretary shall require repayment of such funds to the Treasury in a proportional amount to the degree of such failure.
Timing of repayment.--The payments required by subparagraph (A) shall be made over the 10-fiscal- year period beginning with the date the Secretary makes the determination under subparagraph (A).
No interest shall accrue with respect to such payments.
Election to comply.--With the consent of the Secretary, in lieu of the payments required by subparagraph (A), the recipient of funds may elect to come into compliance with the job placement performance goals established under section 403(a)(6)(E)(i).
Such compliance shall be demonstrated in such manner and in such time as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Failure by state.--In the case of a State that is subject to a penalty under this paragraph, in lieu of the payments required by subparagraph (A), the Secretary may reduce the grant payable to such State under section 403(a)(1) in the same amount and over the same 10-fiscal-year period that such payments would have been made.
Nonapplicability of state penalty limitations.--Subsections (c) and (d) shall not apply in the case of any penalty under this paragraph, except for a penalty with respect to which reductions are made under subparagraph (D).''.
Exclusion from state reasonable cause exception.-- Section 409(b)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 609(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``or (13)'' and inserting ``(13), or (17)''.
OFFSET TO ENSURE PAYGO COMPLIANCE.