This Act may be cited as the ``Breast Cancer License Plate Matching Grant Act of 2001''.
Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) During 2001, 182,800 new cases of female invasive breast cancer will be diagnosed, and 40,800 women will die from the disease.
In addition, 1,400 male cases are projected to be diagnosed, and 400 men will die from the disease.
Breast cancer is the second leading cause of cancer death among all women and the leading cause of cancer death among women between ages 40 and 55.
Breast cancer is the most common form of cancer among women, excluding skin cancers.
Each year thousands of women and men who cannot afford treatment are diagnosed with breast cancer.
Early detection of breast cancer is the best protection.
However, there is no benefit of early detection if adequate treatment cannot be obtained.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To promote the creation of specialized license plates for breast cancer awareness and research or treatment programs by providing matching grants to States that develop and fund such license plate programs.
To provide an incentive for States to develop a program similar to the Breast Cancer License Plate program in California, which authorizes special breast cancer license plates for an increased fee with a portion of that fee being expended to assist low-income breast cancer victims in affording treatment or to increase research funding.
To continue the partnerships among the Federal Government, State governments, and individuals in raising awareness about breast cancer among all Americans.
MATCHING GRANTS FOR ESTABLISHMENT OF STATE LICENSE PLATE PROGRAMS REGARDING BREAST CANCER.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants to States for the purpose of assisting the States with the costs of establishing programs under which-- (1) the State involved develops a vehicle license plate that displays a message devised by the State to indicate support for programs that respond to the problem of breast cancer; (2) from fees paid by residents of the State for such license plates, the State reserves funds for the purpose described in subsection (b); and (3) the State carries out activities to make residents of the State aware of the license plate and the relationship between the license plate and breast cancer programs.
Funding for Breast Cancer Programs.--The purpose referred to in subsection (a)(2) is providing funds to public or private entities for any or all of the following: (1) To assist individuals who have breast cancer in paying the costs of receiving treatment for the cancer.
To carry out programs of research regarding the prevention or treatment of breast cancer.
To carry out activities to educate the public on breast cancer.
Matching Funds.-- (1) In general.--With respect to the costs of the program to be carried out by a State with a grant under subsection (a), the Secretary may make such a grant only if the State agrees to make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is not less than 50 percent of such costs ($1 for each $1 provided in the grant).
Determination of amount contributed.--Non-Federal contributions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount of such non-Federal contributions.
Application for Grant.--A grant may be made under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Limitation.--A State may not receive more than one grant under subsection (a).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, American Samoa, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the Virgin Islands.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2004.