This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Elections and Political Accountability Act''.
REMOVAL OF LIMITATIONS ON FEDERAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN CONTRIBUTIONS.
Section 315(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) The limitations established under this subsection shall not apply to contributions made during calendar years beginning after 1998.''.
PROMOTING EXPEDITED AVAILABILITY OF FEC REPORTS; LOWERING THRESHOLD FOR COLLECTION AND DISCLOSURE OF IDENTIFICATION OF CONTRIBUTORS.
Mandatory Electronic Filing.--Section 304(a)(11)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)(11)(A)) is amended by striking ``permit reports required by'' and inserting ``require reports under''.
Requiring Reports for Certain Contributions Made to Any Political Committee Within 60 Days of Election; Requiring Reports To Be Made Within 48 Hours.--Section 304(a)(6) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)) is amended to read as follows: ``(6)(A) Each political committee shall notify the Secretary or the Commission, and the Secretary of State, as appropriate, in writing, of any contribution in an aggregate amount equal to or greater than $100 which is received by the committee during the period which begins on the 60th day before an election and ends at the time the polls close for such election.
This notification shall be made not later than midnight of the day on which the contribution is deposited (but in no event later than 48 hours after receipt) and shall include the name of the candidate involved (as appropriate) and the office sought by the candidate, the identification of the contributor, and the date of receipt and amount of the contribution.
If a political committee returns a contribution for which notification is made under subparagraph (A), the committee shall notify the Secretary or the Commission, and the Secretary of State (as appropriate).
The notifications required under this paragraph shall be in addition to all other reporting requirements under this Act.''.
Increasing Electronic Disclosure.--Section 304 of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) The Commission shall make the information contained in the reports submitted under this section available on the Internet and publicly available at the offices of the Commission as soon as practicable (but in no case later than 24 hours) after the information is received by the Commission.
In this subsection, the term `Internet' means the international computer network of both Federal and non-Federal interoperable packet-switched data networks.''.
Lowering Threshold for Collection and Disclosure of Identification of Contributors.-- (1) Reporting requirements.--Section 304(b)(3) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(b)(3)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``whose contribution or contributions have an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year, or in any lesser amount if the reporting committee should so elect,''; and (B) in subparagraphs (F) and (G), by striking ``in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200'' each place it appears.
Information required to be forwarded to political committees.--Section 302(b) of such Act (2 United States Code 432(b)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and if the amount of the contribution is in excess of $50'' and inserting ``together with''; and (B) in paragraph (2), by striking ``shall--'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``shall forward to the treasurer such contribution, the name and address of the person making the contribution, and the date of receipt of the contribution, no later than 10 days after receiving the contribution.''.
Information required to be kept by political committees.--Section 302(c) of such Act (2 United States Code 432(c)) is amended-- (A) by striking paragraph (2); and (B) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or contributions aggregating more than $200''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply with respect to reports for periods beginning on or after January 1, 1999.
PROHIBITING CONTRIBUTIONS BY FOREIGN NATIONALS AND INDIVIDUALS NOT QUALIFIED TO REGISTER TO VOTE IN FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
In General.--Section 319 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441e) is amended to read as follows: ``contributions by foreign nationals and individuals not qualified to register to vote in federal elections ``Sec.
Foreign Nationals.-- ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for a foreign national directly or through any other person to make any contribution of money or other thing of value, or to promise expressly or impliedly to make any such contribution, in connection with an election to any political office or in connection with any primary election, convention, or caucus held to select candidates for any political office; or for any person to solicit, accept, or receive any such contribution from a foreign national.
Definition.--As used in this subsection, the term `foreign national' means a foreign principal, as defined by section 1(b) of the Foreign Agents Registration Act of 1938 (22 United States Code 611(b)).
Individuals Not Qualified to Register to Vote in Federal Elections.-- ``(1) Prohibiting contributions.--It shall be unlawful for any individual who is not qualified to register to vote in an election for Federal office directly or through any other person to make any contribution of money or other thing of value, or to promise expressly or impliedly to make any such contribution, in connection with an election to any political office or in connection with any primary election, convention, or caucus held to select candidates for any political office.
Prohibiting solicitation or acceptance of contributions.--It shall be unlawful for any person to knowingly solicit, accept, or receive any contribution of money or other thing of value from an individual who is not qualified to register to vote in an election for Federal office.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to elections occurring after January 1999.
FUNDING OF POLITICAL ACTIVITIES BY CORPORATIONS AND LABOR ORGANIZATIONS.
Prohibiting Donation of Funds to Political Parties.-- (1) In general.--Section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) No national bank, corporation, or labor organization described in this section may make any payment of any gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value to any political committee established and maintained by a political party (including a congressional campaign committee of a political party) in support of the committee's activities.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a contribution or expenditure made by a separate segregated fund of a corporation or labor organization described in subsection (b)(2)(C).''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply with respect to elections occurring after January 1999.
Prohibiting Involuntary Assessment of Employee Funds for Political Activities.-- (1) In general.--Section 316 of such Act (2 United States Code 441b), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) Except with the separate, prior, written, voluntary authorization of the individual involved, it shall be unlawful-- ``(A) for any national bank or corporation described in this section to collect from or assess its stockholders any dues, initiation fee, or other payment, or collect from or assess its employees any dues, initiation fee, or other payment as a condition of employment, if any part of such dues, fee, or payment will be used for Federal campaign activity in which the national bank or corporation is engaged; and ``(B) for any labor organization described in this section to collect from or assess its members or nonmembers any dues, initiation fee, or other payment if any part of such dues, fee, or payment will be used for Federal campaign activity in which the labor organization is engaged.
An authorization described in paragraph (1) shall remain in effect until revoked and may be revoked at any time.
Each entity collecting from or assessing amounts from an individual with an authorization in effect under such paragraph shall provide the individual with a statement that the individual may at any time revoke the authorization.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `Federal campaign activity' means any activity carried out for the purpose of influencing (in whole or in part) any election for Federal office or educating individuals about candidates for election for Federal office, except that such term does not include the making of any communication provided by a corporation to its employees and their families or by a labor organization to its members and their families on any subject.''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to amounts collected or assessed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PROHIBITING CONTRIBUTIONS DURING SIX MONTHS FOLLOWING GENERAL ELECTION.
In General.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``prohibiting contributions during six months following general election ``Sec.
In General.--No person may make any contribution with respect to an election for Federal office to any political committee of a candidate for election for such office during the 180- day period which begins on the date of the previous regularly scheduled general election for such office, unless the election is a runoff or special election.
Exception for Contributions in Connection With Expenses of Previous Election.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to a contribution made solely in connection with the expenses of an election held prior to the date on which the contribution is made.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to elections occurring after January 1999.
INCREASE IN AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION.
Section 314 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 439c) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission $60,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001, of which not less than $28,350,000 shall be used during each such fiscal year for enforcement activities.''.
ENHANCING ENFORCEMENT OF CAMPAIGN FINANCE LAW.
Mandatory Imprisonment for Criminal Conduct.--Section 309(d)(1)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(d)(1)(A)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``shall be fined, or imprisoned for not more than one year, or both'' and inserting ``shall be imprisoned for not fewer than 1 year and not more than 10 years''; and (2) by striking the second sentence.
Concurrent Authority of Attorney General to Bring Criminal Actions.--Section 309(d) of such Act (2 United States Code 437g(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In addition to the authority to bring cases referred pursuant to subsection (a)(5), the Attorney General may at any time bring a criminal action for a violation of this Act or of chapter 95 or chapter 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to actions brought with respect to elections occurring after January 1999.