This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Veterans Affairs Nurses Appreciation Act of 1999''.
REVISED AUTHORITY FOR ADJUSTMENT OF BASIC PAY FOR NURSES AND CERTAIN OTHER HEALTH-CARE PROFESSIONALS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
Annual Adjustments Under Title 5.--Section 7451 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subsections (d), (e), (f), and (g); and (2) by adding after subsection (c) the following new subsection (d): ``(d) The rates of basic pay for each grade in a covered position shall (notwithstanding subsection (a)(3)(A)) be adjusted annually by the same percentages as the rates of pay under the General Schedule are adjusted pursuant to sections 5303 and 5304 of title 5.
Adjustments under this subsection shall be effective on the same date as the annual adjustments made in accordance with such sections 5303 and 5304.''.
Revised Title 38 Locality Pay Authority.--Such section is further amended by adding after subsection (d), as added by subsection (a) of this section, the following new subsection (e): ``(e)(1) Whenever after October 1, 2002, the Secretary determines that the rates of basic pay in effect for a grade of a covered position, as most recently adjusted under subsection (d), at a given Department health-care facility are inadequate to recruit or retain high-quality personnel in that grade at that facility, the Secretary shall in accordance with this subsection adjust the rates of basic pay for that grade at that facility.
An adjustment in rates of basic pay for a grade under this subsection shall be made by determining a minimum rate of basic pay for the grade and then adjusting the other rates of basic pay for the grade to conform to the requirements of subsection (c).
(A) The Secretary shall determine a minimum rate of basic pay for a grade for purposes of paragraph (2) so as to achieve consistency between the rates of basic pay for the grade at the facility concerned and the rates of compensation in the Bureau of Labor Statistics labor market in which the facility is located for non-Department health-care positions requiring education, training, and experience that is equivalent or similar to the education, training, and experience required for Department personnel in the grade at the facility.
The Secretary shall utilize the most current industry-wage survey of the Bureau of Labor Statistics for a labor market in meeting the objective specified in subparagraph (A).
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `rate of compensation', with respect to health-care positions in non-Department health-care facilities, means the sum of-- ``(i) the rate of pay for personnel in such positions; and ``(ii) any employee benefits (other than benefits similar to benefits received by employees in the covered position concerned) for those health-care positions to the extent that such employee benefits are reasonably quantifiable.
An adjustment under this subsection may not reduce any rate of basic pay.
An adjustment in rates of basic pay under this subsection shall take effect on the first day of the first pay period beginning after the date on which the adjustment is made.
The Secretary shall prescribe regulations providing for the adjustment of rates of basic pay for employees in covered positions in the Central and Regional Offices in order to assure the recruitment and retention of high-quality personnel in such positions in such offices.
The regulations shall provide for such adjustment in a manner similar to the adjustment of rates of basic pay under this subsection.''.
Annual Adjustments in Increased Rates of Basic Pay.--Section 7455 of such title is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``and (d)'' and inserting ``(d), and (e)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Whenever an annual adjustment in rates of basic pay under sections 5303 and 5304 of title 5 becomes effective on or after the effective date of an increase in rates of basic pay under this section, the rates of basic pay as so increased under this section shall be adjusted in accordance with appropriate conversion rules prescribed under section 5305(f) of title 5, effective as of the effective date of such annual adjustment in rates of basic pay.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (c)(1) of section 7451 of such title is amended by striking the third sentence.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
In the case of an employee of the Veterans Health Administration who on the day before the effective date of the amendment made by section 2(a) is receiving a rate of pay by reason of the second sentence of section 7451(e) of title 38, United States Code, as in effect on that day, the provisions of the second and third sentences of that section, as in effect on that day, shall continue to apply to that employee, notwithstanding the amendment made by section 2(a).