Special Panel.--Section 46 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by amending the section heading to read as follows: ``Sec.
Assignment of judges; panels; hearings; Intercircuit Court; quorum''; (2) in subsection (d)-- (A) by redesignating such subsection as subsection (e); and (B) by striking ``paragraph (c)'' and inserting ``subsections (c) and (d)''; and (3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following: ``(d)(1) The judges of the Courts of Appeals for the Ninth and Twelfth Circuits whose official duty stations are in the State of California shall constitute the Intercircuit California En Banc Court.
The Intercircuit Court shall convene as necessary to resolve any conflict between a decision of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit and a decision of the Court of Appeals for the Twelfth Circuit that results or is likely to result in the imposition of inconsistent or otherwise nonuniform Federal law within the State of California.
An appeal or other proceeding shall be reheard by the Intercircuit Court upon a majority vote of the judges of that court who are in regular active service.
Any judge of the Intercircuit Court who is in regular active service may request a vote to determine whether a decision of the Court of Appeals of which that judge is a member should be ordered reheard by the Intercircuit Court.
The appropriateness of rehearing by the Intercircuit Court may be suggested by a party, but a vote of the Intercircuit Court to order rehearing shall not be taken unless requested by a judge of the Intercircuit Court who is in regular active service and who is a member of the Court of Appeals in which the appeal or other proceeding is pending.
Rehearing by the Intercircuit Court shall not be favored and ordinarily shall be considered only when the failure to resolve a conflict described in paragraph (1) would be unusually burdensome to the administration of Federal law within the State of California.
The clerk of the Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit, and the clerk of the Court of Appeals for the Twelfth Circuit, shall, during alternate 2-year periods, serve as the clerk of the Intercircuit Court and shall provide such services as are needed by the Intercircuit Court.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The item relating to section 46 in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 3 of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``46.
Assignment of judges; panels; hearing; Intercircuit Court; quorum.''.
ASSIGNMENT AND SENIORITY OF JUDGES.
Active Service Judges.-- (1) New ninth circuit.--Each circuit judge in regular active service of the former ninth circuit whose official duty station on the day before the effective date of this Act is in Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon, Washington, Hawaii, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, or the Northern or Eastern District of California is assigned as a circuit judge of the new ninth circuit as of such effective date.
Twelfth circuit.--Each circuit judge in regular active service of the former ninth circuit whose official duty station on the day before the effective date of this Act is in Arizona, Nevada, or the Central or Southern District of California is assigned as a circuit judge of the twelfth circuit as of such effective date.
Senior Judges.--Each judge who is a senior judge of the former ninth circuit on the day before the effective date of this Act may elect to be assigned to the new ninth circuit or to the twelfth circuit and shall notify the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts of such election.
Seniority.--The seniority of each judge-- (1) who is assigned under subsection (a), or (2) who elects to be assigned under subsection (b), shall run from the date of the commission of such judge as a judge of the former ninth circuit.
The following applies to any case in which, on the day before the effective date of this Act, an appeal or other proceeding has been filed with the former ninth circuit: (1) If the matter has been submitted for decision, further proceedings in respect of the matter shall be had in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
If the matter has not been submitted for decision, the appeal or proceeding, together with the original papers, printed records, and record entries duly certified, shall, by appropriate orders, be transferred to the court to which it would have gone had this Act been in full force and effect at the time such appeal was taken or other proceeding commenced, and further proceedings in respect of the case shall be had in the same manner and with the same effect as if the appeal or other proceeding had been filed in such court.
A petition for rehearing or a petition for rehearing en banc in a matter decided before the effective date of this Act, or submitted before the effective date of this Act and decided on or after the effective date as provided in paragraph (1) of this section, shall be treated in the same manner and with the same effect as though this Act had not been enacted.
If a petition for rehearing en banc is granted, the matter shall be reheard by a court comprised as though this Act had not been enacted.
The new ninth circuit and the twelfth circuit shall be deemed to be a single circuit for purposes of sections 291(a) and 292(a) of title 28, United States Code, with respect to any judge serving in the former ninth circuit on the day before the effective date of this Act.
As used in sections 4, 5, and 6-- (1) the term ``former ninth circuit'' means the ninth judicial circuit of the United States as in existence on the day before the effective date of this Act; (2) the term ``new ninth circuit'' means the ninth judicial circuit of the United States established by the amendment made by section 2(a)(2); and (3) the term ``twelfth circuit'' means the twelfth judicial circuit of the United States established by the amendment made by section 2(a)(3).
The court of appeals for the ninth circuit as constituted on the day before the effective date of this Act may take such administrative action as may be required to carry out this Act.
Such court shall cease to exist for administrative purposes on July 1, 1997.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on October 1, 1994.