This Act may be cited as the ``International and Foreign Language Studies Act of 2004''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) In recent years, foreign language needs have significantly increased throughout the Federal Government due to the presence of a wider range of security threats, the emergence of new nation states, and the globalization of the United States economy.
Likewise, American businesses increasingly need internationally and multiculturally experienced employees to compete in the global economy and to manage a culturally diverse workforce.
Currently, the Federal Government requires 34,000 employees with foreign language skills across more than 70 Federal agencies.
Federal agency officials have stated that, over the years, translator and interpreter shortfalls have adversely affected agency operations and hindered United States military, law enforcement, intelligence, counterterrorism, and diplomatic efforts.
In a 2002 General Accounting Office report, the United States Army reported that it was experiencing serious shortfalls of translators and interpreters in 5 of its 6 critical languages: Arabic, Korean, Mandarin Chinese, Persian- Farsi, and Russian.
The number of Foreign Language and Area Studies Fellowships awarded in 2003 was 30 percent less than the number awarded at its high point in 1967.
In the 2000-2001 school year, the number of foreign language degrees conferred was 1 percent of the total undergraduate degrees conferred, less than .05 percent of the total masters degrees conferred, and 1 percent of the total doctoral degrees conferred.
In the 2003 National Survey of Student Engagement, only \2/5\ of undergraduates reported taking foreign language coursework, while only 1 in 5 reported having studied abroad.
Only 1 percent of all United States undergraduates studied abroad in the 2001-2002 school year.
In 2002, 79 percent of Americans agreed that students should have a study-abroad experience sometime during college.
More than 40 percent of Americans said they were more likely to favor an increase in State funding for foreign language education at their local college or university after September 11, 2001.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, wherever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001 et sequentes).
GRADUATE AND UNDERGRADUATE LANGUAGE AND AREA CENTERS AND PROGRAMS.
Section 602 (20 United States Code 1122) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(2)-- (A) in subparagraph (G), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in subparagraph (H), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(I) support for instructors of the less commonly taught languages.
''; (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) in the subsection heading, by inserting ``and Undergraduate'' after ``Graduate''; and (B) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following: ``(2) Eligible student.--A student receiving a stipend described in paragraph (1) shall be engaged-- ``(A) in an instructional program with stated performance goals for functional foreign language use or in a program developing such performance goals, in combination with area studies, international studies, or the international aspects of a professional studies program; and ``(B)(i) in the case of an undergraduate student, in the intermediate or advanced study of a less commonly taught language; or ``(ii) in the case of a graduate student, in graduate study work in connection with a program described in subparagraph (A), including predissertation level study, preparation for dissertation research, dissertation research abroad, or dissertation writing.
''; and (3) by striking subsection (d) and inserting the following: ``(d) Allowances.-- ``(1) Graduate level recipients.--A stipend awarded to a graduate level recipient may include allowances for dependents and for travel for research and study in the United States and abroad.
Undergraduate level recipients.--A stipend awarded to an undergraduate level recipient may include an allowance for educational programs in the United States or abroad that-- ``(A) are closely linked to the overall goals of the recipient's course of study; and ``(B) have the purpose of promoting foreign language fluency and cultural knowledge.''.
USE OF FUNDS IN UNDERGRADUATE INTERNATIONAL STUDIES AND FOREIGN LANGUAGE PROGRAMS.
Section 604 (20 United States Code 1124) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (2)-- (i) by redesignating subparagraphs (I) through (M) as subparagraphs (J) through (N), respectively; and (ii) by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following: ``(I) providing subgrants to undergraduate students for educational programs abroad that-- (i) are closely linked to the overall goals of the program for which the grant is awarded; and (ii) have the purpose of promoting foreign language fluency and cultural knowledge;''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(9) Limitation on undergraduate grants.--An institution of higher education, a combination of such institutions, or a partnership awarded a grant under this section shall use not more than 10 percent of the grant funds for the use described in paragraph (2)(I).
''; and (2) by striking subsection (c).
Section 605(a) (20 United States Code 1125(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (8), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in paragraph (9), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(10) the systematic collection, analysis, and dissemination of data that contribute to achieving the purposes of this part.''.
Section 610 (20 United States Code 1128b) is amended by striking ``$80,000,000 for fiscal year 1999'' and inserting ``$120,000,000 for fiscal year 2005''.