This Act may be cited as the ``Disaster Burden Relief Act of 2001''.
CREDIT FOR MORTGAGE PAYMENTS MADE ON DESTROYED HOME.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
MORTGAGE PAYMENTS MADE ON DESTROYED HOME.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the payments made during the taxable year on acquisition indebtedness (as defined in section 163(h)(3)(B)) secured by a qualified destroyed home.
Qualified Destroyed Home.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified destroyed home' means any residence if-- ``(1) such residence is substantially destroyed as a result of a disaster which is a Presidentially declared disaster (as defined in section 1033(h)) or a disaster which is declared by the chief executive officer of the State in which such residence is located, ``(2) such residence was the principal residence (within the meaning of section 121) of the taxpayer at the time of its destruction, ``(3) because of the high risk of the occurrence of the type of disaster which substantially destroyed such residence, insurance covering damage resulting from such a disaster was unavailable at reasonable rates, and ``(4) such destruction is not compensated for by insurance or otherwise.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Coordination with interest deduction.--The deduction which would (but for this subsection) be allowed on the indebtedness referred to in subsection (a) shall be reduced by the credit allowed under this section.
Credit only for payment due after destruction.-- Subsection (a) shall not apply to any amount first due before the date of the disaster.
Benefit reduced by government grants.-- ``(A) In general.--If any grant is provided to the taxpayer under any Federal, State, or local government program by reason of the destruction of the residence-- ``(i) subsection (b)(4) shall be applied without regard to such grant, but ``(ii) the credit which would (but for this paragraph) be allowed under this section for any taxable year shall be reduced by such taxable year's ratable portion of such grant.
Ratable portion.--The ratable portion of a grant shall be determined by allocating such grant ratably over the reasonably expected remaining period that payments on the mortgage will be required to be made.
Election Not To Have Credit Apply.--This section shall not apply to a taxpayer for a taxable year if the taxpayer elects not to have this section apply for such year.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Mortgage payments made on destroyed home.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to with respect to disasters occurring on or after January 1, 2000.
NO INCOME FROM DISCHARGE OF INDEBTEDNESS OF DESTROYED HOME.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 108 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to income from discharge of indebtedness) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Exception for homes destroyed in presidentially declared disasters.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any discharge of acquisition indebtedness (as defined in section 163(h)(3)(B)) secured by a qualified destroyed home (as defined in section 25B(b)).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section apply to with respect to disasters occurring on or after January 1, 2000.
LOSS DEDUCTION ON DESTROYED HOME DETERMINED AS IF BASIS EQUALED FAIR MARKET VALUE PRIOR TO DESTRUCTION.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 165 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitation on losses of individuals) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``If the loss referred to in paragraph (3) is of a qualified destroyed home (as defined in section 25B(b)) and the taxpayer irrevocably elects not to claim the benefits of section 25B with respect to such home, the amount of the loss sustained shall be determined as if the adjusted basis of the home equaled its fair market value immediately before its destruction.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section apply to with respect to disasters occurring on or after January 1, 2000.
LOSS ON SALE OR EXCHANGE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE LOCATED IN PRESIDENTIALLY DECLARED DISASTER AREA.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 165 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitation on losses of individuals) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``; and'', and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) losses arising from the sale or exchange of the principal residence (within the meaning of section 121) of the taxpayer if-- ``(A) such residence is located in an area-- ``(i) which was at any time determined by the President to warrant assistance by the Federal Government under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act, or ``(ii) which was at any time declared a disaster area by the chief executive officer of the State in which such residence is located, ``(B) such residence was acquired by the taxpayer on or before the date of the occurrence of the disaster for which such determination or declaration was made, and ``(C) because of the high risk of the reoccurrence of the type of disaster for which such determination or declaration was made, insurance covering damage resulting from such a disaster was unavailable at reasonable rates.''
Limitation on Losses Not To Apply.--Subsection (b) of section 1211 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new flush sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply to a loss described in section 165(c)(4).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales and exchanges on or after January 1, 2000.