The Congress finds the following: (1) The current public/private partnership has succeeded in fulfilling the mission set for it by Congress--delivering loans to students reliably and in a timely fashion--and as such should be preserved.
The current Federal Family Education Loan (FFEL) program is, however, in need of reform.
Many important positive changes were made during the reauthorization of the Higher Education Act in the 102d Congress, but further changes are needed to make the FFEL program more efficient.
It would be preferable to improve on a public/private partnership that is known to work rather than dismantle it in favor of an unproved direct Government lending program, which would increase the Federal debt, further enlarge the Federal bureaucracy, add major new financial oversight activities to the already overburdened Department of Education, and force the Congress to depend on estimated savings which may prove illusory.
The large Direct Lending Demonstration Program that was begun by the Higher Education Amendments of 1992 is only now getting started.
It would be better to allow this Demonstration Program to proceed and show some results before expanding it to cover the entire federally insured student lending system.
Reforming the FFEL system with the immediate savings and efficiencies that are contained in this bill will in no way prevent the passage and implementation of legislation that would begin a National Service Program, as proposed by the President.
Reforming the current FFEL system will produce immediate savings without increasing the size and debt of the Federal Government.
It will also assure students and their parents that they will continue to receive the funds they need for higher education when they need them.
Section 427A of the Act (20 United States Code 1077a) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (h) as subsection (i); and (2) by inserting after subsection (g) the following new subsection: ``(h) In-School and Grace Period Interest Rates.-- ``(1) Applicable rate.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, with respect to any loan for which the first disbursement is made on or after October 1, 1993, the applicable rate of interest for interest which accrues-- ``(A) prior to the beginning of the repayment period of the loan, or ``(B) during the period in which principal need not be paid (whether or not such principal is in fact paid) by reason of a provision described in section 428(b)(1)(M) or 427(a)(2)(C), shall not exceed the rate determined under paragraph (2).
Method of calculation.--For purposes of paragraph (1) the rate determined under this paragraph shall, during any 12- month period beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30, be determined on the preceding June 1 and be equal to-- ``(A) the bond equivalent rate of 91-day Treasury bills auctioned at the final auction prior to such June 1; plus ``(B) 2.6 percent.''.
Section 428(b)(2) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(G) provide that, if a lender or holder, on or after October 1, 1993, sells, transfers, or assigns a loan under this part, then the transferee shall pay to the Secretary a transfer fee in an amount equal to 0.25 percent the principal and accrued unpaid interest of the loan.''.
Guaranty Agency Reinsurance Percentage.--Section 428(c)(1) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078(c)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``100 percent'' and inserting ``96 percent''; (2) in subparagraph (B)(i), by striking ``90 percent'' and inserting ``86 percent''; and (3) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``80 percent'' and inserting ``76 percent''.
Risk Sharing by the Student Loan Marketing Association.-- (1) GSL program.--Section 428(b)(1)(G) of the Act is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end thereof the following: ``, except that for loans held by the Student Loan Marketing Association (other than loans made pursuant to section 439(q)) such percentage shall be 90 percent''.
FISL program.--Section 425(b)(1) of the Act is amended by inserting after ``interest'' in the matter preceding clause (i) the following: ``, except that for loans held by the Student Loan Marketing Association (other than loans made pursuant to section 439(q)) such liability shall be 90 percent of such unpaid balance, and''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any loan on which a default (as defined in section 435 of the Act) occurs on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
SHARES OF POST-DEFAULT COLLECTIONS.
Section 428(c)(6) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078(c)(6)(A) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be applied with respect to determinations of the Secretary's equitable share of payments made by borrowers-- ``(i) during fiscal years 1994 and 1995, by substituting `27 percent' for `30 percent'; and ``(ii) during fiscal year 1996 and succeeding fiscal years, by substituting `26 percent' for `30 percent'.''.
Administrative Cost Allowances.--Section 428(f)(1)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1078(f)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``1 percent'' and inserting ``0.50 percent''.
Reinsurance Fees.--Section 428(c) of the Act is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (9); and (2) by redesignating paragraph (10) as paragraph (9).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to loans made on or after October 1, 1993.
PLUS LOAN AMOUNTS AND DISBURSEMENTS.
Loan Amounts.--Section 428B(b) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078-2(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Limitations on Amounts of Loans.-- ``(1) Annual limit.--Subject to paragraph (2), the maximum amount parents may borrow for one student in any academic year or its equivalent (as defined by regulation of the Secretary) is $10,000.
Limitation based on need.--Any loan under this section may be counted as part of the expected family contribution in the determination of need under this title, but no loan may be made to any parent under this section for any academic year in excess of (A) the student's estimated cost of attendance, minus (B) other financial aid as certified by the eligible institution under section 428(a)(2)(A).
The annual insurable limit on account of any student shall not be deemed to be exceeded by a line of credit under which actual payments to the borrower will not be made in any year in excess of the annual limit.''.
Multiple Disbursement Required.-- (1) Amendment.--Section 428B(c) of the Act is amended by inserting after ``under this section'' the following: ``shall be disbursed in accordance with the requirements of section 428G and''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 428G(e) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078-7(e) is amended-- (A) by striking ``PLUS, Consolidation,'' and inserting ``Consolidation''; and (B) by striking ``section 428B or 428C'' and inserting ``section 428C''.
FISL amendment.--Section 427(b)(2) of the Act (20 United States Code 1077(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``section 428B or 428C'' and inserting ``section 428B''.
Interest Rates.-- (1) Reduction of rates.--Section 428C(c)(1)(B) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078-3(c)(1)(B)) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) Except as provided in subparagraph (C), a consolidation loan shall bear interest at an annual rate on the unpaid principal balance of the loan that is equal to the lesser of-- ``(i) the weighted average of the interest rates on the loans consolidated, rounded to the nearest whole percent; or ``(ii) for any 12-month period beginning on July 1 and ending on June 30, determined on the preceding June 1 that is a rate equal to-- ``(I) the bond equivalent rate of 52-week Treasury bills auctioned at the final auction before such June 1; plus ``(II) 3.10 percent.''.
9 percent ceiling.--Section 428C(c)(1)(C) of the Act is amended by striking out ``not less'' and inserting ``not more''.
Limitation of Interest Subsidy During Deferment.--Section 428C(c)(4)(C) of the Act is amended to read as follows: ``(C)(i) provides that periodic installments of principal need not be paid, but interest shall accrue and be paid in accordance with clause (ii), during any period for which the borrower would be eligible for a deferral under section 428(b)(1)(M), and that any such period shall not be included in determining the repayment period pursuant to subsection (c)(2) of this section; and ``(ii) provides that interest shall accrue and be paid-- ``(I) by the Secretary, in the case of a consolidation loan that consolidated only Federal Stafford Loans for which the student borrower received an interest subsidy under section 428; or ``(II) by the borrower, or capitalized, in the case of a consolidation loan other than one described in subclause (I);''.
Lender Fees.--Section 428C(c) of the Act is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Insurance fee from lenders.--Each lender shall pay to the Secretary, by quarterly installments, an annual amount equal to 0.5 percent of the average principal amount outstanding on loans under this section held by the lender, as determined in accordance with such regulations as the Secretary shall prescribe.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to loans for which the first disbursement is made on or after October 1, 1993.
DATE OF DEFAULT DETERMINATIONS.
Amendments.--Section 435(l) of the Act (20 United States Code 1085(l)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``180 days'' and inserting ``270 days''; and (2) by striking ``240 days'' and inserting ``330 days''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 428(c)(1)(A) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078(c)(1)(A)) is amended by striking the last sentence and inserting the following: ``A guaranty agency shall file a claim for reimbursement under this subsection within 45 days after the agency's discharge of its insurance obligation, except that when a guaranty agency discharges its insurance obligation prior to 360 days after a loan becomes delinquent with respect to any installment thereon, the guaranty agency shall file a claim under this subsection within 45 days after the loan becomes 360 days delinquent with respect to any such installment.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply on and after October 1, 1993.
SPECIAL ALLOWANCES ON TAX EXEMPT FUNDS.
Special Allowance Amendment.--Section 438(b)(2)(B) of the Act (20 United States Code 1087-1(b)(2)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking the first sentence of division (i) and inserting the following: ``The quarterly rate of the special allowance for holders of loans which were made or purchased with funds obtained by the holder from the issuance of obligations, the income from which is exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, shall be 85 percent of the quarterly rate of the special allowance established under subparagraph (A).
''; (2) by striking division (ii); and (3) by redesignating division (iii) as division (ii).
Purchase Premiums.--Section 438(d)(2) of the Act is amended-- (1) by striking subparagraph (C); and (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (D), (E), and (F) as subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E), respectively.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to loans made on and after October 1, 1993.
Section 438 of the Act (20 United States Code 1087-1) is amended-- (1) in the heading of subsection (c) by inserting ``From Students'' after ``Origination Fees''; (2) by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (e) and (f), respectively; and (3) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Origination Fees From Lenders.-- ``(1) Deduction from interest and special allowance subsidies.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), the total amount of interest and special allowance payable under section 428(a)(3)(A) and subsection (b) of this section, respectively, to any holder shall be reduced by the Secretary by an origination fee in an amount determined in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection.
If the total amount of interest and special allowance payable under section 428(a)(3)(A) and subsection (b) of this section, respectively, is less than the amount of such origination fee, the Secretary shall deduct such excess amount from subsequent quarters' payments until the total amount has been deducted.
Amount of origination fees.--Subject to paragraph (3) of this subsection, with respect to any loan (other than loans made under sections 428A, 428B, 428C, and 428H) for which a completed note or other written evidence of the loan was sent or delivered to the borrower for signing on or after July 1, 1993, the amount of the origination fee which shall be deducted under paragraph (1) shall be equal to 1 percent of the principal amount of the loan.
SLS, plus, consolidation, and undsubsidized loans.-- With respect to any loans made under section 428A, 428B, 428C, and 428H and disbursed on or after October 1, 1993, each eligible lender under this part shall pay to the Secretary an origination fee of 1 percent of the principal amount of the loan.
Distribution of origination fees.--All origination fees collected pursuant to this section on loans authorized under section 428A, 428B, 428C, or 428H shall be paid to the Secretary by the lender and deposited in the fund authorized under section 431 of this part.''.
Section 439(q)(1)(A) of the Act (20 United States Code 1087-2) is amended by ``may begin'' and inserting ``shall begin''.
STUDENT LOAN MARKETING ASSOCIATION STUDY.
Section 439 of the Act is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(s) Transition Study and Activities.--(1) The Secretaries of Education and the Treasury, in consultation with the Association, shall prepare a study, to be completed within 6 months of the enactment of this provision, which shall examine alternatives concerning the status, operations, and purposes of the Association.
Such alternatives shall include providing for an orderly transition of the Association from a Government-Sponsored Enterprise to a private corporation.
Such study shall-- ``(A) consider how best to meet the needs of students and taxpayers for financing for postsecondary education; ``(B) reflect the need for the Association to maintain liquidity and perform other functions for the Federal Education Loan program; ``(C) consider any appropriate changes to part D of title VII, relating to the College Construction Loan Insurance Association; and ``(D) be considered by the Secretaries of Education and the Treasury in developing any legislative proposals concerning any changes to the status of the Association as a Government- Sponsored Enterprise or its duties under the Federal Family Education Loan program.
The Secretaries of Education and the Treasury are directed to work with the Association to ensure that any changes in the Association's status, operations, or purposes are carried out efficiently and effectively.''.
Regulations Required.--The Secretary of Education shall, not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act-- (1) prescribe the regulations required for the implementation of the income sensitive repayment options pursuant to section 428(b)(1)(E)(i) and 428(m) of the Act; (2) take such steps as may be necessary-- (A) to inform borrowers under part B of title IV of the Act of the availability of standard, graduated, and income sensitive repayment options for student loans; and (B) to ensure that lenders under such part permit borrowers to fully exercise such options.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 428(b)(1) of the Act (20 United States Code 1078(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (D)(ii), by inserting ``except as permitted pursuant to subparagraph (E),''; (2) in subparagraph (E)-- (A) by striking ``subparagraphs (D) and (L)'' and inserting ``subparagraph (L)''; (B) by inserting ``or 428H'' after ``section 428A''; (C) by inserting ``under subsection (m)'' after ``regulations of the Secretary''; and (D) by striking ``nor more than 10 years''.