This Act may be cited as the ``Book Stamp Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Literacy is fundamental to all learning.
Between 40 and 60 percent of the Nation's children do not read at grade level, particularly children in families or school districts that are challenged by significant financial or social instability.
Increased investments in child literacy are needed to improve opportunities for children and the efficacy of the Nation's education investments.
Increasing access to books in the home is an important means of improving child literacy, which can be accomplished nationally at modest cost.
Effective channels for book distribution already exist through child care providers.
In this Act: (1) Early learning program.--The term ``early learning'', used with respect to a program, means a program of activities designed to facilitate development of cognitive, language, motor, and social-emotional skills in children under age 6 as a means of enabling the children to enter school ready to learn, such as a Head Start or Early Head Start program carried out under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), or a State pre-kindergarten program.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' means the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
State agency.--The term ``State agency'' means an agency designated under section 658D of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858b).
GRANTS TO STATE AGENCIES.
Establishment of Program.--The Secretary shall establish and carry out a program to promote child literacy and improve children's access to books at home and in early learning and other child care programs, by making books available through early learning and other child care programs.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary shall make grants to State agencies from allotments determined under paragraph (2).
Allotments.--For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall allot to each State an amount that bears the same ratio to the total of the available funds for the fiscal year as the amount the State receives under section 658O(b) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858m(b)) for the fiscal year bears to the total amount received by all States under that section for the fiscal year.
Applications.--To be eligible to receive an allotment under this section, a State shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Accountability.--The provisions of sections 658I(b) and 658K(b) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858g(b), 9858i(b)) shall apply to States receiving grants under this Act, except that references in those sections-- (1) to a subchapter shall be considered to be references to this Act; and (2) to a plan or application shall be considered to be references to an application submitted under subsection (c).
Definition.--In this section, the term ``available funds'', used with respect to a fiscal year, means the total of-- (1) the funds made available under section 416(c)(1) of title 39, United States Code for the fiscal year; and (2) the amounts appropriated under section 9 for the fiscal year.
CONTRACTS TO CHILD CARE RESOURCE AND REFERRAL AGENCIES.
A State agency that receives a grant under section 4 shall use funds made available through the grant to enter into contracts with local child care resource and referral agencies to carry out the activities described in section 6.
The State agency may reserve not more than 3 percent of the funds made available through the grant to support a public awareness campaign relating to the activities.
Activities.-- (1) Book payments for eligible providers.--A child care resource and referral agency that receives a contract under section 5 shall use the funds made available through the grant to provide payments for eligible early learning program and other child care providers, on the basis of local needs, to enable the providers to make books available, to promote child literacy and improve children's access to books at home and in early learning and other child care programs.
Eligible providers.--To be eligible to receive a payment under paragraph (1), a provider shall-- (A)(i) be a center-based child care provider, a group home child care provider, or a family child care provider, described in section 658P(5)(A) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858n(5)(A)); or (ii) be a Head Start agency designated under section 641 of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9836), an entity that receives assistance under section 645A of such Act to carry out an Early Head Start program or another provider of an early learning program; and (B) provide services in an area where children face high risks of literacy difficulties, as defined by the Secretary.
Responsibilities.--A child care resource and referral agency that receives a contract under section 5 to provide payments to eligible providers shall-- (1) consult with local individuals and organizations concerned with early literacy (including parents and organizations carrying out the Reach Out and Read, First Book, and Reading Is Fundamental programs) regarding local book distribution needs; (2) make reasonable efforts to learn public demographic and other information about local families and child literacy programs carried out by the eligible providers, as needed to inform the agency's decisions as the agency carries out the contract; (3) coordinate local orders of the books made available under this Act; (4) distribute, to each eligible provider that receives a payment under this Act, not fewer than 1 book every 6 months for each child served by the provider for more than 3 of the preceding 6 months; (5) use not more than 5 percent of the funds made available through the contract to provide training and technical assistance to the eligible providers on the effective use of books with young children at different stages of development; and (6) be a training resource for eligible providers that want to offer parent workshops on developing reading readiness.
Discounts.-- (1) In general.--Federal funds made available under this Act for the purchase of books may only be used to purchase books on the same terms as are customarily available in the book industry to entities carrying out nonprofit bulk book purchase and distribution programs.
Terms.--An entity offering books for purchase under this Act shall be present to have met the requirements of paragraph (1), absent contrary evidence, if the terms include a discount of 43 percent off the catalogue price of the books, with no additional charge for shipping and handling of the books.
Administration.--The child care resource and referral agency may not use more than 6 percent of the funds made available through the contract for administrative costs.
Not later than 2 years of the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report on the implementation of the activities carried out under this Act.
SPECIAL POSTAGE STAMPS FOR CHILD LITERACY.
Chapter 4 of title 39, United States Code is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Special postage stamps for child literacy ``(a) In order to afford the public a convenient way to contribute to funding for child literacy, the Postal Service shall establish a special rate of postage for first-class mail under this section.
The stamps that bear the special rate of postage shall promote childhood literacy and shall, to the extent practicable, contain an image relating to a character in a children's book or cartoon.
(1) The rate of postage established under this section-- ``(A) shall be equal to the regular first-class rate of postage, plus a differential of not to exceed 25 percent; ``(B) shall be set by the Governors in accordance with such procedures as the Governors shall by regulation prescribe (in lieu of the procedures described in chapter 36); and ``(C) shall be offered as an alternative to the regular first-class rate of postage.
The use of the special rate of postage established under this section shall be voluntary on the part of postal patrons.
(1) Of the amounts becoming available for child literacy pursuant to this section, the Postal Service shall pay 100 percent to the Department of Health and Human Services.
Payments made under this subsection to the Department shall be made under such arrangements as the Postal Service shall by mutual agreement with such Department establish in order to carry out the objectives of this section, except that, under those arrangements, payments to such agency shall be made at least twice a year.
In this section, the term `amounts becoming available for child literacy pursuant to this section' means-- ``(A) the total amounts received by the Postal Service that the Postal Service would not have received but for the enactment of this section; reduced by ``(B) an amount sufficient to cover reasonable costs incurred by the Postal Service in carrying out this section, including costs attributable to the printing, sale, and distribution of stamps under this section, as determined by the Postal Service under regulations that the Postal Service shall prescribe.
It is the sense of Congress that nothing in this section should-- ``(1) directly or indirectly cause a net decrease in total funds received by the Department of Health and Human Services, or any other agency of the Government (or any component or program of the Government), below the level that would otherwise have been received but for the enactment of this section; or ``(2) affect regular first-class rates of postage or any other regular rates of postage.
Special postage stamps made available under this section shall be made available to the public beginning on such date as the Postal Service shall by regulation prescribe, but in no event later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this section.
The Postmaster General shall include in each report provided under section 2402, with respect to any period during any portion of which this section is in effect, information concerning the operation of this section, except that, at a minimum, each report shall include information on-- ``(1) the total amounts described in subsection (c)(3)(A) that were received by the Postal Service during the period covered by such report; and ``(2) of the amounts described in paragraph (1), how much (in the aggregate and by category) was required for the purposes described in subsection (c)(3)(B).
This section shall cease to be effective at the end of the 2- year period beginning on the date on which special postage stamps made available under this section are first made available to the public.''.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.