This Act may be cited as the ``Minnesota National Treasures Conservation and Protection Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Voyageurs National Park and the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness are special natural resources that offer a unique lakeland experience for the enjoyment and inspiration of present and future generations; (2) Voyageurs National Park and the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness are international, national, and Minnesota treasures worthy of national preservation and protection as a national park and a wilderness area; (3) Congress has expressed overwhelming support for the protection of these resources through their designation as a national park and wilderness area and by providing sustained funding to implement these landmark laws; (4) public acceptance and enthusiasm for the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness has established the area as the most widely used wilderness unit in the entire national wilderness preservation system; and (5) it is necessary and desirable to further provide for the orderly administration and management of public use and enjoyment of these national areas, while at the same time protecting the special qualities of the areas as a natural forest-lakeland wilderness ecosystem of major esthetic, cultural, scientific, recreational and educational value to the Nation.
TITLE I--THE BOUNDARY WATERS CANOE AREA WILDERNESS PRESERVATION SEC.
BOUNDARY WATERS CANOE AREA WILDERNESS DESIGNATION AND MAP.
Section 3 of Public Law 94-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note) is amended as follows-- (1) by amending the first sentence to read as follows: ``The areas generally depicted as wilderness on the map entitled `Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness' and dated 1996, comprising approximately 1,101,000 acres, are hereby designated as the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness (hereinafter referred to as the `Wilderness').
''; (2) by striking ``one year after the date of enactment of this Act'' and insert ``one year after the enactment of the Minnesota National Treasures Conservation and Protection Act''; and (3) by amending the third sentence to read as follows: ``Such map and description shall be filed with the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.''.
AMENDMENTS TO SECTION 4 OF PUBLIC LAW 95-495.
Section 4 of Public Law 95-495 is amended as follows: (1) In subsection (c)(1), by striking ``Basswood, except that portion generally north of the narrows at the north end of Jackfish Bay and north of a point on the international boundary between Ottawa Island and Washington Island'' and inserting in lieu thereof: ``Pipestone Bay of Basswood and that portion of Jackfish Bay of Basswood generally south of the narrows at the north end of Jackfish Bay;''.
In subsection (d), by striking ``Loon Lake, Saint Louis County; that portion of the Lac La Croix, Saint Louis County, south of Snow Bay and east of Wilkins Bay.''.
The provisions of Executive Order 10092 shall be applicable to the areas depicted on the map referred to in section 101 of this Act.
TITLE II--THE VOYAGEURS NATIONAL PARK PRESERVATION ACT SEC.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS AREA.
In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), land and waters of the Kabetogama Peninsula within Voyageurs National Park in the State of Minnesota, which comprise approximately 74,114 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Voyaguers National Park Wilderness'', numbered __________ and dated __________ are hereby designated as wilderness and shall be known as the ``Voyageurs National Park Wilderness''.
MAP AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION.
As soon as practicable after enactment of this Act, a map and legal description of the wilderness area designated in section 201 shall be filed by the Secretary of the Interior with the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
Such map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that correction of clerical and typographical errors in such map and legal description may be made.
Such map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and in the office of the Superintendent of Voyageurs National Park.
Subject to valid existing rights, the area designated as wilderness by section 201 shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Wilderness Act governing areas so designated.
The Secretary shall continue to provide for the use of existing safety portages for snowmobiles, as depicted on the map referred to in section 201.