This Act may be cited as the ``Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997''.
EXPANSION OF ARCHES NATIONAL PARK, UTAH.
Boundary Expansion.--Subsection (a) of the first section of Public Law 92-155 (16 United States Code 272; 85 United States Statutes at Large 422) is amended as follows: (1) By inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``Effective on the date of the enactment of the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997, the boundary of the park shall also include the area consisting of approximately 3,140 acres and known as the `Lost Spring Canyon Addition', as depicted on the map entitled `Boundary Map, Arches National Park, Lost Spring Canyon Addition', numbered 138/60,000-B, and dated April 1997.''.
In the last sentence, by striking ``Such map'' and inserting ``Such maps''.
Inclusion of Land in Park.--Section 2 of Public Law 92-155 (16 United States Code 272a) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentences: ``As soon as possible after the date of the enactment of the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997, the Secretary of the Interior shall transfer jurisdiction over the Federal lands contained in the Lost Spring Canyon Addition from the Bureau of Land Management to the National Park Service.
The lands included in the park pursuant to the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997 shall be administered in accordance with the laws and regulations applicable to the park.''.
Protection of Existing Grazing Permit.--Section 3 of Public Law 92-155 (16 United States Code 272b) is amended as follows: (1) By inserting ``(a)'' before ``Where''.
By adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b)(1) In the case of any grazing lease, permit, or license with respect to lands within the Lost Spring Canyon Addition that was issued before the date of the enactment of the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997, the Secretary of the Interior shall, subject to periodic renewal, continue such lease, permit, or license for a period of time equal to the lifetime of the permittee as of that date and any direct descendants of the permittee born before that date.
Any such grazing lease, permit, or license shall be permanently retired at the end of such period.
Pending the expiration of such period, the permittee (or a descendant of the permittee who holds the lease, permit, or license) shall be entitled to periodically renew the lease, permit, or license, subject to such limitations, conditions, or regulations as the Secretary may prescribe.
Any such grazing lease, permit, or license may be sold during the period specified in paragraph (1) only on the condition that the purchaser shall, immediately upon such acquisition, permanently retire such lease, permit, or license.
Nothing in this subsection shall affect other provisions concerning leases, permits, or licenses under the Taylor Grazing Act.
Any portion of any grazing lease, permit, or license with respect to lands within the Lost Spring Canyon Addition shall be administered by the National Park Service.''.
Withdrawal From Mineral Entry and Leasing; Pipeline Management.--Section 5 of Public Law 92-155 (16 United States Code 272d) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) Subject to valid existing rights, Federal lands within the Lost Spring Canyon Addition are hereby appropriated and withdrawn from entry, location, selection, leasing, or other disposition under the public land laws, including the mineral leasing laws.
The inclusion of the Lost Spring Canyon Addition in the park shall not affect the operation or maintenance by the Northwest Pipeline Corporation (or its successors or assigns) of the natural gas pipeline and related facilities located in the Lost Spring Canyon Addition on the date of the enactment of the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997.''.
Effect on School Trust Lands.-- (1) Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (A) A parcel of State school trust lands, more specifically described as section 16, township 23 south, range 22 east, of the Salt Lake base and meridian, is partially contained within the Lost Spring Canyon Addition included within the boundaries of Arches National Park by the amendment by subsection (a).
The parcel was originally granted to the State of Utah for the purpose of generating revenue for the public schools through the development of natural and other resources located on the parcel.
It is in the interest of the State of Utah and the United States for the parcel to be exchanged for Federal lands of equivalent value outside the Lost Spring Canyon Addition, in order to permit Federal management of all lands within the Lost Spring Canyon Addition.
Land exchange.--Public Law 92-155 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
LAND EXCHANGE INVOLVING SCHOOL TRUST LANDS.
Exchange Requirement.--If, not later than one year after the date of the enactment of the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997, and in accordance with this section, the State of Utah offers to transfer all right, title and interest of the State in and to the parcel of school trust lands described in subsection (b)(1) to the United States, the Secretary of the Interior shall accept the offer on behalf of the United States and, within 180 days after the date of such acceptance, transfer to the State of Utah all right, title and interest of the United States in and to the parcel of land described in subsection (b)(2).
Title to the State lands shall be transferred at the same time as conveyance of title to the Federal lands by the Secretary of the Interior.
The exchange of lands under this section shall be subject to valid existing rights, and each party shall succeed to the rights and obligations of the other party with respect to any lease, right-of-way, or permit encumbering the exchanged lands.
Description of Parcels.-- ``(1) State conveyance.--The parcel of school trust lands to be conveyed by the State of Utah under subsection (a) is section 16, township 23 south, range 22 east of the Salt Lake base and meridian.
Federal conveyance.--The parcel of Federal lands to be conveyed by the Secretary of the Interior consists of approximately 639 acres and is identified as lots 1 through 12 located in the S\1/2\N\1/2\ and the N\1/2\N\1/2\N\1/2\S\1/2\ of section 1, township 25 south, range 18 east, Salt Lake base and meridian.
Equivalent value.--The Federal lands described in paragraph (2) are of equivalent value to the State school trust lands described in paragraph (1).
Management by State.--At least 60 days before undertaking or permitting any surface disturbing activities to occur on the lands acquired by the State under this section, the State shall consult with the Utah State Office of the Bureau of Land Management concerning the extent and impact of such activities on Federal lands and resources and conduct, in a manner consistent with Federal laws, inventory, mitigation, and management activities in connection with any archaeological, paleontological, and cultural resources located on the acquired lands.
To the extent consistent with applicable law governing the use and disposition of State school trust lands, the State shall preserve existing grazing, recreational, and wildlife uses of the acquired lands.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to preclude the State from authorizing or undertaking surface or mineral activities authorized by existing or future land management plans for the acquired lands.
Implementation.--Administrative actions necessary to implement the land exchange described in this section shall be completed within 180 days after the date of the enactment of the Arches National Park Expansion Act of 1997.''.
Passed the House of Representatives November 9, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.