This Act may be cited as the ``Improved Consumer Access to Travel Information Act''.
NATIONAL COMMISSION TO ENSURE CONSUMER INFORMATION AND CHOICE IN THE AIRLINE INDUSTRY.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The continued success of a deregulated airline system requires that consumers have full access to complete information concerning airline fares, routes, and other services.
The means of distributing information about the products and services of the airline industry are changing; during the past four years, airlines have begun selling a larger percentage of their products and services directly to consumers, and Internet businesses are now offering services that allow consumers to compare prices for these products and services.
Airline policies with respect to travel agencies, who historically have sold a majority of the airline industry's products and services, threaten the ability of consumers to gather the information necessary to evaluate market prices, routes, and services.
Further reductions in the number of travel agents and greater marketplace reliance on direct airline sales may result in a marketplace in which consumers lack sufficient information and are thereby forced to pay higher prices.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``National Commission to Ensure Consumer Information and Choice in the Airline Industry'' (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Duties.-- (1) Study.--The Commission shall undertake a study of-- (A) consumer access to information about the products and services of the airline industry; (B) the effect on the marketplace of the emergence of new means of distributing such products and services; (C) the effect on consumers of the declining financial condition of travel agents in the United States; and (D) the impediments imposed by the airline industry on distributors of the industry's products and services, including travel agents and Internet-based distributors.
Policy recommendations.--Based on the results of the study described in paragraph (1), the Commission shall recommend to the President and Congress policies necessary-- (A) to ensure full consumer access to complete information concerning airline fares, routes, and other services; (B) to ensure that the means of distributing the products and services of the airline industry, and of disseminating information about such products and services, is adequate to ensure that competitive information is available in the marketplace; (C) to ensure that distributors of the products and services of the airline industry have adequate relief from illegal, anticompetitive practices that occur in the marketplace; and (D) to foster healthy competition in the airline industry and the entry of new entrants.
Specific Matters To Be Addressed.--In carrying out the study authorized under subsection (c)(1), the Commission shall specifically address the following: (1) Consumer access to information.--With respect to consumer access to information regarding the services and products offered by the airline industry: (A) The state of such access.
The effect in the next 5 years of the making of alliances in the airline industry.
Whether and to what degree the trends regarding such access will produce benefits to consumers.
Means of distribution.--With respect to the means of distributing the products and services of the airline industry: (A) The state of such means of distribution.
The roles played by travel agencies and Internet-based providers of travel information and services in distributing such products and services.
Whether the policies of the United States promote the access of consumers to multiple means of distribution.
Airline reservation systems.--With respect to airline reservation systems: (A) The rules, regulations, policies, and practices of the industry governing such systems.
How trends in such systems will affect consumers, including-- (i) the effect on consumer access to flight reservation information; and (ii) the effect on consumers of the use by the airline industry of penalties and promotions to convince distributors to use such systems, and the degree of consumer awareness of such penalties and promotions.
Legal impediments to distributors seeking relief for anticompetitive actions.--The policies of the United States with respect to the legal impediments to distributors seeking relief for anticompetitive actions, including-- (A) Federal preemption of civil actions against airlines; and (B) the role of the Department of Transportation in enforcing rules against anticompetitive practices.
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 voting members and 11 nonvoting members as follows: (A) 5 voting members and 1 nonvoting member appointed by the President.
3 voting members and 3 nonvoting members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
2 voting members and 2 nonvoting members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
3 voting members and 3 nonvoting members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
2 voting members and 2 nonvoting members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate (2) Qualifications.--Voting members appointed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be appointed from among individuals who are experts in economics, service product distribution, or transportation, or any related discipline, and who can represent consumers, passengers, shippers, travel agents, airlines, or general aviation.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Travel expenses.--Members shall serve without pay but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Chairman.--The President, in consultation with the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the majority leader of the Senate, shall designate the Chairman of the Commission from among its voting members.
Commission Panels.--The Chairman shall establish such panels consisting of voting members of the Commission as the Chairman determines appropriate to carry out the functions of the Commission.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of such personnel as it considers appropriate.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any department or agency of the United States may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
Other Staff and Support.--Upon the request of the Commission, or a panel of the Commission, the Secretary of Transportation shall provide the Commission or panel with professional and administrative staff and other support, on a reimbursable basis, to assist the Commission or panel in carrying out its responsibilities.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information (other than information required by any statute of the United States to be kept confidential by such department or agency) necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this section.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish such nonconfidential information to the Commission.
Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date on which initial appointments of members to the Commission are completed, the Commission shall transmit to the President and Congress a report on the activities of the Commission, including recommendations made by the Commission under subsection (c)(2).
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the 30th day following the date of transmittal of the report under subsection (k).
All records and papers of the Commission shall thereupon be delivered by the Administrator of General Services for deposit in the National Archives.
Applicability of the Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission.