RECOGNITION OF JOURNALISTS EMBEDDED WITH UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES OR COALITION PARTNERS IN IRAQ DURING OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The First Amendment to the Constitution of the United States establishes the right to free speech and a press unfettered by Government interference and reflected the belief of the American people that an informed public is essential to the survival of democracy.
The press, in all its forms today, informs the public on news events in the United States and elsewhere in the world and acts as a check on excessive Government actions by facilitating feedback to the legislative, executive, and judicial branches of Government.
Journalists first began serving as war correspondents during the Crimean War in 1854, and, by the next decade, more than 500 journalists covered the activities of the contending armies during the American Civil War, capturing the interest of Americans in the conflict and establishing the tradition of newspaper readership in America.
During Operation Iraqi Freedom, the Department of Defense provided journalists with the opportunity to actually accompany units of the United States Armed Forces and coalition partners, a process referred to as ``embedding'', in order to provide first-hand and timely reports on the progress of the United States and coalition forces and the liberation of the Iraqi people.
Approximately 700 print, broadcast, and Internet journalists chose to receive the special training offered by the Department of Defense to prepare for the dangers and hardships of accompanying troops in possible combat and embedded themselves with units of the United States Armed Forces or coalition partners.
Journalists have often worked under censorship in the past, but the embedded journalists were free to cover the conflict without interference from the military, and provided generally accurate accounts despite the omnipresent ``fog of war'' on a real-time basis for the first time in history.
The relationship between journalists and the military has often been strained in times of war, but the conflict in Iraq proved that both sides could meet their individual goals without restricting or impeding the other.
Many of the embedded journalists made their satellite phones and email available to members of the Armed Forces who were able to communicate with their families for the first time in weeks and sometimes months.
Friends and families of members of the Armed Forces serving in Iraq in units that included an embedded journalist were able to track the progress of these units and were often reassured that their loved ones were still alive because of the journalist's reports.
The embedded journalists, while in-theater, endured the same privations as the members of the Armed Forces they covered and risked possible imprisonment, torture, and execution if captured by Iraqi forces.
The embedded journalists braved excessive and sometimes fatal weather conditions, including horrific sandstorms that reduce visibility to four or five feet and temperatures higher than 130 degrees Fahrenheit, but still filed their dispatches each day.
At least 14 journalists have died while covering the conflict in Iraq, and other journalists have died in Afghanistan.
The American people are best served by a robust and competitive media that provides accurate and fair accounts of United States Armed Forces wherever they may be.
Official Recognition of Embedded Journalists.--The Secretary of Defense shall award the Office of the Secretary of Defense Exceptional Public Service Award to journalists who were authorized by the Department of Defense to accompany, and actually accompanied into Iraq, a unit of the United States Armed Forces or of a coalition partner during Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Posthumous Award.--If a person entitled to the Office of the Secretary of Defense Exceptional Public Service Award under subsection (b) died while serving in Iraq or dies before the issuance of the award, the award shall be provided to the person's representative, as designated by the Secretary.
Availability of Appropriations.--The Secretary may expend, from any appropriation for contingent expenses of the Department of Defense, amounts necessary to provide Office of the Secretary of Defense Exceptional Public Service Awards under subsection (b).