Programs Established.--The Presidential designee under the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (hereafter referred to as the ``Presidential designee'') shall carry out a series of pilot programs to test the feasibility of using alternative methods, including the use of advanced electronic technologies and the Internet, to enable absent uniformed services voters to register to vote and vote in elections for Federal office.
Agreements With Participating States.--To carry out a pilot program under this Act, the Presidential designee and the chief State election official of a participating State shall enter into an agreement which sets forth the following: (1) The specific alternative methods for enabling absent uniformed services voters to register to vote and vote in elections for Federal office in the State which will be tested under the program.
The steps to be taken by the Presidential designee, the chief State election official, and other election officials in the State to enable these alternative methods to be tested under the program.
The role to be played by the State advisory panel described in section 2(b) in assisting the chief State election official in carrying out the agreement.
The duration of the program.
Such other terms and conditions as may be agreed to by the Presidential designee and the chief State election official (consistent with the requirements of this Act).
Issues To Be Considered in Programs.--In carrying out a pilot program under this Act, the Presidential designee may consider the following issues: (1) The transmission of electronic voting material across military networks.
Virtual private networks, cryptographic voting systems, centrally controlled voting stations, and other information security techniques.
The transmission of ballot representations and scanned pictures in a secure manner.
Capturing, retaining, and comparing electronic and physical ballot representations.
Utilization of voting stations at military bases.
Document delivery and upload systems.
The functional effectiveness of the application or adoption of the pilot program to operational environments, taking into account environmental and logistical obstacles and State procedures.
Priority in Selection of Eligible States.--In selecting among States eligible to participate in a pilot program under this Act, the Presidential designee shall give priority to States with the greatest number of individuals eligible to register to vote and vote in elections for Federal office in the State who are absent uniformed services voters.
No Effect on Other Federal Election Laws.--The operation of a pilot program under this Act may not conflict with or substitute for existing Federal laws, regulations, or procedures with respect to the participation of absent uniformed services voters in elections for Federal office.
ELIGIBILITY OF STATES TO PARTICIPATE.
In General.--A State is eligible to participate in a pilot program under this Act if the chief State election official of the State submits to the Presidential designee, at such time and in such form as the Presidential designee may require, an application containing-- (1) assurances that the State has established an advisory panel described in subsection (b); and (2) such other information and assurances as the Presidential designee may require.
State Advisory Panel.-- (1) Panels described.--An advisory panel described in this subsection is a panel established by the State to assist the chief State election official in entering into and carrying out an agreement with the Presidential designee under section 1(b), consisting of representatives of the following: (A) Local election officials in the State.
Members of the uniformed services who are residents of the State, including members of the National Guard and Reserve Components thereof.
The spouses and dependents of members of the uniformed services who are residents of the State, including members of the National Guard and Reserve Components thereof.
The committees of the State legislature with jurisdiction over the election administration laws of the State.
Organizations promoting the integrity of the voting process in the State.
Method of establishment.--The State shall establish the advisory panel under this subsection in a manner which ensures that the panel will be bipartisan in nature and will reflect the various geographic regions of the State.
The Presidential designee shall submit to Congress reports on the progress and outcomes of any pilot program conducted under this Act, and shall include in the reports such recommendations as the Presidential designee considers appropriate for further legislation and administrative action.
In this Act-- (1) the term ``absent uniformed services voter'' has the meaning given such term in section 107(1) of the Uniformed and Overseas Citizens Absentee Voting Act (42 United States Code 1973ff-6(1)); (2) the ``chief State election official'' of a State is the individual designated by the State under section 10 of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 1973gg-8) to be responsible for coordination of the State's responsibilities under such Act; and (3) the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, and the United States Virgin Islands.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary, to remain available until expended.