This Act may be cited as the ``Portable Generator Safety Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Portable generators are frequently used to provide electricity during temporary power outages.
These generators use fuel-burning engines that emit carbon monoxide gas in their exhaust.
In the last several years, hundreds of people nationwide have been seriously injured or killed due to exposure to carbon monoxide poisoning from portable generators.
From 1990 through 2003, 228 carbon monoxide poisoning deaths were reported to the Consumer Product Safety Commission.
Virtually all of the serious injuries and deaths due to carbon monoxide from portable generators were preventable.
In many instances, consumers simply were unaware of the hazards posed by carbon monoxide.
Since at least 1997, a priority of the Consumer Product Safety Commission has been to reduce injuries and deaths resulting from carbon monoxide poisoning.
Although the Commission has attempted to work with industry to devise voluntary standards for portable generators, and despite Commission staff statements that voluntary standards were ineffective, the Commission has not promulgated mandatory rules governing safety standards and labeling requirements.
The issuance of mandatory safety standards and labeling requirements to warn consumers of the dangers associated with portable generator carbon monoxide would reduce the risk of injury or death.
Not later than 180 days after the enactment of this Act, the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall promulgate regulations, pursuant to section 7 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2056), requiring, at a minimum, that every portable generator sold to the public for purposes other than resale shall be equipped with an interlock safety device that detects the level of carbon monoxide in the areas surrounding such portable generator and automatically turns off power to the portable generator before the level of carbon monoxide is capable of causing serious bodily injury or death to people.
LABELING AND INSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS.
Not later than 180 days after the enactment of this Act, the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall promulgate regulations, pursuant to section 7 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2056), requiring, at a minimum, the following: (1) Warning labels.--Each portable generator sold to the public for purposes other than resale shall have a large, prominently displayed warning label on the exterior packaging, if any, of the portable generator and permanently affixed on the portable generator regarding the carbon monoxide hazard posed by incorrect use of the portable generator.
The warning label shall include the word ``DANGER'' printed in a large font, and shall include the following information, at a minimum, presented in a clear manner: (A) Indoor use of a portable generator can kill quickly.
Portable generators should be used outdoors only and away from garages and open windows.
Portable generators produce carbon monoxide, a poisonous gas that people cannot see or smell.
Pictogram.--Each portable generator sold to the public for purposes other than resale shall have a large pictogram, affixed to the portable generator, which clearly states ``POISONOUS GAS'' and visually depicts the harmful effects of breathing carbon monoxide.
Instruction Manual.--The instruction manual, if any, that accompanies any portable generator sold to the public for purposes other than resale shall include detailed, clear, and conspicuous statements that include the following elements: (A) A warning that portable generators emit carbon monoxide, a poisonous gas that can kill people.
A warning that people cannot smell, see, or taste carbon monoxide.
An instruction to operate portable generators only outdoors and away from windows, garages, and air intakes.
An instruction to never operate portable generators inside homes, garages, sheds, or other semi- enclosed spaces, even if a person runs a fan or opens doors and windows.
A warning that if a person begins to feel sick, dizzy, or weak while using a portable generator, that person should shut off the portable generator, get to fresh air immediately, and consult a doctor.