This Act may be cited as the ``Law Enforcement Science and Technology Act of 2000''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE; DIRECTOR.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Department of Justice under the Assistant Attorney General, Office of Justice Programs, an Office of Science and Technology (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Office'').
Transfer of Functions and Employees.--The Office of Science and Technology of the National Institute of Justice is hereby abolished, and the functions and employees of such office shall be transferred to the Office established under subsection (a).
Director.--The Office shall be headed by a director appointed from the career Senior Executive Service, who shall initially be paid at the same rate of compensation applicable to the Director of the Office of Science and Technology of the National Institute of Justice on the date of the enactment of this Act.
MISSION OF OFFICE; DUTIES.
Mission.--The mission of the Office shall be-- (1) to serve as the national focal point for work on law enforcement technology; and (2) to carry out programs to improve the safety and effectiveness of, and access to, technology to assist Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies.
Duties.--In carrying out its mission, the Office shall-- (1) provide recommendations and advice to the Attorney General; (2) establish advisory groups (which shall be exempt from the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.))
to assess the technology needs of Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies; (3) establish technical and use standards for, and test and evaluate technologies that may be used by, Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies; (4) establish a program to certify, validate, and mark, or otherwise recognize, products that conform to standards set by the Office; (5) work with other Federal agencies to establish a coordinated Federal approach to issues related to law enforcement technology; (6) conduct research and development in fields that would improve the safety, effectiveness, and efficiency of technologies used by Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, including-- (A) weapons capable of preventing use by unauthorized persons, including personalized guns; (B) protective apparel; (C) bullet-resistant and explosion-resistant glass; (D) monitoring systems and alarm systems capable of providing precise location information; (E) wire and wireless interoperable communication technologies; (F) tools and techniques that facilitate forensic work; (G) equipment for particular use in counterterrorism, including devices and technologies to disable terrorist devices; (H) guides to assist State and local law enforcement agencies; (I) DNA identification technologies; and (J) tools and techniques that facilitate investigations of computer crime.
administer a program of research, development, testing and demonstration to improve the interoperability of voice and data public safety communications; (8) serve on the Technical Support Working Group of the Department of Defense, and on other relevant interagency panels, as requested; (9) develop and disseminate technical assistance and training materials to local law enforcement agencies, including assistance combating computer crime; (10) operate the regional National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Centers and, through a competitive process, establish additional centers; (11) support research fellowships in support of its mission; (12) serve as a clearinghouse for information on law enforcement technologies; (13) represent the United States and State and local law enforcement agencies, as requested, in international activities concerning law enforcement technology; (14) enter into contracts and cooperative agreements and provide grants, which may require in-kind or cash matches from the recipient, as necessary to carry out its mission; and (15) carry out other duties assigned by the Attorney General to accomplish the mission of the Office.
Coordination With Federal Agencies.--Federal agencies shall, upon request from the Office and in accordance with Federal law, provide the Office with any data, reports, or other information requested, unless compliance with such request is otherwise prohibited by law.
Publications.--Decisions concerning publications issued by the Office shall rest solely with the Director of the Office.
Transfer of Funds.--The Office may transfer funds to other Federal agencies or provide funding to non-Federal entities through grants, cooperative agreements, or contracts to carry out its duties under this section.
Amounts.--In each of fiscal years 2000 through 2005, there are authorized to be appropriated for the Office $200,000,000.
Set-Asides.--Of the amounts appropriated for the Office in each of fiscal years 2000 through 2005-- (1) $40,000,000 shall only be available for the regional National Law Enforcement and Corrections Technology Centers; (2) $60,000,000 shall only be available for research and development of forensic technologies and methods to improve crime laboratories; (3) $20,000,000 shall only be available for development of standards and for the testing and evaluation of technologies; (4) $10,000,000 shall only be available for salaries and expenses; and (5) not more than 5 percent of funds appropriated for the Office shall be available for expenditure under the provisions enacted in the Intergovernmental Personnel Act of 1970 (Public Law 91-648; 84 United States Statutes at Large 1909) and the Systems Engineering and Technical Assistance program.
Non-Federal Research.--(1) Of the funds available to the Office in any fiscal year for research and development, 75 percent shall be available only for non-Federal entities through a competitive process.
Continuing funding through competitive awards made in prior years shall apply toward such amount.
Of the funds expended by the Office in any fiscal year for testing and evaluation, 75 percent shall be made available to non- Federal entities through a competitive process.
Continuing funding through competitive awards made in prior years shall apply toward such amount.
Reductions.--If, in any of fiscal years 2001 through 2005, an amount less than $200,000,000 is appropriated for the Office, the amounts in subsection (b)(1), (2), and (3) shall be reduced in proportion to the amount appropriated.
Not later than February 1 of each year, the Director of the Office shall submit to the President and Congress a report on the state of law enforcement technology.
For the purposes of this Act, the term ``law enforcement technology'' includes investigative and forensic technologies, corrections technologies, and technologies that support the judicial process.