This Act may be cited as the ``Community Reinvestment and Recovery Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GRANT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a program to make grants under this Act to assist local communities in recovering from the adverse economic impact of the closure or major realignment of a military installation under a base closure law.
Determinations of Grant Eligibility.--Within 180 days after the date on which a closure or realignment announcement is made with regard to a military installation under a base closure law, the Secretary shall determine the unit or units of local government of communities adjacent to the installation that are eligible to receive a grant under this Act.
In the case of military installations already announced for closure or realignment, the Secretary shall make the determinations required by this subsection within 180 days after the effective date of this Act.
Provision of Assistance.--A grant under this section shall be made by the Secretary through existing Federal programs.
The Secretary may use the grant to supplement funds made available under other Federal programs and may provide financial assistance to eligible local governments determined under subsection (b) to assist such governments to pay their share of the costs under such programs.
Cooperation.--The heads of all departments and agencies of the Federal Government shall cooperate fully with the Secretary in carrying out subsection (c).
The heads of such departments and agencies shall give priority attention to applications from eligible local governments determined under subsection (b) for priority funding under assistance programs within their annual agency appropriations.
Plan Required.--To be eligible for a grant under section 2, an eligible local government determined under subsection (b) of such section shall submit to the Secretary a comprehensive local economic recovery plan developed by the local government.
Such plan shall describe the steps being taken or planned to be taken by the local community to recover from the adverse economic impact of the closure or major realignment and shall include a detailed description of the programs for which the grant will be used.
Evaluation.--For the plan to be approved and assistance provided under section 2(c), the Secretary must find that the proposed use of the grant funds will-- (1) improve opportunities for the establishment or expansion of industrial or commercial activity in the community; (2) create new jobs in the community; or (3) otherwise alleviate specific economic problems in the community which limit the effective economic recovery from the closure or major realignment.
Submission of Application.--Eligible local governments may submit an application or applications to the Secretary through the cooperating departments and agencies under section 2(c) at any time after the date on which the Secretary determines under section 2(b) that the local government is eligible for assistance.
Review.--The Secretary shall review and act upon applications submitted by an eligible local government within 90 days of the date of submission.
Amount of Funds Available.--The amount of funds to be made available as grants under section 2 with respect to the closure or major realignment of a military installation shall be equal to 10 percent of the total projected savings to be realized by the Department of Defense in the first 10 years after the closure or major realignment of the installation as a result of the closure or realignment.
The amount of the projected savings shall be determined by the Secretary as soon as possible after the date of the announcement of the closure or realignment.
Funding Requests.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress annually such budgetary requests for funds to make grants under section 2 as may be necessary.
Such requests shall be made separate from the normal appropriation requests of the Department of Defense.
Reports From Grant Recipients.--Any unit of local government receiving a grant under section 2 for any fiscal year shall, not later than 90 days before the end of such fiscal year, submit a report to the Secretary concerning the progress of the local community in recovering from the effects of the closure or major realignment and the purposes for which grant money received under section 2 was used during such fiscal year.
The report shall include-- (1) a revision of the comprehensive local economic recovery plan originally submitted under section 3; and (2) a statement of all expenditures of grant money received under section 2 during such fiscal year.
Evaluation of Reports.--If the Secretary finds that a report submitted under subsection (a) for any fiscal year discloses that the use during such fiscal year of grant money received under section 2 by the unit of local government submitting such report was not consistent with the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may suspend any remaining grant payments and terminate grant application eligibility under this Act to such unit of local government until the Secretary receives satisfactory assurances that the use of such grant money in the future will be consistent with the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary shall prescribe general regulations covering the eligibility of units of local government for grants under section 2, the order of priority in approving applications, the terms and conditions for approving applications, determinations of the amounts of grants, and such other regulations as the Secretary considers to be necessary to carry out this Act.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``military installation'' means any camp, post, station, fort, base, yard, facility, or other installation under the authority of the Department of Defense-- (A) which is located within any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or Guam; and (B) at which there are authorized to be employed not less than 500 direct-hire or contracted permanent civilian employees of the Department of Defense or at which the total military and civilian personnel loss constitutes more than 2 percent of the total military and civilian work force for the impacted area.
The terms ``unit of local government'' and ``local government'' mean-- (A) a general purpose unit of local government; or (B) an entity established by a State, general purpose unit of local government, or combination of general purpose units of local government for the purposes of achieving economic recovery in an area adversely affected by the closure or realignment of a military installation.
The term ``base closure law'' means each of the following: (A) The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Title II of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
The funds appropriated pursuant to this section shall be available for a period not to exceed 10 years.
Effective Date.--This Act shall take effect on October 1, 1993.
Applicability.--This Act shall apply with respect to those military installations selected to be closed or realigned under the base closure laws before, on, or after the effective date of this Act.