Congress finds the following: (1) John Walsh, host of the television program ``America's Most Wanted'', has dedicated his life to the pursuit and apprehension of felons and fugitives who have committed murder, rape, robbery, kidnaping, pedophilia, and other atrocious crimes against the citizens of the United States.
In doing so, John Walsh has sacrificed his own personal safety and freedom for the good of all citizens of the United States.
On July 27, 1981, Adam Walsh, the 6-year-old son of John Walsh, was abducted and brutally murdered.
John Walsh and his family have never obtained closure for this heinous crime, because no person was ever charged with the crime and the prime suspect ultimately died in prison.
After the death of his son, John Walsh became a tireless advocate for victims' rights.
John Walsh has testified more than 35 times before the Congress in support of legislation, and his efforts led to the passage in 1982 of the Missing Children Act and in 1984 of the Missing Children's Assistance Act, which established the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
John Walsh has lobbied for a constitutional amendment that would secure victims' rights.
John Walsh, not ceasing his dedication to the safety and welfare of children with the enactment of new protective statutes, established a public information television program, ``America's Most Wanted'', to expose the criminal activity of various fugitives throughout the United States and abroad.
Four days after the debut of the program, on February 11, 1988, the Federal Bureau of Investigation announced the capture in New York City of one of its 10 Most Wanted fugitives, David James Roberts, as a direct result of tips from viewers of the program.
On May 29, 1988, the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, William Sessions, appeared on ``America's Most Wanted'' to announce the addition of 3 new fugitives to the Federal Bureau of Investigation's 10 Most Wanted list, one of whom was captured within 24 hours after the announcement.
On July 17, 1988, Robert Wayne Fisher, a fugitive wanted for the murder of his wife, was captured just 33 minutes after John Walsh profiled him on ``America's Most Wanted''.
On May 7, 1989, John Walsh facilitated the capture of a New Jersey mass murderer who had been at large for nearly 18 years.
On January 20, 2001, John Walsh profiled 7 escapees from a maximum security prison in Texas, known as the ``Texas Seven'', on ``America's Most Wanted'', which led to the apprehension of 5 of the escapees 2 days later and the 2 remaining fugitives the following day.
John Walsh profiled 2,034 fugitives from justice on ``America's Most Wanted'' as of December 3, 1998, 1,177 of whom have been captured, including 647 who were captured as a direct result of being profiled.
On May 10, 1990, John Walsh and ``America's Most Wanted'' for the first time helped recover a missing child, Nicole Ravesi, and aided in the arrest of her abductor, Kenneth Cole.
In all, John Walsh has profiled 465 cases involving missing or kidnapped persons, 30 of whom have been reunited with their families.
John Walsh has profiled 285 criminal suspects whose identities were unknown to law enforcement officials, and 6 of the suspects have been identified as a result of being profiled.
At the request of law enforcement officials, John Walsh has also profiled 35 unidentified victims of foul play, and 2 of the victims have been identified as a result of being profiled.
The outstanding contributions of John Walsh to crime victims and the law enforcement community have come at no cost to the taxpayers of the United States.
John Walsh, through ``America's Most Wanted'' and through other endeavors, continues to serve law enforcement officials and crime victims through his unfailing dedication to pursuing and capturing dangerous fugitives, protecting the safety of children, and bringing closure to victims of crime in the United States.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, a gold medal of appropriate design to John Walsh in recognition of his outstanding and enduring contributions to the Nation through his work in the fields of law enforcement and victims' rights.
Design and Striking.--For the purpose of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary.
Under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck under section 2 at a price sufficient to cover the cost of the bronze medals (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses) and the cost of the gold medal.
The medals struck under this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
FUNDING AND PROCEEDS OF SALE.
Authorization.--There is authorized to be charged against the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund an amount not to exceed $30,000 to pay for the cost of the medals authorized by this Act.
Proceeds of Sale.--Amounts received from the sale of duplicate bronze medals under section 3 shall be deposited in the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund.