SHORT TITLE AND REFERENCE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Family and Medical Leave Improvements Act of 1997''.
Reference.--Whenever in this Act (other than in section 4) an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.
Paragraphs (2)(B)(ii) and (4)(A)(i) of section 101 (29 United States Code 2611 (2)(B)(ii) and (4)(A)(i)) are each amended by striking ``50'' each place it appears and inserting ``25''.
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR LEAVE.
Entitlement to Leave.--Section 102(a) (29 United States Code 2612(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Entitlement to parental involvement and elder-care leave.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to section 103(f), an eligible employee shall be entitled to a total of 24 hours of leave during any 12-month period, in addition to leave available under paragraph (1), to-- ``(i) participate in school activities directly related to the educational advancement of a son or daughter of the employee, such as parent-teacher conferences or interviewing for a new school; ``(ii) accompany the son or daughter of the employee to routine medical or dental appointments, such as checkups or vaccinations; and ``(iii) accompany an elderly relative of the employee to routine medical or dental appointments or appointments for other professional services related to the elder's care, such as interviewing at nursing or group homes.
Definitions.--As used in this paragraph: ``(i) School.--The term `school' means an elementary school or secondary school (as such terms are defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)), a Head Start program assisted under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), and a child care facility licensed under State law.
Elderly relative.--The term `elderly relative' means an individual of at least 60 years of age who is related by blood or marriage to the employee, including a parent.''.
Schedule.--Section 102(b)(1) (29 United States Code 2612(b)(1)) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Leave under subsection (a)(3) may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.''.
Substitution of Paid Leave.--Section 102(d)(2)(A) (29 United States Code 2612(d)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, or for leave provided under subsection (a)(3) for any part of the 24-hour period of such leave under such subsection''.
Notice.--Section 102(e) (29 United States Code 2612(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Notice for parental involvement and eldercare leave.--If the necessity for leave under subsection (a)(3) is foreseeable, the employee shall provide the employer with not less than 7 days notice before the date the leave is to begin.
If the necessity for leave is not foreseeable, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.''.
Certification.--Section 103 (29 United States Code 2613) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Certification for Parental Involvement and Elder-Care Leave.--An employer may require that a request for leave under section 102(a)(3) be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.''.
LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVICE EMPLOYEES.
Entitlement to Leave.--Section 6382(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Subject to section 6383(f), an employee shall be entitled to a total of 24 hours of leave during any 12-month period, in addition to leave available under paragraph (1), to: ``(i) participate in school activities directly related to the educational advancement of a son or daughter of the employee, such as parent-teacher conferences, or interviewing for a new school; ``(ii) accompany the son or daughter of the employee to routine medical or dental appointments, such as checkups or vaccinations; and ``(iii) accompany an elderly relative of the employee to routine medical or dental appointments or appointments for other professional services related to the elder's care, such as interviewing at nursing or group homes.
As used in this paragraph: ``(i) The term `school' means an elementary school or secondary school (as such terms are defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)), a Head Start program assisted under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), and a child care facility licensed under State law.
The term `elderly relative' means an individual of at least 60 years of age who is related by blood or marriage to the employee, including a parent.''.
Schedule.--Section 6382(b)(1) of such title is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Leave under subsection (a)(3) may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.''.
Substitution of Paid Leave.--Section 6382(d) of such title is amended by inserting before ``, except'' the following: ``, or for leave provided under subsection (a)(3) any of the employee's accrued or accumulated annual leave under subchapter I for any part of the 24-hour period of such leave under such subsection''.
Notice.--Section 6382(e)(1) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``If the necessity for leave under subsection (a)(3) is foreseeable, the employee shall provide the employer with not less than 7 days notice before the date the leave is to begin.
If the necessity for leave is not foreseeable, the employee shall provide such notice as is practicable.''.
Certification.--Section 6383 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Certification.--An employing agency may require that a request for leave under section 6382(a)(3) be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as the Office of Personnel Management may by regulation prescribe.''.
This Act shall take effect 120 days after the date of enactment.