AUTHORIZATION FOR PARK FACILITIES TO BE LOCATED OUTSIDE THE BOUNDARIES OF YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK.
Authorization.--In order to facilitate the administration of Yosemite National Park, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized, under such terms and conditions as the Secretary may deem advisable, to expend donated funds, funds collected from user fees, or appropriated funds for the planning, design, construction of, and related activities for, essential facilities for Park and concessions administration and visitor use outside the boundaries, but within the vicinity, of the Park.
Such facilities and the use thereof shall be in conformity with approved plans for the Park.
Such facilities may only be constructed by the Secretary upon a finding that the facilities are necessary for Park operation, and that the location of such facilities would-- (1) avoid undue degradation of natural or cultural resources within the Park; (2) enhance service to the public; or (3) provide a cost saving to the Federal Government.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with local governments or private entities to undertake the activities granted under this section.
The Secretary is encouraged to identify and use alternative funding sources to supplement any Federal funding used for these facilities.
PLANNING; TRANSPORTATION; VISITOR SERVICE PROJECTS.
Authorization.--The Secretary shall allocate amounts made available under section 1(a) to carry out the following activities: (1) Planning and restoration of low-impact camping at upper and lower river campgrounds.
The Secretary may use amounts appropriated to the Secretary for flood recovery in the Yosemite Valley to carry out planning (including environmental documentation) and development related to the activities required under this paragraph.
Construction and maintenance of the maximum amount of parking available at Camp 6 and adjacent previously impacted lands.
Cooperation and participation (including the provision of technical and financial assistance) with governments of counties located in the vicinity of the Park for the preparation of county general and specific plans related to determining the feasibility of locating park administrative facilities, visitor services and facilities, housing, or other facilities necessary for Park operations outside the boundaries of the Park.
Not later than December 31, 2003, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a description of the actions that the Secretary has taken under this paragraph.
Consistent with the projects described in paragraphs (1) through (3), development of traffic management and traveler information services, signage, and circulation improvements.
Provision of housing for employees of the Federal Government and employees of concessionaires related to the Park who are required as a condition of employment to reside in Yosemite Valley.
Notwithstanding the last sentence of section 814(a)(8) of the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 (16 United States Code 17o note; 110 United States Statutes at Large 4192), for employee housing requirements outside of Yosemite Valley, the Secretary shall use partnerships with private entities whenever practicable and cost effective, including through leases and lease agreements.
Guarantees to carry out this paragraph shall not apply against the limitation in the last sentence of such section 814(a)(8).
Entering into and carrying out cooperative agreements with the Yosemite Area Regional Transportation System Joint Powers Authority to transport employees of the Federal Government and employees of concessionaires related to the Park to and from the Park for the purposes of their employment.
Removal of the Le Conte Memorial, a private special use, from the Park and restoration of the grounds of that memorial to its natural state.
Prohibited Projects.--The Secretary may not allocate amounts described in section 1(a) to implement a shuttle system which uses remote parking facilities or includes operations outside of the boundaries of Yosemite Valley.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Park.--The term ``Park'' means Yosemite National Park.
Record of decision.--The term ``Record of Decision'' means the record of decision entitled ``Final Yosemite Valley Plan Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement'' dated December 29, 2000.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.