SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Defense Alternative Use Committee Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Establishment of alternative use committees at defense facilities.
Functions of alternative use committees.
Elements of conversion plans.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) during the past three decades the United States has made heavy economic, scientific, and technical commitments for defense; (2) these commitments led to the development of specialized skills and business practices not directly applicable in the civilian sector of the economy; (3) as these commitments are modified to take account of changing requirements for national security and domestic needs, careful preparation is necessary if serious economic dislocations are to be avoided; and (4) the economic ability of the Nation and of management, labor, and capital to adjust to changing national security needs is consistent with the general welfare of the United States.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide the means through which the United States can promote orderly economic adjustment which will-- (1) minimize the dislocation of workers, communities, and industries; (2) assure that such dislocations do not compound recessionary trends; and (3) encourage conversion of technologies and managerial and worker skills developed in defense production to projects which serve the civilian sector.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``defense agency'' means the Department of Defense, the Nuclear Weapons Division of the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Coast Guard, and any other agency of the Federal Government to the extent it conducts defense-related activities.
The term ``defense contract'' means-- (A) any contract entered into between a defense contractor and a defense agency to furnish defense material or services to that agency; and (B) any contract entered into between a defense contractor and any foreign country or person acting on behalf of a foreign country to furnish defense material or services to or for such country pursuant to the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2751 et sequentes) or similar law.
The term ``defense contractor'' means any person engaged in the furnishing of defense material or services pursuant to the terms of the defense contract, including subcontractors, component manufacturers, suppliers, service contractors and service suppliers.
The term ``defense facility'' means-- (A) any private plant or other establishment (or part thereof) used under a defense contract or engaged in the production, repair, modification, storage, or handling of defense material; or (B) any Government-owned or Government-leased facility, including military installations, bases, forts, shipyards, and depots.
The term ``defense materials or services'' means-- (A) any item of weaponry, munitions, equipment, or specialized supplies or services intended for use by a defense agency or for sale to or for the use of a foreign country which has primarily military applications; or (B) the research, development, production, test, inspection, or repair of any material described in subparagraph (A) for use by a defense agency or pursuant to a defense contract.
The term ``displace'', with respect to any worker (including a civilian employee of a defense agency and an employee of a defense contractor engaged in the provision of defense materials or services under a defense contract), means the separation, on a permanent or temporary basis, of the worker from employment with the facility or agency.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ALTERNATIVE USE COMMITTEES AT DEFENSE FACILITIES.
Condition of Defense Contracts.--The head of each defense agency shall require as a condition of each defense contract with a private defense contractor for the provision of defense materials or services to that agency that the defense contractor agree to establish an alternative use committee pursuant to this section at each defense facility that employs at least 100 employees and is used under the contract.
The President shall require as a condition on the eligibility for export of defense materials or services under section 38 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2778) or similar law that the private defense contractor involved in such export agree to establish an alternative use committee pursuant to this section at each defense facility that employs at least 100 employees and is used under the defense contract involved.
Federal Facilities.--In the case of a Government defense facility (as defined in section 3(4)(B)), the head of the facility shall establish an alternative use committee pursuant to this section composed of not less than eight members, with equal representation of the facility management and the civilian employees of the installation (including representatives of union bargaining units and democratically elected representatives of unorganized civilians).
Membership and Purposes.--An alternative use committee for a defense facility shall be composed of not less than eight members, with equal representation of the facility's management and labor (including representatives of union bargaining units and democratically elected representatives of unorganized workers).
The committee shall undertake economic conversion planning and preparation for the employment of the employees at the defense facility and the utilization of the equipment and facilities in the event of a reduction or closure of any defense facility or the curtailment, conclusion, or disapproval of any defense contract.
Community Representatives.--The chief executive officer of any unit of general local government within which a defense facility is located may appoint nonvoting representatives of the alternative use community for that facility to participate in activities of the alternative use committee in an advisory capacity.
The representatives appointed under this subsection shall not include individuals employed at the facility.
The number of such representatives shall not exceed a number equal to one-half the total number of voting representatives on the committee.
Prohibitions Against Discrimination Against Representatives of Unorganized Labor.--The representatives of the unorganized civilian workers on any alternative use committee shall not be discriminated against in any manner for their participation in the committee.
Funds.--Funds for performing the planning and reporting requirements imposed by this Act, including market research, independent studies, and the employment of specialized personnel, shall be paid from funds derived from the defense contract or, in the case of a Government defense facility, the operating account of the facility.
Office space shall be provided to the alternative use committee by the management of the facility without charge.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply with respect to each defense contract referred to in subsection (a) that is entered into by the agency after the date of the enactment of this Act SEC.
FUNCTIONS OF ALTERNATIVE USE COMMITTEES.
Evaluation of Defense Facility Assets.--The alternative use committee established for a defense facility shall evaluate the assets of the defense facility and the resources and requirements of the local community in terms of physical property, manpower skills and expertise, accessibility, environment, and economic needs.
Development of Conversion Plans.--Consistent with section 7, the alternative use committee established for a defense facility shall develop and review at least biennially a plan for the conversion of the facility to efficient, nondefense-related productive activity to be carried out in the event the facility is closed or adversely affected by the termination of a defense contract or the disapproval of a license to sell or export defense materials or services.
Retraining and Reemployment.--The alternative use committee shall arrange for the provision of occupational retraining and reemployment counseling services for all employees to be displaced by the implementation of a conversion plan or the closing of the facility as soon as the date of commencement of the implementation of that plan or the permanent closing of that facility is known.
Dissolution.--A alternative use committee shall dissolve itself and return all assets to the control of the management of the defense facility involved immediately upon final completion of the conversion.
Staff.--The alternative use committees may hire staff personnel as well as any specialists it may determine necessary.
Information.--The alternative use committees may obtain a complete and detailed inventory of all land, building, capital equipment, and other equipment, including its condition, and are authorized to obtain information of a general nature regarding the occupations and skills of civilian employees, and information concerning existing collective-bargaining contracts.
Any defense agency or contractor and any department, agency, or other instrumentality of the Government shall provide any such inventory or information upon request from an alternative use committee.
ELEMENTS OF CONVERSION PLANS.
Elements of Plan.--Conversion plans developed by an alternative use committee shall-- (1) be so designed as to maximize the extent to which the personnel required for the efficient operation of the converted facility can be drawn from personnel with the types and levels of skill approximating skill levels and types possessed by civilian personnel employed at the defense facility prior to its conversion; (2) specify the numbers of civilian personnel, by type and level of skill, employed at the facility prior to conversion, whose continued employment is not consistent with the efficient operation of the non-defense-related converted facility; (3) specify the numbers of positions, by level and type of skill, if any, that will be needed at the converted facility because personnel employed at the preconverted facility do not possess the levels or types of skills required; (4) indicate in detail what new plant and equipment and modifications to existing plant and equipment are required for the converted facility; and (5) include an estimate of financing requirements and a financial plan for the conversion; and (6) provide for completion of the entire conversion process within a period of not less than two years.
Extension of Existing Agreements.--No plan shall be approved by an alternative use committee unless the plan provides for extension of wage, labor contract provisions, and other benefits to workers at a defense facility until conversion to non-defense-related operations is completed.
If the head of a defense agency determines that a defense contractor fails to establish an alternative use committee or refuses or fails to carry out the provisions of a conversion plan prepared by an alternative use committee of the defense contractor (as determined by the head of the defense agency concerned), the defense contractor shall lose eligibility for defense contracts for a period of three years, for contract termination payments, and for tax credits.