This Act may be cited as the ``Otay Mountain Wilderness Act of 1999''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the public land in the Otay Mountain region of California is one of the last remaining pristine locations in western San Diego County, California; (2) this rugged mountain adjacent to the United States- Mexico border is internationally known for having a diversity of unique and sensitive plants; (3) this area plays a critical role in San Diego's multi- species conservation plan, a national model made for maintaining biodiversity; (4) due to the proximity of the Otay Mountain region to the international border, this area is the focus of important law enforcement and border interdiction efforts necessary to curtail illegal immigration and protect the area's wilderness values; and (5) the illegal immigration traffic, combined with the rugged topography, present unique fire management challenges for protecting lives and resources.
In this Act: (1) Public land.--The term ``public land'' has the meaning given the term ``public lands'' in section 103 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Wilderness area.--The term ``Wilderness Area'' means the Otay Mountain Wilderness designated by section 4.
In General.--In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), there is designated as wilderness and as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System certain public land in the California Desert District of the Bureau of Land Management, California, comprising approximately 18,500 acres as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Otay Mountain Wilderness'' and dated May 7, 1998.
Otay Mountain Wilderness.--The area designated under subsection (a) shall be known as the Otay Mountain Wilderness.
MAP AND LEGAL DESCRIPTION.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, a map and a legal description for the Wilderness Area shall be filed by the Secretary with-- (1) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Force and Effect.--The map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary, as appropriate, may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Availability.--The map and legal description for the Wilderness Area shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Director and California State Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
United States-Mexico Border.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall ensure that the southern boundary of the Wilderness Area is-- (1) 100 feet north of the trail depicted on the map referred to in subsection (a); and (2) not less than 100 feet from the United States-Mexico international border.
All public land not designated as wilderness within the boundaries of the Southern Otay Mountain Wilderness Study Area (CA-060-029) and the Western Otay Mountain Wilderness Study Area (CA-060-028) managed by the Bureau of Land Management and reported to the Congress in 1991-- (1) have been adequately studied for wilderness designation under section 603 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1782); and (2) shall no longer be subject to the requirements contained in section 603(c) of that Act pertaining to the management of wilderness study areas in a manner that does not impair the suitability of those areas for preservation as wilderness.
ADMINISTRATION OF WILDERNESS AREA.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights and to subsection (b), the Wilderness Area shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), except that for the purposes of the Wilderness Area-- (1) any reference in that Act to the effective date of that Act shall be considered to be a reference to the effective date of this Act; and (2) any reference in that Act to the Secretary of Agriculture shall be considered to be a reference to the Secretary of the Interior.
Border Enforcement, Drug Interdiction, and Wildland Fire Protection.--Because of the proximity of the Wilderness Area to the United States-Mexico international border, drug interdiction, border operations, and wildland fire management operations are common management actions throughout the area encompassing the Wilderness Area.
This Act recognizes the need to continue such management actions so long as such management actions are conducted in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) and are subject to such conditions as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Any land within the boundaries of the Wilderness Area that is acquired by the United States after the date of enactment of this Act shall-- (1) become part of the Wilderness Area; and (2) be managed in accordance with this Act and other laws applicable to wilderness areas.
In General.--The designation of the Wilderness Area by this Act shall not lead to the creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones outside the boundary of the Wilderness Area.
Nonwilderness Activities.--The fact that nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard from areas within the Wilderness Area shall not, in and of itself, preclude nonwilderness activities or uses outside the boundary of the Wilderness Area.