This Act may be cited as the ``Lyme Disease Initiative Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) The incidence of Lyme disease in the United States is increasing more rapidly than most other diseases.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention has determined that, since 1982, there has been a 32-fold increase in reported cases.
For 1996, such Centers determined that 16,455 cases of the disease were reported.
There is no reliable standardized diagnostic test for Lyme disease, and it is therefore likely that the disease is severely underreported.
The disease is often misdiagnosed because the symptoms of the disease mimic other health conditions.
Lyme disease costs our Nation at least $60,000,000 a year in direct medical costs for early, acute cases.
The costs of chronic cases of the disease, as well as the costs of lost wages and productivity, are many times higher.
Many health care providers lack the necessary knowledge and expertise--particularly in non-endemic areas--to accurately diagnose Lyme disease.
As a result, patients often visit multiple doctors before obtaining a diagnosis of the disease, resulting in prolonged pain and suffering, unnecessary tests, and costly and futile treatments.
PUBLIC HEALTH GOALS; FIVE-YEAR PLAN.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (acting as appropriate through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Director of the National Institutes of Health) and the Secretary of Defense shall collaborate to carry out the following: (1) The Secretaries shall establish the goals described in subsections (c) through (f) (relating to activities to provide for a reduction in the incidence and prevalence of Lyme disease).
The Secretaries shall carry out activities toward achieving the goals, which may include activities carried out directly by the Secretaries and activities carried out through awards of grants or contracts to public or nonprofit private entities.
In carrying out paragraph (2), the Secretaries shall give priority-- (A) first, to achieving the goal under subsection (c); (B) second, to achieving the goal under subsection (d); (C) third, to achieving the goal under subsection (e); and (D) fourth, to achieving the goal under subsection (f).
Five-Year Plan.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretaries shall establish a plan that, for the 5 fiscal years following the date of the enactment of this Act, provides for the activities to be carried out during such fiscal years toward achieving the goals under subsections (c) through section (f).
The plan shall, as appropriate to such goals, provide for the coordination of programs and activities regarding Lyme disease that are conducted or supported by the Federal Government.
First Goal: Detection Test.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the goal described in this subsection is the development, by the expiration of the 18-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, of-- (A) a test for accurately determining whether an individual who has been bitten by a tick has Lyme disease; and (B) a test for accurately determining whether a patient with such disease has been cured of the disease.
Second Goal: Improved Surveillance and Reporting System.--For purposes of subsection (a), the goal described in this subsection is to review the system in the United States for surveillance and reporting with respect to Lyme disease and to determine whether and in what manner the system can be improved (relative to the date of the enactment of this Act).
In carrying out activities toward such goal, the Secretaries shall-- (1) consult with the States, units of local government, physicians, patients with Lyme disease, and organizations representing such patients; (2) consider whether uniform formats should be developed for the reporting by physicians of cases of Lyme disease to public health officials; and (3) with respect to health conditions that are reported by physicians as cases of Lyme disease but do not meet the criteria established by the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to be counted as such cases, consider whether data on such health conditions should be maintained and analyzed to assist in understanding the circumstances in which Lyme disease is being diagnosed and the manner in which it is being treated.
Third Goal: Indicator Regarding Accurate Diagnosis.--For purposes of subsection (a), the goal described in this subsection is to determine the average number of visits to physicians that are made by patients with Lyme disease before a diagnosis of such disease is made.
In carrying out activities toward such goal, the Secretaries shall conduct a study of patients and physicians in 2 or more geographic areas in which there is a significant incidence or prevalence of cases of Lyme disease.
Fourth Goal: Physician Knowledge.--For purposes of subsection (a), the goals described in this subsection are to make a significant increase in the number of physicians who have an appropriate level of knowledge regarding Lyme disease, and to develop and apply an objective method of determining the number of physicians who have such knowledge.
LYME DISEASE TASK FORCE.
In General.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, there shall be established in accordance with this section an advisory committee to be known as the Lyme Disease Task Force (in this section referred to as the Task Force).
Duties.--The Task Force shall provide advice to the Secretaries with respect to achieving the goals under section 3, including advice on the plan under subsection (b) of such section.
Composition.--The Task Force shall be composed of 9 members with appropriate knowledge or experience regarding Lyme disease.
Of such members-- (1) 2 shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, after consultation with the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; (2) 2 shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, after consultation with the Director of the National Institutes of Health; (3) 1 shall be appointed by the Secretary of Defense; (4) 2 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, after consultation with the Minority Leader of the House; and (5) 2 shall be appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate, after consultation with the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Chair.--The Task Force shall, from among the members of the Task Force, designate an individual to serve as the chair of the Task Force.
Meetings.--The Task Force shall meet at the call of the Chair or a majority of the members.
Term of Service.--The term of service of a member of the Task Force is the duration of the Task Force.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the membership of the Task Force shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made and shall not affect the power of the remaining members to carry out the duties of the Task Force.
Compensation; Reimbursement of Expenses.--Members of the Task Force may not receive compensation for service on the Task Force.
Such members may, in accordance with chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in carrying out the duties of the Task Force.
Staff; Administrative Support.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall, on a reimbursable basis, provide to the Task Force such staff, administrative support, and other assistance as may be necessary for the Task Force to effectively carry out the duties under subsection (b).
Termination.--The Task Force shall terminate on the date that is 90 days after the end of the fifth fiscal year that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Secretaries shall submit to the Congress periodic reports on the activities carried out under this Act and the extent of progress being made toward the goals established under section 3.
The first such report shall be submitted not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and subsequent reports shall be submitted annually thereafter until the goals are met.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``Secretaries'' means-- (1) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting as appropriate through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Director of the National Institutes of Health; and (2) the Secretary of Defense.
National Institutes of Health.--In addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for carrying out the purposes described in this Act and that are established for the National Institutes of Health, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of such Institutes for such purposes $9,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.--In addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for carrying out the purposes described in this Act and that are established for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Director of such Centers for such purposes $8,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
Department of Defense.--In addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for carrying out the purposes described in this Act and that are established for the Department of Defense, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Defense for such purposes $3,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that the Food and Drug Administration should-- (1) conduct a rapid and thorough review of new drug applications for drugs to immunize individuals against Lyme disease; and (2) ensure that the labeling approved for such drugs specifically indicate the particular strains of Lyme disease for which the drugs provide immunization, the duration of the period of immunization, and the reliability rate of the drugs.