This Act may be cited as the ``Flight Attendant Certification Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The Federal Aviation Administration requires cabin crew on board all transport category aircraft (20 seats or more) to handle aircraft evacuations and other emergency procedures.
Cabin crew are in-flight first responders trained to handle medical emergencies, fires, and security threats.
As safety-sensitive employees, cabin crew are tested for drug and alcohol use.
Federal regulations limit cabin crew duty time and stipulate mandatory rest periods.
A wide disparity in quality and content of training exists from air carrier to air carrier.
The Federal Aviation Administration certifies other groups with safety responsibilities under its jurisdiction, including pilots, mechanics, repairmen, dispatchers, and parachute packers.
Certification of cabin crew will make the Federal Aviation Administration responsible for ensuring that cabin crew are qualified to perform their safety and security duties.
TRAINING PROGRAMS FOR CABIN CREW.
Section 44935 of chapter 449 of part A of subtitle VII of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Training Standards for Cabin Crew.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator shall prescribe standards for cabin crew training and certification.
The standards shall include the following: ``(A) Mandatory certification.--All new and existing cabin crew members shall be certified by the Administrator after successful completion of an air carrier's training program, which consists of-- ``(i) initial, indoctrination, and emergency training; ``(ii) air carrier specific training related to aircraft types and operator's certificate; and ``(iii) submission by the air carrier to the Administrator confirming such completion.
Standardized training.--The Administrator shall be prohibited from granting an air carrier a waiver of cabin crew training requirements or an exemption from any part of such requirements.
Qualifications.-- ``(i) In general.--To be qualified to receive a cabin crew certificate, a cabin crew member shall-- ``(I) successfully complete the training requirements established by the Administrator, including all initial, indoctrination, emergency, transition, differences, recurrent, and requalification training as described in the applicable regulations; ``(II) successfully complete the cabin security and self-defense training requirements established by the Transportation Security Administrator; and ``(III) successfully perform the assigned duties of a cabin crew member and complete the approved proficiency check, under the supervision of a certified instructor or supervisor, for not less than 5 hours of initial operating experience.
Initial operating experience.-- Initial operating experience shall be conducted: ``(I) on an operating flight; ``(II) without decreasing the number of required cabin crew complement on an aircraft; and ``(III) by assigning not more than 2 qualifying cabin crew on a narrow- body aircraft or not more than 4 qualifying cabin crew on a wide-body aircraft.
No deviations, exemptions, and waivers from these requirements shall be permitted.
Contents.--The cabin crew certificate shall-- ``(i) be numbered and recorded by the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration; ``(ii) contain the name, address, and description of the individual to whom the certificate is issued; ``(iii) contain the name of the current air carrier employer of the certificate holder; ``(iv) contain terms the Administrator determines are necessary to ensure safety in air commerce, including terms that the certificate shall remain valid unless the Administrator suspends or revokes the certificate; and ``(v) designate the type and model of aircraft on which the certificate holder cabin crew member has successfully completed all Federal Aviation Administration and Transportation Security Administration required training in order to be assigned duties on board such type and model of aircraft.
Carrier training approval.--Air carrier training programs shall require approval by the Administrator.
To assure consistent training and competency, only a FAA headquarters staff position shall be authorized to approved training programs.
Principal operations inspectors or other personnel with responsibilities for a particular air carrier or carriers shall not be permitted to issue such approval or permitted to grant exemptions, deviations, or waivers from any approved training requirements used to evaluate air carrier training programs or to determine whether such programs shall be approved.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `cabin crew' means individuals working in an aircraft cabin on board a transport category aircraft with 20 or more seats.