This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Commitment Act''.
INCLUSION OF MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE COVERED BENEFICIARIES IN FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM.
FEHBP Option.--(1) Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program ``(a) FEHBP Option.--The Secretary of Defense, after consulting with the other administering Secretaries, shall enter into an agreement with the Office of Personnel Management under which a Medicare-eligible covered beneficiary described in subsection (b) will be offered an opportunity to enroll in a health benefits plan offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5, in addition to receiving health care services under this chapter through a treatment facility of the uniformed services, the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services, or the TRICARE program.
The agreement may provide for limitations on enrollment of Medicare-eligible covered beneficiaries in the Federal Employee Health Benefits program if the Office of Personnel Management determines the limitations are necessary to allow for adequate planning for access for services under the Federal Employee Health Benefits program.
Medicare-Eligible Covered Beneficiary Described.--A Medicare- eligible covered beneficiary referred to in subsection (a) is a covered beneficiary under this chapter who for any reason is or becomes entitled to hospital insurance benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et sequentes).
The covered beneficiary shall not be required to satisfy any eligibility criteria specified in chapter 89 of title 5 as a condition for enrollment in a health benefits plan offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to subsection (a).
Continued Participation in Uniformed Services Health System.--A Medicare-eligible covered beneficiary who enrolls in a health benefits plan offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to subsection (a) may continue, after such enrollment, to receive health care services through a treatment facility of the uniformed services, the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services, or the TRICARE program.
Section 1095 of this title, relating to collection from third-party payers, shall apply with respect to the costs of health care services incurred by the United States on behalf of an enrolled covered beneficiary through a treatment facility of the uniformed services, the Civilian Health and Medical Program of the Uniformed Services, or the TRICARE program.
Contributions.--(1) In the case of a Medicare-eligible covered beneficiary who enrolls in a health benefits plan offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to subsection (a), the administering Secretary concerned shall be responsible for Government contributions that the Office of Personnel Management determines are necessary to cover all costs in excess of beneficiary contributions under paragraph (2).
The contribution required from the enrolled covered beneficiary shall be equal to the amount that would be withheld from the pay of a similarly situated Federal employee who enrolls in a health benefits plan under chapter 89 of title 5.
Management of Participation.--If the enrolled covered beneficiary is a member or former member of the uniformed services described in section 1074(b) of this title, the authority responsible for approving retired or retainer pay or equivalent pay for the member or former member shall manage the participation of the enrolled member or former member in a health benefits plan offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to subsection (a).
If the enrolled covered beneficiary is a dependent of a member or former member, the authority that is, or would be, responsible for approving retired or retainer pay or equivalent pay for the member or former member shall manage the participation of the enrolled dependent in a health benefits plan offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program under subsection (a).
The Office of Personnel Management shall maintain separate risk pools for enrolled covered beneficiaries until such time as the Director of the Office of Personnel Management determines that complete inclusion of enrolled covered beneficiaries under chapter 89 of title 5 will not adversely affect Federal employees and annuitants enrolled in health benefits plans under such chapter.
Effect of Cancellation.--The cancellation by a Medicare- eligible covered beneficiary of coverage under the Federal Employee Health Benefits program shall be irrevocable for purposes of this section.
Reporting Requirements.--Not later than November 1 of each year, the administering Secretaries and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall jointly submit a report to Congress describing the provision of health care services to Medicare-eligible covered beneficiaries under this section during the preceding fiscal year.
The report shall address or contain the following: ``(1) The number of Medicare-eligible covered beneficiaries enrolled in health benefits plans offered through the Federal Employee Health Benefits program pursuant to subsection (a), both in terms of total number and as a percentage of all Medicare-eligible covered beneficiaries receiving health care through the health care system of the uniformed services.
The out-of-pocket cost to enrolled covered beneficiaries under such health benefits plans.
The cost to the Government (including the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Health and Human Services) of providing care under such health benefits plans as a result of this section.
A comparison of the costs determined under paragraphs (2) and (3) and the costs that would have otherwise been incurred by the Government and enrolled covered beneficiaries under alternative health care options available to the administering Secretaries.
The effect of this section on the cost, access, and utilization rates of other health care options under the health care system of the uniformed services.
Time for Option.--The Secretary of Defense shall begin to offer the health benefits option under subsection (a) not later than January 1, 1998.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1107.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in section 8905-- (A) by redesignating subsections (d) through (f) as subsections (e) through (g), respectively; and (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) An individual whom an administering Secretary described in section 1073 of title 10 determines is a medicare-eligible covered beneficiary under subsection (b) of section 1107 of such title may enroll in a health benefits plan under this chapter in accordance with the agreement entered into under subsection (a) of such section between the Secretary of Defense and the Office and in accordance with applicable regulations under this chapter.
''; (2) in section 8906(b)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of individuals who enroll in a health plan in accordance with section 8905(d) of this title, the Government contribution shall be determined under section 1107(d) of title 10.
''; and (3) in section 8906(g)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) The Government contribution described in subsection (b)(4) for beneficiaries who enroll in accordance with section 8905(d) of this title shall be paid as provided in section 1107(d) of title 10.