Establishment by States.--Each State is encouraged to establish or maintain alternative dispute resolution mechanisms that promote the resolution of health care liability claims in a manner that-- (1) is affordable for the parties involved in the claims; (2) provides for the timely resolution of claims; and (3) provides the parties with convenient access to the dispute resolution process.
Guidelines.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary and the Administrative Conference of the United States, shall develop guidelines with respect to alternative dispute resolution mechanisms that may be established by States for the resolution of health care liability claims.
Such guidelines shall include procedures with respect to the following methods of alternative dispute resolution: (1) Arbitration.--The use of arbitration, a nonjury adversarial dispute resolution process which may, subject to subsection (d), result in a final decision as to facts, law, liability or damages.
The parties may elect binding arbitration.
Mediation.--The use of mediation, a settlement process coordinated by a neutral third party without the ultimate rendering of a formal opinion as to factual or legal findings.
Early neutral evaluation.--The use of early neutral evaluation, in which the parties make a presentation to a neutral attorney or other neutral evaluator for an assessment of the merits, to encourage settlement.
If the parties do not settle as a result of assessment and proceed to trial, the neutral evaluator's opinion shall be kept confidential.
Early offer and recovery mechanism.--The use of early offer and recovery mechanisms under which a health care provider, health care organization, or any other alleged responsible defendant may offer to compensate a claimant for his or her reasonable economic damages, including future economic damages, less amounts available from collateral sources.
Certificate of merit.--The requirement that a claimant in a health care liability action submit to the court before trial a written report by a qualified specialist that includes the specialist's determination that, after a review of the available medical record and other relevant material, there is a reasonable and meritorious cause for the filing of the action against the defendant.
No-fault.--The use of a no-fault statute under which certain health care liability actions are barred and claimants are compensated for injuries through their health plans or through other appropriate mechanisms.
Further Redress.-- (1) In general.--The extent to which any party may seek further redress (subsequent to a decision of an alternative dispute resolution method established by a State under this section) concerning a health care liability claim in a Federal or State court shall be dependent upon the methods of alternative dispute resolution adopted by the State involved.
Claimant.--With respect to further redress described in paragraph (1), if the party initiating such court action is the claimant and the claimant receives a level of damages that is at least 25 percent less under the decision of the court than under the State alternative dispute resolution method, such party shall bear the reasonable costs, including legal fees, incurred in the court action by the other party or parties to such action.
Provider or other defendant.--With respect to further redress described in paragraph (1), if the party initiating a court action is the health care professional or health care provider, or other defendant in a health care liability action and the health care professional, health care provider, or other defendant is found liable for a level of damages that is at least 25 percent more under the decision of the court than under the State alternative dispute resolution method, such party shall bear the reasonable costs, including legal fees, incurred in the court action by the other party or parties to such action.
Technical Assistance and Evaluations.-- (1) Technical assistance.--The Attorney General may provide States with technical assistance in establishing or maintaining alternative dispute resolution mechanisms under this section.
Evaluations.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary and the Administrative Conference of the United States, shall monitor and evaluate the effectiveness of State alternative dispute resolution mechanisms established or maintained under this section.
This Act shall apply to all civil actions covered under this Act that are commenced on or after the date of enactment of this Act, including any such action with respect to which the harm asserted in the action or the conduct that caused the harm occurred before the date of enactment of this Act.
If any provision of this Act, an amendment made by this Act, or the application of such provision or amendment to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, the amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provisions of such to any person or circumstance shall not be affected thereby.