This Act may be cited as the ``OPIC Abolition Act''.
TERMINATION OF OVERSEAS PRIVATE INVESTMENT CORPORATION.
Termination of Authority To Make New Obligations.--(1) Effective 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation shall not issue any insurance, guaranties, or reinsurance, make any loan, or acquire any securities, under section 234 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, enter into any agreements for any other activity authorized by such section 234, or enter into risk sharing arrangements authorized by section 234A of that Act.
Paragraph (1) does not require the termination of any contract or other agreement entered into before such paragraph takes effect.
Termination of OPIC.--Effective 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation is abolished.
Transfer of Operations to OMB.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall, effective 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, perform the functions of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation with respect to contracts and agreements described in subsection (a)(2) until the expiration of such contracts and agreements, but shall not renew any such contract or agreement.
The Director shall take the necessary steps to wind up the affairs of the Corporation.
Repeal of Authorities.--Effective 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, title IV of chapter 2 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2191 and following) is repealed, but shall continue to apply with respect to functions performed by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget under subsection (c).
Appropriations.--Funds available to the Corporation shall, upon the effective date of the repeal made by subsection (d), be transferred to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget for use in performing the functions of the Corporation under subsection (c).
Upon the expiration of the contracts and agreements with respect to which the Director is exercising such functions, any unexpended balances of the funds transferred under this subsection shall be deposited in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
Prior Determinations Not Affected.--The repeal made by section 2(d) of the provisions of law set forth in such section shall not affect any order, determination, regulation, or contract that has been issued, made, or allowed to become effective under such provisions before the effective date of the repeal.
All such orders, determinations, regulations, and contracts shall continue in effect until modified, superseded, terminated, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, or other authorized official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Pending Proceedings.--(1) The repeal made by section 2(d) shall not affect any proceedings, including notices of proposed rulemaking, pending on the effective date of the repeal, before the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, except that no insurance, reinsurance, guarantee, or loan may be issued pursuant to any application pending on such effective date.
Such proceedings, to the extent that they relate to functions performed by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget after such repeal, shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this Act had not been enacted; and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by the Director, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget is authorized to issue regulations providing for the orderly transfer of proceedings continued under paragraph (1).
Actions.--Except as provided in subsection (e)-- (1) the provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced before the effective date of the repeal made by section 2(d); and (2) in all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Liabilities Incurred.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against any officer in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
No cause of action by or against the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, or by or against any officer thereof in the official capacity of such officer shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Parties.--If, before the effective date of the repeal made by section 2(d), the Overseas Private Investment Corporation or an officer thereof in the official capacity of such officer, is a party to a suit, then such suit shall be continued with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget substituted or added as a party.
Review.--Orders and actions of the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in the exercise of functions of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation shall be subject to judicial review to the same extent and in the same manner as if such orders and actions had been issued or taken by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation.
Any statutory requirements relating to notice, hearings, action upon the record, or administrative review that apply to any function of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation shall apply to the exercise of such function by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Title 5, United States Code.--(1) Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``President, Overseas Private Investment Corporation.''.
Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Executive Vice President, Overseas Private Investment Corporation.''.
Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Vice Presidents, Overseas Private Investment Corporation (3).''.
Other Amendments and Repeals.--(1) Section 222(a) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 is amended by inserting after ``section 238(c)'' the following: ``as in effect on the day before the effective date of the repeal of that section made by section 2(d) of the OPIC Abolition Act''.
Section 2301(b)(9) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4721(b)(9)) is amended by striking ``the Overseas Private Investment Corporation,''.
Section 2312(d)(1) of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4727(d)(1)) is amended-- (A) by striking subparagraph (K); and (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (L) and (M) as subparagraphs (K) and (L), respectively.
Section 5402(b) of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988 (15 United States Code 4902(b)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (12) by adding ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) by striking paragraph (13); and (C) by redesignating paragraph (14) as paragraph (13).
Section 709 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the paragraph that begins ``Whoever uses the words `Overseas Private Investment'''.
Section 624 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1131c) is amended by striking ``the Overseas Private Investment Corporation,''.
Section 481(e)(4)(A) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2291(e)(4)(A)) is amended by striking ``(including programs under title IV of chapter 2, relating to the Overseas Private Investment Corporation)''.
(A) Section 574 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1996 (22 United States Code 2394 note) is amended-- (i) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Countries.--The countries referred to in subsection (a) are countries for which in excess of $5,000,000 has been obligated during the previous fiscal year for assistance under sections 103 through 106, chapters 10 and 11 of part I, and chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, and under the Support for East European Democracy Act of 1989.
''; and (ii) in the first sentence of subsection (c) by striking ``the Administrator'' and all that follows through ``Corporation'' and inserting ``and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development''.
The amendment made by subparagraph (A) shall first apply to the annual report required to be submitted under section 574(a) of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1996 in the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which no funds have been obligated by the Overseas Private Investment Corporation by virtue of this Act.
Section 2(c)(12) of the Support for East European Democracy (SEED) Act of 1989 (22 United States Code 5401(c)(12)) is repealed.
Section 202(b)(2)(B) of the Cuban Liberty and Democratic Solidarity (LIBERTAD) Act of 1996 (22 United States Code 6062(b)(2)(B)) is amended-- (A) by striking clause (iv); and (B) by redesignating clauses (v), (vi), and (vii) as clauses (iv), (v), and (vi), respectively.
Section 9101(3) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking subparagraph (H); and (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (I) through (P) as subparagraphs (G) through (O), respectively.
The following provisions of law are repealed: (A) Section 5(b)(2) of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation Amendments Act of 1981 (22 United States Code 2194a).
Section 5 of the Taiwan Relations Act (22 United States Code 3304).
Subsections (b), (c), and (d) of section 576 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1991.
Subsections (b), (c), and (d) of section 597 of the Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1990.
Sections 109 and 111 of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation Amendments Act of 1988, as enacted by reference in section 555 of Public Law 100-461.
Effective Date.--The amendments and repeals made by this section shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.