This Act may be cited as the ``Early Education Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) In 1989 the Nation's Governors established a goal that all children would have access to high-quality early education programs by the year 2000.
Less than half of all 3- to 5-year-olds who are not in kindergarten are enrolled in an early education program, with only 36 percent of children from families with annual incomes below $15,000 enrolled in an early education program.
Research suggests that a child's early years are critical in the development of the brain.
Early brain development is an important component of educational and intellectual achievement.
The National Research Council reported that early education opportunities are necessary if children are going to develop the language and literacy skills necessary to learn to read.
Evaluations of early education programs demonstrate that compared to children with similar backgrounds who have not participated in early education programs, children who participate in such programs-- (A) perform better on reading and mathematics achievement tests; (B) are more likely to stay academically near their grade level and make normal academic progress throughout elementary school; (C) are less likely to be held back a grade or require special education services in elementary school; (D) show greater learning retention, initiative, creativity, and social competency; and (E) are more enthusiastic about school and are more likely to have good attendance records.
Studies have estimated that for every dollar invested in quality early education, about 7 dollars are saved in later costs.
Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART L--EARLY EDUCATION ``SEC.
Definition of Early Education.--In this part the term `early education' means not less than a half day of schooling each weekday during the academic year preceding the academic year a child enters kindergarten.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to establish a program to develop the foundation of early literacy and numerical training among young children by helping State educational agencies expand the existing education system to include early education for all children.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to not less than 10 State educational agencies to enable the State educational agencies to expand the existing education system with programs that provide early education.
Matching requirement.--The amount provided to a State educational agency under paragraph (1) shall not exceed 50 percent of the cost of the program described in the application submitted pursuant to subsection (d).
Requirements.--Each program assisted under this section-- ``(A) shall be carried out by 1 or more local educational agencies, as selected by the State educational agency; ``(B) shall be carried out-- ``(i) in a public school building; or ``(ii) in another facility by, or through a contract or agreement with, a local educational agency; ``(C) shall be available to all children served by a local educational agency carrying out the program; and ``(D) shall only involve instructors who are licensed or certified in accordance with applicable State law.
Application.--Each State educational agency desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Each application shall-- ``(1) include a description of-- ``(A) the program to be assisted under this section; and ``(B) how the program will meet the purpose of this section; ``(2) contain a statement of the total cost of the program and the source of the matching funds for the program; and ``(3) demonstrate how the program will be coordinated with other federally funded programs that provide early educational opportunities, such as Head Start and the Even Start Family Literacy Program under part B of title I, to avoid duplication of activities in the school districts to be served.
Coordination of Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--In order for a State to operate a single early education program and notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may allow a State educational agency to coordinate activities funded under this section with activities funded under-- ``(A) part B of title I; ``(B) section 619 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act; or ``(C) the Head Start Act, if the Secretary obtains the consent of the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Reduction of services prohibited.--The Secretary shall ensure that the coordination described in paragraph (1) does not result in a reduction of services under part B of title I, section 619 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, or the Head Start Act, as appropriate.
Secretarial Authority.--In order to carry out the purpose of this section, the Secretary-- ``(1) shall establish a system for the monitoring and evaluation of, and shall annually report to Congress regarding, the programs funded under this section; and ``(2) may establish any other policies, procedures, or requirements, with respect to the programs.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement, not supplant, other Federal, State, or local funds.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $300,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.