This Act may be cited as the ``ATM Fee Disclosure Act of 1996''.
ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER FEES.
Disclosures Required.--The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 United States Code 1693 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 918, 919, 920, and 921 as sections 919, 920, 921, and 922, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 917 the following new section: ``SEC.
Disclosure of Point-of-Sale and Cash Withdrawal Fees.--In the case of any electronic fund transfer which is initiated by a consumer through the use of an electronic terminal, including a telephone operated by the consumer, no fee may be imposed by any person in connection with such transaction unless a notice is provided to the consumer, in accordance with subsection (b), which clearly states the following: ``(1) A fee will be imposed in connection with the transaction.
The amount of any such fee.
The consumer may cancel the transaction without paying the fee.
If the consumer does not elect to continue in the manner necessary to effect the transaction after receiving this notice, the transaction will be canceled without the imposition of a fee by any person, including any person described in subparagraph (B), (C), or (D) of subsection (d)(1) who would have been involved in the transaction had the transaction been completed.
Time and Location of Notice.--The notice required under subsection (a) shall appear on the screen of the electronic terminal or on a paper notice issued from the machine or, in the case of an electronic fund transfer by a telephonic instrument, as a voice message clearly audible to the consumer after the transaction is initiated and before the consumer is irrevocably committed to completing the transaction.
Prohibition on Fees Not Properly Disclosed or Explicitly Assumed by Consumer.--No fee may be imposed by any person in connection with any electronic fund transfer initiated by a consumer for which a notice is required under subsection (a), unless-- ``(1) the consumer receives such notice in accordance with subsection (b); and ``(2) the consumer elects to complete the transaction, or otherwise responds in the manner necessary to effect the transaction, after receiving such notice.
Scope of Notice and Prohibition.-- ``(1) In general.--The requirement of notice of fees under subsection (a) and the prohibition on the imposition of fees under subsection (c) shall apply with respect to any fee which is or would be imposed in connection with any electronic fund transfer to which such subsections apply by-- ``(A) the person operating or owning the electronic terminal or telephonic instrument at which the transaction is initiated by the consumer (other than a telephone operated by the consumer); ``(B) the financial institution holding the account of the consumer; ``(C) any national, regional, or local network utilized to effect the transaction; and ``(D) any other party involved in the electronic fund transfer.
Transactions initiated by telephone.--In the case of an electronic fund transfer initiated by a consumer through the use of a telephone operated by the consumer, the electronic terminal or telephonic instrument to which the consumer connects through the use of such telephone shall be treated as the electronic terminal or telephonic instrument at which the electronic fund transfer is initiated for purposes of this section.
Documentation.--Written documentation of the amount of any fee imposed by any person in connection with any electronic fund transfer for which notice is required under this subsection, and the identity of any such person, shall be provided directly to the consumer upon completion of such transfer.
Balance Inquiries.--For purposes of this section, the term `electronic fund transfer' includes a transaction which involves a balance inquiry initiated by a consumer in the same manner as an electronic fund transfer, whether or not the consumer initiates a transfer of funds in the course of the transaction.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 906(a) of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 United States Code 1693d(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) The amount and type of any fee imposed in connection with the transfer, including any fee information required to be disclosed pursuant to section 918(e).