This Act may be cited as the ``The Fairness in Medicare Home Health Access Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Home health care is a vital component of the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Home health services provided under the medicare program enable medicare beneficiaries who are homebound and greatly risk costly institutionalized care to continue to live in their own homes and communities.
Implementation of the interim payment system for home health services has inadvertently exacerbated payment disparities for home health services among regions, penalizing efficient, low-cost providers in rural areas and providing insufficient compensation for the care of medicare beneficiaries with acute, medically complex conditions.
The combination of insufficient payments and new administrative changes has reduced the access of medicare beneficiaries to home health services in many areas by forcing home health agencies to provide fewer services, to shrink their service areas, or to limit the types of conditions for which they provide treatment.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To improve access to care for medicare beneficiaries with high medical needs by establishing a process for home health agencies to exclude services provided to medicare beneficiaries with acute, medically complex conditions from payment limits and to receive payment based on the reasonable costs of providing such services through a process that is feasible for the Health Care Financing Administration to administer.
To ensure that the 15 percent contingency reduction in medicare payments for home health services established under the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 does not occur under the interim payment system for home health services.
To reduce the scheduled 15 percent reduction in the cost limits and per beneficiary limits to 10 percent and to phase-in the additional 5 percent reduction in such limits after the initial 3 years of the prospective payment system for home health services.
To address the unique challenges of serving medicare beneficiaries in rural and underserved areas by increasing the per visit cost limit under the interim payment system for home health services.
To refine the home health consolidated billing provision to ensure that medicare beneficiaries requiring durable medical equipment services do not experience a break in the continuum of care during episodes of home health care.
To eliminate the requirement that home health agencies identify the length of time of a service visit in 15 minute increments.
To express the sense of the Senate that the Secretary of Health and Human Services should establish a uniform process for disseminating information to fiscal intermediaries to ensure timely and accurate information to home health agencies and beneficiaries.
ADEQUATELY ACCOUNTING FOR THE NEEDS OF MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES WITH ACUTE, MEDICALLY COMPLEX CONDITIONS.
Waiver of Per Beneficiary Limits for Outliers.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), as amended by section 5101 of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in Division J of Public Law 105-277), is amended-- (1) by redesignating clause (ix) as clause (x); and (2) by inserting after clause (viii) the following: ``(ix)(I) Notwithstanding the applicable per beneficiary limit under clause (v), (vi), or (viii), but subject to the applicable per visit limit under clause (i), in the case of a provider that demonstrates to the Secretary that with respect to an individual to whom the provider furnished home health services appropriate to the individual's condition (as determined by the Secretary) at a reasonable cost (as determined by the Secretary), and that such reasonable cost significantly exceeded such applicable per beneficiary limit because of unusual variations in the type or amount of medically necessary care required to treat the individual, the Secretary, upon application by the provider, shall pay to such provider for such individual such reasonable cost.
The total amount of the additional payments made to home health agencies pursuant to subclause (I) in any fiscal year shall not exceed an amount equal to 2 percent of the amounts that would have been paid under this subparagraph in such year if this clause had not been enacted.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, and apply with respect to each application for payment of reasonable costs for outliers submitted by any home health agency for cost reporting periods ending on or after October 1, 1999.
PROTECTION OF THE ACCESS OF MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES TO HOME HEALTH SERVICES BY ADDRESSING THE 15 PERCENT CONTINGENCY REDUCTION IN INTERIM PAYMENTS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Elimination of Contingency Reduction.--Section 4603 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (42 United States Code 1395fff note), as amended by section 5101(c)(3) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in division J of Public Law 105-277), is amended by striking subsection (e).
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 United States Statutes at Large 251).
PROTECTION OF THE ACCESS OF MEDICARE BENEFICIARIES TO HOME HEALTH SERVICES THROUGH A PHASE-IN OF THE 15 PERCENT REDUCTION IN PROSPECTIVE PAYMENTS FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Phase-In of 15 Percent Reduction.--Section 1895(b)(3)(A)(ii) (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)), as amended by section 5101(c)(1)(B) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in division J of Public Law 105-277), is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3)(A)(ii), by striking ``15'' and inserting ``10''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) Special rule for payments beginning with fiscal year 2004.--Beginning with fiscal year 2004, payment under this section shall be made as if `15' had been substituted for `10' in clause (ii) of paragraph (3)(A) when computing the initial basis under such paragraph.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN PER VISIT COST LIMIT TO 112 PERCENT OF THE NATIONAL MEDIAN.
Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(i)), as amended by section 5101(b) of the Tax and Trade Relief Extension Act of 1998 (contained in division J of Public Law 105-277), is amended-- (1) in subclause (IV), by striking ``or''; (2) in subclause (V)-- (A) by inserting ``and before October 1, 1999,'' after ``October 1, 1998,''; and (B) by striking the period and inserting ``, or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(VI) October 1, 1999, 112 percent of such median.''.
REFINEMENT OF HOME HEALTH AGENCY CONSOLIDATED BILLING.
In General.--Section 1842(b)(6)(F) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395u(b)(6)(F)) is amended by striking ``payment shall be made to the agency (without regard to whether or not the item or service was furnished by the agency, by others under arrangement with them made by the agency, or when any other contracting or consulting arrangement, or otherwise).''
and inserting ``(i) payment shall be made to the agency (without regard to whether or not the item or service was furnished by the agency, by others under arrangement with them made by the agency, or when any other contracting or consulting arrangement, or otherwise); and (ii) in the case of an item of durable medical equipment (as defined in section 1861(n)), payment for the item shall be made to the agency separately from payment for other items and services furnished to such an individual under such plan.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to items of durable medical equipment furnished on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
ELIMINATION OF TIMEKEEPING REQUIREMENTS UNDER THE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES.
In General.--Section 1895(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(c)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``unless--'' and all that follows through ``(1) the'' and inserting ``unless the''; and (2) by striking ``1835(a)(2)(A);'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``1835(a)(2)(A).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
SENSE OF THE SENATE REGARDING THE TIMELINESS AND ACCURACY OF INTERMEDIARY COMMUNICATIONS TO HOME HEALTH AGENCIES.
It is the sense of the Senate that the Secretary of Health and Human Services should establish a nationally uniform process that ensures that each fiscal intermediary (as defined in section 1816(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395h(a))) and each carrier (as defined in section 1842(f) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395u(f))) has the training and ability necessary to provide timely, accurate, and consistent coverage and payment information to each home health agency and to each individual eligible to have payment made under the medicare program under title XVIII of such Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes).