This Act may be cited as the ``Deficit Reduction Lock-box Act of 1995''.
DEFICIT REDUCTION LOCK-BOX LEDGER.
Establishment of Ledger.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``deficit reduction lock-box ledger ``Sec.
Establishment of Ledger.--The Director of the Congressional Budget Office (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Director'') shall maintain a ledger to be known as the ``Deficit Reduction Lock-box Ledger''.
The Ledger shall be divided into entries corresponding to the subcommittees of the Committees on Appropriations.
Each entry shall consist of three parts: the `House Lock-box Balance'; the `Senate Lock-box Balance'; and the `Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balance'.
Components of Ledger.--Each component in an entry shall consist only of amounts credited to it under subsection (c).
No entry of a negative amount shall be made.
Credit of Amounts to Ledger.--(1) The Director shall, upon the engrossment of any appropriation bill by the House of Representatives and upon the engrossment of that bill by the Senate, credit to the applicable entry balance of that House amounts of new budget authority and outlays equal to the net amounts of reductions in new budget authority and in outlays resulting from amendments agreed to by that House to that bill.
The Director shall, upon the engrossment of Senate amendments to any appropriation bill, credit to the applicable Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balance the amounts of new budget authority and outlays equal to-- ``(A) an amount equal to one-half of the sum of (i) the amount of new budget authority in the House Lock-box Balance plus (ii) the amount of new budget authority in the Senate Lock-box Balance for that bill; and ``(B) an amount equal to one-half of the sum of (i) the amount of outlays in the House Lock-box Balance plus (ii) the amount of outlays in the Senate Lock-box Balance for that bill.
Calculation of Lock-Box Savings in Senate.--For purposes of calculating under this section the net amounts of reductions in new budget authority and in outlays resulting from amendments agreed to by the Senate on an appropriation bill, the amendments reported to the Senate by its Committee on Appropriations shall be considered to be part of the original text of the bill.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term `appropriation bill' means any general or special appropriation bill, and any bill or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations through the end of a fiscal year.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 313 the following new item: ``Sec.
Deficit reduction lock-box ledger.''.
TALLY DURING HOUSE CONSIDERATION.
There shall be available to Members in the House of Representatives during consideration of any appropriations bill by the House a running tally of the amendments adopted reflecting increases and decreases of budget authority in the bill as reported.
DOWNWARD ADJUSTMENT OF 602(a) ALLOCATIONS AND SECTION 602(b) SUBALLOCATIONS.
Allocations.--Section 602(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Upon the engrossment of Senate amendments to any appropriation bill (as defined in section 314(d)) for a fiscal year, the amounts allocated under paragraph (1) or (2) to the Committee on Appropriations of each House upon the adoption of the most recent concurrent resolution on the budget for that fiscal year shall be adjusted downward by the amounts credited to the applicable Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balance under section 314(c)(2).
The revised levels of budget authority and outlays shall be submitted to each House by the chairman of the Committee on the Budget of that House and shall be printed in the Congressional Record.''.
Suballocations.--Section 602(b)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Whenever an adjustment is made under subsection (a)(5) to an allocation under that subsection, the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations of each House shall make downward adjustments in the most recent suballocations of new budget authority and outlays under subparagraph (A) to the appropriate subcommittees of that committee in the total amounts of those adjustments under section 314(c)(2).
The revised suballocations shall be submitted to each House by the chairman of the Committee on Appropriations of that House and shall be printed in the Congressional Record.''.
PERIODIC REPORTING OF LEDGER STATEMENTS.
Section 308(b)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such reports shall also include an up-to-date tabulation of the amounts contained in the ledger and each entry established by section 314(a).''.
DOWNWARD ADJUSTMENT OF DISCRETIONARY SPENDING LIMITS.
The discretionary spending limits for new budget authority and outlays for any fiscal year set forth in section 601(a)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, as adjusted in strict conformance with section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, shall be reduced by the amounts set forth in the final regular appropriation bill for that fiscal year or joint resolution making continuing appropriations through the end of that fiscal year.
Those amounts shall be the sums of the Joint House-Senate Lock-box Balances for that fiscal year, as calculated under section 602(a)(5) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
That bill or joint resolution shall contain the following statement of law: ``As required by section 6 of the Deficit Reduction Lock-box Act of 1995, for fiscal year [insert appropriate fiscal year] and each outyear, the adjusted discretionary spending limit for new budget authority shall be reduced by $ [insert appropriate amount of reduction] and the adjusted discretionary limit for outlays shall be reduced by $ [insert appropriate amount of reduction] for the budget year and each outyear.''
Notwithstanding section 904(c) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, section 306 of that Act as it applies to this statement shall be waived.
This adjustment shall be reflected in reports under sections 254(g) and 254(h) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
In General.--This Act shall apply to all appropriation bills making appropriations for fiscal year 1996 or any subsequent fiscal year.
FY96 Application.--In the case of any appropriation bill for fiscal year 1996 engrossed by the House of Representatives after August 4, 1995 and before the date of enactment of this bill, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the Committees on Appropriations and the Committees on the Budget of the House of Representatives and of the Senate shall, within 10 calendar days after that date of enactment of this Act, carry out the duties required by this Act and amendments made by it that occur after the date this Act was engrossed by the House of Representatives.
FY96 Allocations.--The duties of the Director of the Congressional Budget Office and of the Committees on the Budget and on Appropriations of the House of Representatives pursuant to this Act and the amendments made by it regarding appropriation bills for fiscal year 1996 shall be based upon the revised section 602(a) allocations in effect on August 4, 1995.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``appropriation bill'' means any general or special appropriation bill, and any bill or joint resolution making supplemental, deficiency, or continuing appropriations through the end of a fiscal year.
Passed the House of Representatives September 13, 1995.