This Act may be cited as the ``Prisoner-of-War Commemorative Coin Act''.
Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to -i-n -t-h-i-s -A-c-t as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 1,500,000 one dollar coins which shall weigh 26.73 grams, have a diameter of 1.500 inches, and shall contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of such coins shall be emblematic of the experience of Americans who have been prisoners of war.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1993'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Commencement of Issuance.--The coins authorized and minted under this Act may be issued beginning January 15, 1994.
Termination of Authority.--The coins authorized and minted under this Act may not be minted after December 31, 1994.
Proof and Uncirculated Coins.--The coins authorized and minted under this Act may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities and shall be struck at no more than one facility of the United States Mint.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act (50 United States Code 98 et sequentes).
The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts.
As required by section 5135 of title 31, United States Code, the design shall also be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses) and the surcharge provided for in subsection (d).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins issued under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount to reflect the benefit of prepayment.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this Act shall include a surcharge of $5 per coin.
An amount equal to the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be made available or paid by the Secretary in the order that follows: (1) Amounts to be made available for construction of museum.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall make available to the Secretary of the Interior the first $3,000,000 for the construction of the Andersonville Prisoner-of-War Museum in Andersonville, Georgia.
Amounts to be paid to endowment fund.--After payment of the amount required by paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury shall pay 50 percent of the remaining surcharges to the endowment fund created under section 8.
Amounts to be paid to maintain national cemeteries.-- After payment of the amount required by paragraph (1), the Secretary shall pay 50 percent of the remaining surcharges to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for purposes of maintaining national cemeteries pursuant to chapter 24 of title 38, United States Code.
Establishment.--There is established in the Department of the Interior an endowment fund (-h-e-r-e-i-n-a-f-t-e-r hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``fund'') to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior and to consist of the amounts deposited under subsection (b).
Deposit Into Fund.-- (1) Deposit from surcharges.--There shall be deposited into the fund such amounts that are paid by the Secretary under section 7(2).
Investment.--The Secretary shall have the authority to invest the portion of the fund that is not, in the determination of the Secretary, required to meet the current needs of the fund, in obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to the principal and interest by the United States.
In making such investments, the Secretary shall select obligations having maturities suitable to the needs of the fund.
Expenditures.--The Secretary of the Interior may use the amounts deposited in the fund under this Act to pay for the maintenance of the Andersonville Prisoner-of-War Museum in Andersonville, Georgia.
-(-a-) -D-e-p-o-s-i-t-s-.----A-l-l -a-m-o-u-n-t-s -r-e-c-e-i-v-e-d -f-r-o-m -t-h-e -s-a-l-e -o-f -c-o-i-n-s -i-s-s-u-e-d -u-n-d-e-r -t-h-i-s -A-c-t -s-h-a-l-l -b-e -d-e-p-o-s-i-t-e-d -i-n -t-h-e -c-o-i-n-a-g-e -p-r-o-f-i-t -f-u-n-d-.
-(-b-) -P-a-y-m-e-n-t-s-.----T-h-e -S-e-c-r-e-t-a-r-y -s-h-a-l-l -p-a-y -t-h-e -a-m-o-u-n-t-s -a-u-t-h-o-r-i-z-e-d -u-n-d-e-r -t-h-i-s -A-c-t -f-r-o-m -t-h-e -c-o-i-n-a-g-e -p-r-o-f-i-t -f-u-n-d-.
-(-c-) -E-x-p-e-n-d-i-t-u-r-e-s-.----T-h-e -S-e-c-r-e-t-a-r-y -s-h-a-l-l -c-h-a-r-g-e -t-h-e -c-o-i-n-a-g-e -p-r-o-f-i-t -f-u-n-d -w-i-t-h -a-l-l -e-x-p-e-n-d-i-t-u-r-e-s -u-n-d-e-r -t-h-i-s -A-c-t-.
NUMISMATIC PUBLIC ENTERPRISE FUND.
The coins issued under this Act are subject to the provisions of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, relating to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins referred to in section 2 shall not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment for Coins.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment thereof; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Government.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to any law relating to equal employment opportunity.