This Act may be cited as the ``U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia is the world's oldest steel war ship afloat.
She is the sole surviving United States naval ship of the Spanish-American war and revived American Steel Navy.
Launched in 1892 and serving with distinction in two wars, the U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia is emblematic of the moment the United States became a global power.
Cruiser Olympia is a National Historic Landmark listed on the National Register of Historic Places (1964), a National Historic Engineering Landmark (1977), a National Historic Maritime Landmark (1988), and was awarded ``Official Project'' status of Save America's Treasures program (1999).
Cruiser Olympia was the flagship of the Asiatic Squadron and is the only vessel from the Spanish- American War still in existence.
Commissioned on February 5, 1895, she visited ports in China, Japan, Hong Kong, and the Philippines.
When war was declared on April 25, 1898, between the United States and Spain, Commodore George Dewey made the U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia his flagship under the command of Captain Gridley and entered Manila Bay on the morning of May 1, 1898, to confront the Spanish ships and coastal artillery.
At approximately 5:40 in the morning, Commodore Dewey instructed the captain, ``You may fire when ready, Gridley''.
By 7:30 a.m., the Spanish squadron and shore batteries were destroyed and Dewey accepted the surrender of the Spanish at Manila.
Cruiser Olympia became famous as the first victors of the War, and returned to the United States for celebrations in Boston and New York.
During the early twentieth century, it served in the Caribbean, Mediterranean, and, during World War I, became the flagship of the American fleet.
In 1921, the U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia was honored to carry the first American unknown solider from the port of Le Havre, France, to Washington, DC.
On November 10, 1921, the unknown soldier lay in state in the United States Capitol, and then was transported by caisson to Arlington National Cemetery for interment.
Accompanying the casket were President Warren Harding, officials of the United States government, and World War I veterans.
Cruiser Olympia was decommissioned in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, in the winter of 1922 and has rested beside the city since that time.
It is permanently docked at Penn's Landing, Philadelphia, open for public viewing, and is one of only four warships representative of the Spanish-American war period that exists in the world.
The Friends of the Cruiser Olympia is a non-profit, tax exempt organization dedicated to restoring and preserving the national treasure of the U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia and to provide education for Americans and foreign visitors regarding the impact it had on American and world history.
The Friends of the Cruiser Olympia is a non- governmental member-based organization that is entirely dependant on funds from members, donations, and sponsorships for its mission, which is to restore and preserve the U.S.S.
$1 Silver Coins.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins in commemoration of the legacy of the U.S.S.
Cruiser Olympia, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of sections 5134 and 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the courage, pride, sacrifice, sense of duty, and history of the U.S.S.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act, there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2016''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the Friends of the Cruiser Olympia and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins under this Act only during the calendar year beginning on January 1, 2016.
Sale Price.--The coins under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in section 7(a) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
In General.--All sales of coins issued under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be paid to the Friends of the Cruiser Olympia for the purpose of restoring and preserving the U.S.S.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the rights to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Friends of the Cruiser Olympia as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (b).
Limitation.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), no surcharge may be included with respect to the issuance under this Act of any coin during a calendar year if, as of the time of such issuance, the issuance of such coin would result in the number of commemorative coin program issuance limitation under section 5112(m)(1) of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary of the Treasury may issue guidance to carry out this subsection.