This Act may be cited as the ``Capturing Criminals Act of 2000''.
FUGITIVE APPREHENSION TASK FORCES.
In General.--The Attorney General is authorized to establish, upon consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and appropriate law enforcement officials in the States, Fugitive Apprehension Task Forces, consisting of Federal, State, and local law enforcement authorities in designated regions of the United States, to be coordinated by the Director of the United States Marshals Service, for the purpose of locating and apprehending fugitives, as defined by section 1075 of title 18, United States Code, as added by this Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the United States Marshals Service to carry out the provisions of this section $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, and $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
Other Federal and State law.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority under any other provision of Federal or State law to locate or apprehend a fugitive .
ADMINISTRATIVE SUBPOENAS TO APPREHEND FUGITIVES.
In General.--Chapter 49 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Administrative subpoenas to apprehend fugitives ``(a) Definitions.--In this section-- ``(1) the term `fugitive' means a person who-- ``(A) having been accused by complaint, information or indictment, or having been convicted of committing, a felony under Federal law, flees from or evades (or attempts to flee from or evade) the jurisdiction of the court with jurisdiction over the felony; ``(B) having been accused by complaint, information or indictment, or having been convicted of committing, a felony under State law, flees from or evades (or attempts to flee from or evade) the jurisdiction of the court with jurisdiction over the felony; ``(C) escapes from lawful Federal or State custody after having been accused by complaint, information or indictment, or convicted, of committing a felony under Federal or State law; or ``(D) is in violation of paragraph (2) or (3) of the first undesignated paragraph of section 1073; ``(2) the term `investigation' means, with respect to a State fugitive described in subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1), an investigation in which there is reason to believe that the fugitive fled from or evaded (or attempted to flee from or evade) the jurisdiction of the court, or escaped from custody, in or affecting, or using any facility of, interstate or foreign commerce, or as to whom an appropriate law enforcement officer or official of a State or political subdivision has requested the Attorney General to assist in the investigation, and the Attorney General finds that the particular circumstances of the request give rise to a Federal interest sufficient for the exercise of Federal jurisdiction under section 1075; and ``(3) the term `State' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
Scope.--In any investigation with respect to the apprehension of a fugitive, the Attorney General may subpoena witnesses for the purpose of the production of any records (including books, papers, documents, electronic data, and other tangible and intangible items that constitute or contain evidence) that the Attorney General finds, based upon articulable facts, are relevant to discerning the fugitive's whereabouts.
A subpoena under this subsection shall describe the records or items required to be produced and prescribe a return date within a reasonable period of time within which the records or items can be assembled and made available.
Jurisdiction.--The attendance of witnesses and the production of records may be required from any place in any State or any other place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States at any designated place where the witness is served with a subpoena, except that a witness shall not be required to appear more than 500 miles distant from the place where the witness was served.
Witnesses subpoenaed under this section shall be paid the same fees and mileage that are paid witnesses in the courts of the United States.
Service.--A subpoena issued under this section may be served by any person designated in the subpoena as the agent of service.
Service upon a natural person may be made by personal delivery of the subpoena to that person or by certified mail with return receipt requested.
Service may be made upon a domestic or foreign corporation, a partnership, or other unincorporated association that is subject to suit under a common name, by delivering the subpoena to an officer, a managing or general agent, or to any other agent authorized by appointment or by law to receive service of process.
The affidavit of the person serving the subpoena entered on a true copy thereof by the agent of service shall be proof of service.
Enforcement.-- ``(1) Noncompliance.--In the case of the contumacy by or refusal to obey a subpoena issued to any person, the Attorney General may invoke the aid of any court of the United States within the jurisdiction of which the investigation is carried on or of which the subpoenaed person is an inhabitant, or in which he carries on business or may be found, to compel compliance with the subpoena.
The court may issue an order requiring the subpoenaed person to appear before the Attorney General to produce records if so ordered.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punishable by the court as contempt thereof.
All process in any such case may be served in any judicial district in which the person may be found.
Rights of a subpoena recipient.--Not later than 20 days after the date of service of an administrative subpoena under this section upon any person, or at any time before the return date specified in the subpoena, whichever period is shorter, such person may file, in the district court of the United States for the judicial district within which such person resides, is found, or transacts business, a petition to modify or quash such subpoena on grounds that-- ``(A) the terms of the subpoena are unreasonable or unnecessary; ``(B) the subpoena fails to meet the requirements of this section; or ``(C) the subpoena violates the constitutional rights or any other legal right or privilege of the subpoenaed party.
Time for response.--The time allowed for compliance with a subpoena in whole or in part shall be suspended during the pendency of a petition filed under paragraph (2).
Such petition shall specify the grounds upon which the petitioner relies in seeking relief.
Delayed notice.-- ``(1) In general.--Where an administrative subpoena is issued under this section to a provider of electronic communication service (as defined in section 2510 of this title) or remote computing service (as defined in section 2711 of this title), the Attorney General may-- ``(A) in accordance with section 2705(a) of this title, delay notification to the subscriber or customer to whom the record pertains; and ``(B) apply to a court, in accordance with section 2705(b) of this title, for an order commanding the provider of electronic communication service or remote computing service not to notify any other person of the existence of the subpoena or court order.
Subpoenas for financial records.--If a subpoena is issued under this section to a financial institution for financial records of any customer of such institution, the Attorney General may apply to a court under section 1109 of the Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978 (12 United States Code 3409) for an order to delay customer notice as otherwise required.
Nondisclosure requirements.--Except as provided in paragraphs (1) and (2), the Attorney General may apply to a court for an order requiring the party to whom an administrative subpoena is directed to refrain from notifying any other party of the existence of the subpoena or court order for such period as the court deems appropriate.
The court shall enter such order if it determines that there is reason to believe that notification of the existence of the administrative subpoena will result in-- ``(A) endangering the life or physical safety of an individual; ``(B) flight from prosecution; ``(C) destruction of or tampering with evidence; ``(D) intimidation of potential witnesses; or ``(E) otherwise seriously jeopardizing an investigation or undue delay of a trial.
Immunity From Civil Liability.--Any person, including officers, agents, and employees, who in good faith produce the records or items requested in a subpoena shall not be liable in any court of any State or the United States to any customer or other person for such production or for nondisclosure of that production to the customer, in compliance with the terms of a court order for nondisclosure.
Delegation.--The Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue guidelines governing the issuance of administrative subpoenas.
Such guidelines shall mandate that administrative subpoenas may be issued only after review and approval of senior supervisory personnel within the Department of Justice and the Department of the Treasury.
Report.--The Attorney General shall report in January of each year to the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives on the number of administrative subpoenas issued under this section, whether each matter involved a fugitive from Federal or State charges, and identification of the agency issuing the subpoena and imposing the charges.
This reporting requirement shall terminate in 3 years after enactment.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 49 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``1075.
Administrative subpoenas to apprehend fugitives.''.
STUDY AND REPORT OF THE USE OF ADMINISTRATIVE SUBPOENAS.
Not later than December 31, 2001, the Attorney General shall complete a study on the use of administrative subpoena power by executive branch agencies or entities and shall report the findings to the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Such report shall include-- (1) a description of the sources of administrative subpoena power and the scope of such subpoena power within executive branch agencies; (2) a description of applicable subpoena enforcement mechanisms; (3) a description of any notification provisions and any other provisions relating to safeguarding privacy interests; (4) a description of the standards governing the issuance of administrative subpoenas; and (5) recommendations from the Attorney General regarding necessary steps to ensure that administrative subpoena power is used and enforced consistently and fairly by executive branch agencies.