CONSERVATION FLEX PROGRAM OPTION.
Establishment of Program.--The Agricultural Act of 1949 is amended by inserting after section 115 (7 United States Code 1445k) the following new section: ``SEC.
CONSERVATION FLEX PROGRAM OPTION.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a voluntary conservation flex program option to assist producers of agricultural commodities in adopting integrated, site-specific farm management plans through the reduction of farm program barriers to resource stewardship practices and systems.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `program' means the conservation flex program option established under this section.
The term `plan' means a site-specific farm management plan prepared by the producer and approved by the Secretary.
The term `alternative crops' means experimental and industrial crops which conserve soil and water.
The term `breeding cattle' means bulls, dams, and heifers held solely for the production of calves, but shall not include weaned calves being grown for slaughter or dairy cattle.
The term `legume' means any legume, including alfalfa, clover, lentils, lupine, medic, peas, soybeans, and vetch grown for use as a forage, green manure, or biomass feedstock, but not including any pulse crop from which the seeds are harvested and sold for purposes other than use as seed for planting.
The term `resource-conserving crop' means legumes, grasses, brassica cover crops and forages, alternative crops, any interseeded or relay-planted combination of such crops, any interseeded or relay-planted combination of such crops and small grains, and such other crops as the Secretary may designate.
The term `resource-conserving crop rotation' means a crop rotation which includes at least one resource-conserving crop and that reduces erosion, maintains or improves soil fertility, tilth and structure, interrupts pest cycles, or conserves water.
The term `rotational grazing' means planting forage, dividing pastures into paddocks, and using grazing rotations to increase forage quality and production, improve vegetative cover, and reduce sediment and nutrient runoff.
The term `small grains' means any small grain, including barley, buckwheat, oats, rye, spelt, and triticale, but not including wheat, except for wheat grown for nonhuman consumption.
The term `special conservation practices' means field borders, contour grass strips, grass waterways, filter strips, grass windbreaks, buffer areas, wildlife habitat plantings, habitat plantings for beneficial organisms that aid in the control of pests, and such other practices as the Secretary may designate.
Eligible Producers.--To be eligible to participate in the program, a producer must prepare and submit to the Secretary for approval a site-specific farm management plan, which may at the producer's option be integrated with any conservation plan developed pursuant to section 1212 of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 United States Code 3812) and any other conservation or natural resource plan required for producer participation in any program within the jurisdiction of the Secretary.
Agreements.--Upon the approval of a plan submitted by a producer under subsection (c), the Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the producer that specifies the crop acreage bases being enrolled in the program.
The agreement shall be for a period of not less than one year, nor more than seven years, as determined by the producer.
The agreement may be renewed upon the mutual agreement of the Secretary and the producer.
Producer Responsibilities Under Agreement.--Under the terms of an agreement entered into under subsection (d), a producer shall agree-- ``(1) to actively comply with the terms and conditions of the applicable plan, as approved by the Secretary; ``(2) to devote to a resource-conserving crop-- ``(A) not less than 15 percent of the crop acreage bases of the producer enrolled under such program; or ``(B) not less than 15 percent of the producer's total crop acres, if the sum of resource-conserving crop acres on non-base acres and total crop acreage bases on the farm does not exceed the county average base-to-cropland ratio; and ``(3) to keep such records as the Secretary may reasonably require for purposes of program evaluation.
Requirements of the Plan.--To be approved by the Secretary, a plan submitted by a producer must-- ``(1) specify the crop acreage bases the producer chooses to enroll in the program; ``(2) describe the resource-conserving crop rotation, special conservation practices, rotational grazing, or biomass production operations and practices to be implemented and maintained on such acreage during the agreement period which fulfill the purposes of the program; ``(3) contain a schedule for the implementation, improvement and maintenance of the resource-conserving crop rotation, special conservation practices, rotational grazing, or biomass operations and practices described in the plan; and ``(4) contain such other terms as the Secretary may require.
Program Administration, Certification, and Termination.-- ``(1) Program administration, technical assistance, and flexibility.-- ``(A) Administration.--The program shall be administered by the Secretary.
Technical assistance.--In administering the program, the Secretary, in consultation with the local conservation districts and any State or local authorities deemed appropriate by the Secretary, shall provide technical assistance to a producer in developing and implementing a plan, evaluating the effectiveness of a plan, and assessing the costs and benefits of farming operations and practices.
If requested by a producer, the Secretary shall provide technical assistance to help the producer comply with Federal, State, and local requirements designed to protect soil, wetlands, wildlife habitat, the quality of ground water and surface water, or other natural resources.
Flexibility.--In administering the program, the Secretary shall provide sufficient flexibility for a producer to revise the producer's plan to respond to changes in market conditions, weather, or technology or to adjust and modify the farming operation, except that such revisions must be consistent with the purposes of the program and approved by the Secretary.
Certification.--The Secretary shall certify producer compliance with the terms and conditions of the plan.
Termination.--The Secretary may terminate an agreement entered into with a producer under this program if-- ``(A) the producer agrees to such termination; or ``(B) the producer violates the terms and conditions of such agreement.
Program Rules.-- ``(1) Base and yield protection.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall not reduce crop acreage bases or farm program payment yields as a result of the planting of a resource-conserving crop.
Payment acres.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall not reduce any farm program loans, payments, or benefits of a program participant as a result of the planting of a resource-conserving crop.
Payment rate.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall provide deficiency payments on resource-conserving crop acreage eligible for payments at a rate not less than the projected deficiency payment rate, as determined and announced each year by the Secretary prior to the period during which producers may agree to participate in the program.
Payment acre protection.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall not reduce the payment acres or the established price for a program participant who has entered into an agreement with the Secretary for a fixed period of time.
Resource-conserving crops on normal flex acreage.-- Acreage devoted to resource-conserving crops under this program may, at the discretion of the producer, be designated as normal flex acreage.
Adjustments in production adjustment requirements.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall make fair and equitable adjustments in acreage limitation requirements applicable to a producer participating in the program giving due consideration to crop rotation, special conservation practices, rotational grazing, biomass production, and other appropriate factors resulting from the implementation of a plan.
If the Secretary determines that the reduction in program crop production on a participating farm referred to in the preceding sentence will equal or exceed any reduction in crop production which, in the absence of participation in the program, would occur as a result of acreage limitation requirements, the Secretary shall waive such acreage limitation requirements for the farm.
If the resource conserving crop includes a farm program feed grain crop planted on the base acres of another farm program feed grain crop, the Secretary shall take into account the established or county average yield of the two feed grains for the purposes of making the adjustment or waiver.
Total base acreage flexibility.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall allow participants in this program to plant farm program crops and oilseeds in any proportion on a producer's total acreage of farm program crop base and historic oilseeds acreage without affecting farm program payments.
Crop insurance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, acreage devoted to resource-conserving crops under this program shall be eligible for crop insurance pursuant to the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes).
Haying and grazing restriction.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall not make any farm program payments to a producer, who is otherwise eligible to receive such payments, for acreage enrolled in the program if the producer, during the consecutive five month period in each State in which haying and grazing of conserving use acres may be prohibited under the provisions of this Act, grazes breeding cattle or nursing calves or harvests and sells hay on payment acres.
Transition option.--The restriction in subparagraph (A) shall not apply in the case of a producer who agrees to retire all base acreage enrolled in the program at the end of the agreement period.
Emergency haying and grazing.--The Secretary shall release acreage devoted to resource-conserving crops for emergency haying and grazing as the result of a natural disaster when the Secretary permits unlimited haying and grazing on-- ``(i) reduced acreage under this Act; ``(ii) acreage devoted to a conservation use under this Act; ``(iii) acreage diverted from production under a land diversion program established under this Act; or ``(iv) acreage enrolled in the conservation reserve program under the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 United States Code 3801 et sequentes).''.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 1451 of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 5822) is repealed.