This Act may be cited as the ``Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SAFE MEAT AND POULTRY INSPECTION PANEL.
The Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel.--``(a) Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Department of Agriculture a permanent advisory panel known as the ``Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel''.
Purpose.--The Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel shall review, evaluate, and make comments and recommendations in the form of a report to the Secretary on the adequacy, necessity, safety, cost- effectiveness, and scientific merit of the following: (1) Inspection procedures of, and work rules and worker relations involving Federal employees employed in, plants inspected under this Act.
Informal petitions or proposals for changes in inspection procedures, processes, and techniques of plants inspected under this Act.
Formal changes in meat inspection regulations, either in notice, proposed, or final form, promulgated by virtue of authority granted by this Act and within the time limits prescribed for formal comments on such changes.
Such other matters as may be referred to the panel by the Secretary regarding the quality or effectiveness of a safe and cost-effective meat inspection system under this Act.
Composition of Panel.--The Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel shall be composed of 7 members, not less than 5 of which members shall be from the food, meat, and poultry science profession, appointed to staggered terms not to exceed three years by the Secretary from nominations received from the National Institutes of Health and the American Meat Science Association and based upon the professional qualifications of the nominees.
Nominations.--In constituting the original Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel, the Secretary shall initially solicit 6 nominees from the National Institutes of Health and 6 nominees from the American Meat Science Association for membership on the panel.
Any subsequent vacancy on the panel shall be filled by the Secretary after soliciting 2 nominees from the National Institutes of Health and 2 nominees from the American Meat Science Association.
Nominees shall have a background in public health issues and a scientific expertise in food, meat, and poultry sciences or in veterinary science.
The Secretary may require nominees to submit such additional information as the Secretary may deem necessary prior to completing the selection process.
Should any list of nominees provided under this subsection be unsatisfactory, the Secretary may request an additional set of nominees from the nominating entities.
Compensation.--Each member of the panel shall receive per diem compensation at a rate not in excess of that fixed for GS-18 of the General Schedule as may be determined by the Secretary, except that any such member who holds another office or position under the Federal Government the compensation of which exceeds such rate may elect to receive compensation at the rate provided for such other office or position in lieu of the compensation provided by this subsection.
Conflict of Interest.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations regarding conflicts of interest with respect to the members of the panel.
Publication in Federal Register.--Any report of the panel to the Secretary shall be published in the Federal Register.
Secretarial Response.--Within 90 days of the publication of a panel report under this section, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register any response required of the Secretary to that report.
Funding.--From funds available to the Secretary, the Secretary shall allocate such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.''.
The Poultry Products Inspection Act (21 United States Code 451 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel.--The advisory panel known as the `Safe Meat and Poultry Inspection Panel' established in section of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code ) shall also review, evaluate and make comments and recommendations in the form of a report to the Secretary on the adequacy, necessity, safety, cost-effectiveness, and scientific merit of the following: (1) Inspection procedures of, and work rules and worker relations involving Federal employees employed in, plants inspected under this Act.
Informal petitions or proposals for changes in inspection procedures, processes, or techniques of plants inspected under this Act.
Formal changes in poultry inspection regulations, either in notice, proposed, or final form, promulgated by virtue of authority granted by this Act and within the time limits prescribed for formal comments on such changes.
Such other matters as may be referred to the panel by the Secretary regarding the quality or effectiveness of a safe and cost-effective poultry inspection system under this Act.