This Act may be cited as the ``Treatment on Demand Assistance Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the Department of Health and Human Services, each year drug and alcohol related abuse kills more than 120,000 Americans.
In 1999, an estimated 14,800,000 Americans were current illicit drug users.
States across the country are faced with increasing demands for drug treatment programs.
In addition, methamphetamine abuse continues to be on the rise.
Methamphetamine abuse accounts for 5.1 percent of all treatment admissions, which was the fourth highest percentage after cocaine, heroin, and marijuana.
Current statistics show that methamphetamine use is increasing rapidly especially among the nation's youth.
There are over 2,800,000 substance abusers in America in need of treatment.
This number exceeds the 2,137,100 persons receiving treatment.
Recent reports indicate that every additional dollar invested in substance abuse treatment saves taxpayers $7.46 in societal costs.
In California, the average cost to taxpayers per inmate, per year, is $23,406 versus the national average cost of $4,300 for a full treatment program.
Drugs and alcohol cost taxpayers nearly $276,000,000,000 annually in preventable health care costs, extra law enforcement, auto crashes, crime and lost productivity versus $3,100,000,000 appropriated for substance abuse-related activities in fiscal year 2000.
Nationwide, 59 percent of police chiefs believe that drug offenders are served better by participation in treatment programs versus prisons only.
Current treatment on demand programs such as those in San Francisco and Baltimore focus on the specific drug abuse needs of the local community and should be encouraged.
Many States have developed programs designed to treat non-violent drug offenders and this should be encouraged.
Drug treatment prevention programs must be increased in order to effectively address the needs of those actively seeking treatment before they commit a crime.
It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) assist individuals who seek the services of drug abuse treatment programs by providing them with treatment on demand; (2) provide assistance to help eliminate the backlog of individuals on waiting lists to obtain drug treatment for their addictions; (3) enhance public safety by reducing drug-related crimes and preserving jails and prison cells for serious and violent criminal offenders; (4) complement the efforts of law enforcement by providing additional funding to expand current community-based treatment efforts and prevent the recidivism of those currently in the correctional system; and (5) assist States in the implementation of alternative drug treatment programs that divert non-violent drug offenders to treatment programs that are more suited for the rehabilitation of drug offenders.
In this Act: (1) Non-violent.--The term ``non-violent'' with respect to a criminal offense means an offense that is not a crime of violence as defined under the applicable State law.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
GRANTS FOR THE EXPANSION OF CAPACITY FOR PROVIDING TREATMENT.
Subpart 1 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb et sequentes), as amended by sections 3104 and 3632 of the Youth Drug and Mental Health Services Act (Public Law 106-310), is amended-- (1) by redesignating the section 514 relating to the methamphetamine and amphetamine treatment initiative as section 514B and inserting such section after section 514A; and (2) and by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment, shall-- ``(1) award grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to public and private nonprofit entities, including Native Alaskan entities and Indian tribes and tribal organizations; and ``(2) award block grants to States; for the purpose of providing substance abuse treatment services.
Eligibility.-- ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under subsection (a) an entity or a State shall provide assurances to the Secretary that amounts received under such grant, contract, or agreement will only be used for substance abuse treatment programs that have been certified by the State as using licensed or certified providers.
Application.--An entity or State desiring a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Priority.--In awarding grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to entities under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall give priority to applicants who propose to eliminate the waiting lists for substance abuse treatment on demand programs in local communities with high incidences of drug use.
Amount.-- ``(1) Public and private nonprofit entities.--The amount of each grant, contract, or cooperative agreement awarded to a public or private nonprofit entity under subsection (a)(1) shall be determined by the Secretary based on the application submitted by such an entity.
States.--The amount of a block grant awarded to a State under subsection (a)(2) shall be determined by the Secretary based on the formula contained in section 1933.
Duration of Grants.--The Secretary shall award grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements under subsection (a) for periods not to exceed 5 fiscal years.
Requirement of Matching Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), the Director may not make a grant, contract or cooperative agreement under subsection (a) unless the entity or State involved agrees, with respect to the costs of the program to be carried out by the entity or State pursuant to such subsection, to make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is-- ``(A) for the first fiscal year for which the entity or State receives such a grant, contract or cooperative agreement, not less than $1 for each $9 of Federal funds provided in the grant, contract or cooperative agreement; ``(B) for any second or third such fiscal year, not less than $1 for each $5 of Federal funds provided in the grant, contract or cooperative agreement; and ``(C) for any subsequent such fiscal year, not less than $1 for each $3 of Federal funds provided in the grant, contract or cooperative agreement.
Determination of amount of non-federal contribution.--Non-Federal contributions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount of such non-Federal contributions.
Waiver.--The Director may waive the requirement established in paragraph (1) if the Director determines-- ``(A) that extraordinary economic conditions in the area to be served by the entity or State involved justify the waiver; or ``(B) that other circumstances exist with respect to the entity or State that justify the waiver, including the limited size of the entity or State or the ability of the entity or State to raise funds.
Evaluation.--An entity or State that receives a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under subsection (a) shall submit, in the application for such grant, contract, or cooperative agreement, a plan for the evaluation of any project undertaken with funds provided under this section.
Such entity or State shall provide the Secretary with periodic evaluations of the progress of such project and such evaluation at the completion of such project as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Use for Construction.--A grantee under this section may use up to 25 percent of the amount awarded under the grant, contract or cooperative agreement under this section for the costs of construction or major renovation of facilities to be used to provide substance abuse treatment services and for facility maintenance.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section-- ``(A) $600,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; ``(B) $1,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; ``(C) $1,800,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; ``(D) $2,400,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and ``(E) $3,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.
Allocation of funds.--From the amount appropriated under paragraph (1) for each fiscal year, the Secretary shall allocate-- ``(A) 50 percent of such amount to award grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements to public or nonprofit private entities under subsection (a)(1); and ``(B) 50 percent of such amount to award grants to States under subsection (a)(2).''.
Grants.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary, shall award grants to eligible States to enable such States, either directly or through the provision of assistance to counties or local municipalities, to provide drug treatment services to individuals who have been convicted of non-violent drug possession offenses and diverted from incarceration because of the enrollment of such individuals into community-based drug treatment programs.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section a State shall-- (1) be implementing an alternative drug treatment program under which any individual in the State who has been convicted of a non-violent drug possession offense may be enrolled in an appropriate drug treatment program as an alternative to incarceration; and (2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--Amounts provided to a State under a grant under this section may be used by the State (or by State or local entities that receive funding from the State under this section) to pay expenses associated with-- (1) the construction of treatment facilities; (2) payments to related drug treatment services providers that are necessary for the effectiveness of the program, including aftercare supervision, vocational training, education, and job placement; (3) drug testing; (4) probation services; (5) counseling, including mental health services; and (6) the operation of drug courts.
Matching Requirement.--Funds may not be provided to a State under this section unless the State agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the State in carrying out the drug treatment program involved, the State will make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is at least equal to the amount of Federal funds provided to the State under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to carry out this section, $250,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
STUDY BY THE GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE.
In General.--The General Accounting Office shall conduct a study of the use of funds under this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
In conducting such study, the Office shall make determinations as to whether such funding meets, exceeds, or falls short of the level of funding needed to provide substance abuse treatment to those in need.
Reports.--The General Accounting Office shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress an interim and final report concerning the study conducted under subsection (a).
The reports required under this subsection shall be submitted-- (1) with respect to the interim report, not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) with respect to the final report, not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act.