Congress makes the following findings: (1) Congress strongly supports providing every honorably discharged veteran the opportunity to be buried in a national veterans cemetery in recognition of their sacrifices for the freedoms enjoyed by every citizen of the United States.
The Department of Veterans Affairs has determined that a population threshold of 170,000 eligible people living within a 75-mile service radius is appropriate to merit the establishment of a new national cemetery in areas of greatest need nationwide.
Although the Department of Veterans Affairs estimates a projected veterans population of 133,000 within a 75-mile radius of the city of Bellevue, Nebraska, an independent analysis conducted by the Metropolitan Area Planning Agency located in Omaha, Nebraska, concluded that 172,500 people who reside within a 75-mile radius of Bellevue would be eligible to be buried in a national cemetery.
Congress has consistently authorized the construction of six new national cemeteries every four years since 1999, with the first six established by section 611 of the Veterans Millennium Health Care and Benefits Act (Public Law 106-117; 38 United States Code 2400 note) and the next six established by the National Cemetery Expansion Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-109; 38 United States Code 2400 note).
The independent report titled ``Future Burial Needs'' and completed for the Department of Veterans Affairs in 2002 pursuant to section 613 of the Veterans Millennium Health Care and Benefits Act (Public Law 106-117; 38 United States Code 2404 note) recommended Omaha, Nebraska, as a location for a new national cemetery to be built in 2005.
The Midwest Health Care Network of the Department of Veterans Affairs, which is responsible for the provision of health care for veterans residing in Iowa and Nebraska, currently serves a high population of aging veterans.
Major veterans and military advocacy organizations endorse the establishment of a national cemetery to serve veterans and their family members in the eastern Nebraska and western Iowa regions, including the following: (A) The Nebraska Department of Disabled American Veterans.
The Heartland of America Chapter of the Military Officers Association of America.
The Great Plains Chapter of Paralyzed Veterans of America.
The Nebraska Department of Veterans of Foreign Wars.
The Nebraska chapter of Vietnam Veterans of America.
The Nebraska Military Order of the Purple Heart.
The Nebraska State Air Force Association.
The Air Force Sergeants Association, Chapter 984.
The Nebraska Department of the American Legion.
The Forty & Eight Charitable Veterans.
The Nebraska chapter of the American Ex- Prisoners of War.
The Nebraska chapter of Gold Star Wives.
The Korean War Veterans Association, Nebraska Chapter 1.
The Marine Corps League in Nebraska.
The Nebraska Department of American Veterans.
Such organizations represent a combined membership of not less than 85,700 veterans and military advocates in the State of Nebraska.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CEMETERY IN EASTERN NEBRASKA REGION.
In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish, in accordance with chapter 24 of title 38, United States Code, a national cemetery in the eastern Nebraska region to serve the needs of veterans and their families in the eastern Nebraska and western Iowa regions.
Consultation in Selection of Site.--Before selecting the site for the national cemetery established under subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with-- (1) appropriate officials of the State of Nebraska and local officials in the eastern Nebraska region; and (2) appropriate officials of the United States, including the Administrator of General Services, with respect to land belonging to the United States in that region that would be suitable to establish the national cemetery under subsection (a).
Report.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the establishment of the national cemetery under subsection (a).
The report shall set forth a schedule for such establishment and an estimate of the costs associated with such establishment.