This Act may be cited as the ``Access to Affordable Health Care Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) More than 43,000,000 Americans currently lack health insurance.
The great majority of the uninsured are members of families with at least 1 full-time worker.
Nearly half of the uninsured workers are in firms with fewer than 25 employees.
Small employers generally face higher costs for health insurance than do larger firms, which makes small firms less likely to offer coverage.
According to the Congressional Budget Office, only 42 percent of small-firm establishments with fewer than 50 employees offer health insurance to their employees.
The smaller the firm size, the less likely it is to offer coverage.
According to the Employee Benefit Research Institute (EBRI), in 1998, among private sector workers in firms with fewer than 10 employees, 27.4 percent received health insurance from their employers in their own name, compared with 66.5 percent of workers in firms with 1,000 or more employees.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide new tax incentives to make health insurance more affordable for small businesses, thus encouraging those businesses that do not currently offer health insurance to do so and discouraging businesses that currently do offer heatlh insurance from dropping coverage because of rising costs.
CREDIT FOR EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business-related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
EMPLOYEE HEALTH INSURANCE EXPENSES.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an employer, the employee health insurance expenses credit determined under this section is an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the amount paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year for qualified employee health insurance expenses.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable percentage is equal to-- ``(1) 50 percent in the case of an employer with less than 10 employees, and ``(2) 30 percent in the case of an employer with more than 9 but less than 26 employees.
Per Employee Dollar Limitation.--The amount of qualified employee health insurance expenses taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to any qualified employee for any taxable year shall not exceed-- ``(1) $2,000 in the case of self-only coverage, and ``(2) $4,000 in the case of family coverage (as so defined).
Special Rules and Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Determination of employment.-- ``(A) In general.--An employer shall be considered an employer described in paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (b) if such employer employed an average of the number of employees described in such paragraph on business days during either of the 2 preceding calendar years.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a preceding calendar year may be taken into account only if the employer was in existence throughout such year.
Employers not in existence in preceding year.--In the case of an employer which was not in existence throughout the 1st preceding calendar year, the determination under subparagraph (A) shall be based on the average number of employees that it is reasonably expected such employer will employ on business days in the current calendar year.
Qualified employee health insurance expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified employee health insurance expenses' means any amount paid by an employer for health insurance coverage to the extent such amount is attributable to coverage provided to any employee while such employee is a qualified employee.
Exception for amounts paid under salary reduction arrangements.--No amount paid or incurred for health insurance coverage pursuant to a salary reduction arrangement shall be taken into account under subparagraph (A).
Health insurance coverage.--The term `health insurance coverage' has the meaning given such term by section 9832(b)(1).
Qualified employee.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified employee' means, with respect to any period, an employee of an employer if the total amount of wages paid or incurred by such employer to such employee at an annual rate during the taxable year is not less than $5,000.
Treatment of certain employees.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `employee'-- ``(i) shall not include an employee within the meaning of section 401(c)(1), but ``(ii) shall include a leased employee within the meaning of section 414(n).
Wages.--The term `wages' has the meaning given such term by section 3121(a) (determined without regard to any dollar limitation contained in such section).
Certain Rules Made Applicable.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules of section 52 shall apply.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction or credit under any other provision of this chapter shall be allowed with respect to qualified employee health insurance expenses taken into account under subsection (a).''.
Credit To Be Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (13) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(14) the employee health insurance expenses credit determined under section 45E.''.
No Carrybacks.--Subsection (d) of section 39 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(10) No carryback of section 45e credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the employee health insurance expenses credit determined under section 45E may be carried back to a taxable year ending before January 1, 2002.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Employee health insurance expenses.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
DEDUCTION FOR HEALTH AND LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE COSTS OF INDIVIDUALS NOT PARTICIPATING IN EMPLOYER-SUBSIDIZED HEALTH PLANS.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating section 222 as section 223 and by inserting after section 221 the following new section: ``SEC.
HEALTH AND LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE COSTS.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the amount paid during the taxable year for insurance which constitutes medical care for the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse and dependents.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable percentage shall be determined in accordance with the following table: ``For taxable years beginning The applicable in calendar year-- percentage is-- 2002, 2003, 2004....................................... 25 2005 and 2006.......................................... 50 2007 and thereafter.................................... 100.
Limitation Based on Other Coverage.-- ``(1) Coverage under certain subsidized employer plans.-- ``(A) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any taxpayer for any calendar month for which the taxpayer participates in any health plan maintained by any employer of the taxpayer or of the spouse of the taxpayer if 50 percent or more of the cost of coverage under such plan (determined under section 4980B and without regard to payments made with respect to any coverage described in subsection (e)) is paid or incurred by the employer.
Employer contributions to cafeteria plans, flexible spending arrangements, and medical savings accounts.--Employer contributions to a cafeteria plan, a flexible spending or similar arrangement, or a medical savings account which are excluded from gross income under section 106 shall be treated for purposes of subparagraph (A) as paid by the employer.
Aggregation of plans of employer.--A health plan which is not otherwise described in subparagraph (A) shall be treated as described in such subparagraph if such plan would be so described if all health plans of persons treated as a single employer under subsections (b), (c), (m), or (o) of section 414 were treated as one health plan.
Separate application to health insurance and long-term care insurance.--Subparagraphs (A) and (C) shall be applied separately with respect to-- ``(i) plans which include primarily coverage for qualified long-term care services or are qualified long-term care insurance contracts, and ``(ii) plans which do not include such coverage and are not such contracts.
Coverage under certain federal programs.-- ``(A) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any amount paid for any coverage for an individual for any calendar month if, as of the first day of such month, the individual is covered under any medical care program described in-- ``(i) title XVIII, XIX, or XXI of the Social Security Act, ``(ii) chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, ``(iii) chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, ``(iv) chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, or ``(v) the Indian Health Care Improvement Act.
Exceptions.-- ``(i) Qualified long-term care.-- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to amounts paid for coverage under a qualified long-term care insurance contract.
Continuation coverage of fehbp.-- Subparagraph (A)(iv) shall not apply to coverage which is comparable to continuation coverage under section 4980B.
Long-Term Care Deduction Limited to Qualified Long-Term Care Insurance Contracts.--In the case of a qualified long-term care insurance contract, only eligible long-term care premiums (as defined in section 213(d)(10)) may be taken into account under subsection (a).
Deduction Not Available for Payment of Ancillary Coverage Premiums.--Any amount paid as a premium for insurance which provides for-- ``(1) coverage for accidents, disability, dental care, vision care, or a specified illness, or ``(2) making payments of a fixed amount per day (or other period) by reason of being hospitalized.
shall not be taken into account under subsection (a).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Coordination with deduction for health insurance costs of self-employed individuals.--The amount taken into account by the taxpayer in computing the deduction under section 162(l) shall not be taken into account under this section.
Coordination with medical expense deduction.--The amount taken into account by the taxpayer in computing the deduction under this section shall not be taken into account under section 213.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out this section, including regulations requiring employers to report to their employees and the Secretary such information as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.''.
Deduction Allowed Whether or Not Taxpayer Itemizes Other Deductions.--Subsection (a) of section 62 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after paragraph (17) the following new item: ``(18) Health and long-term care insurance costs.--The deduction allowed by section 222.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Health and long-term care insurance costs.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
DEDUCTION FOR 100 PERCENT OF HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS OF SELF- EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Allowance of deduction.--In the case of an individual who is an employee within the meaning of section 401(c)(1), there shall be allowed as a deduction under this section an amount equal to 100 percent of the amount paid during the taxable year for insurance which constitutes medical care for the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse and dependents.''.
Clarification of Limitations on Other Coverage.--The first sentence of section 162(l)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any taxpayer for any calendar month for which the taxpayer participates in any subsidized health plan maintained by any employer (other than an employer described in section 401(c)(4)) of the taxpayer or the spouse of the taxpayer.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.