This Act may be cited as the ``Fiscal Integrity through Transparency (FIT) Act of 2008''.
TITLE I--CONSTRAINING THE GROWTH OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SEC.
Constraining Growth.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``constraining the growth of the federal government ``Sec.
Point of Order.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any concurrent resolution on the budget for any fiscal year if the percentage increase for the projected total outlays for such fiscal year compared to the projected total outlays for the preceding fiscal year set forth in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget exceeds the allowable growth percentage.
Allowable Growth Percentage.--As used in subsection (a), the term `allowable growth percentage' for the applicable fiscal year refers to the mean of the annual percentage growth of mean earnings of full-time, year-round workers; compensation of employees; and gross domestic product (GDP) for the United States for the most recent calendar year for which such data may be obtained from the United States Reports Census Bureau and the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA) of the Department of Commerce compared to the immediately preceding calendar year before the concurrent resolution on the budget for the applicable fiscal year is reported by the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives or Senate, as the case may be.
Super Majority Required for Waiver.--Subsection (a) may be waived or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate by a two-thirds vote of its Members voting, a quorum being present.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Act of 1974 is amended by adding after the item relating to section 315 the following new item: ``Sec.
Constraining the Growth of the Federal Government.''.
TITLE II--EFFICIENCY AND RESPONSIBILITY FROM THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT SEC.
ANNUAL REPORTS BY FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES TO GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE.
Report Requirement.--Each Federal department and agency annually shall submit to the Comptroller General a report on the total operating costs of the department or agency for the year covered by the report, with a separate statement containing details on waste, fraud, and abuse during such year.
Audit by GAO.--Each year the Comptroller General shall randomly select 10 percent of the reports submitted under subsection (a) and audit the reports.
Intelligence Report Requirement.--Each intelligence department and agency of the Federal Government, and each intelligence-related division within a department or agency, shall submit to the Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives the total operating costs of the agency, department, or division for the year covered by the report, with a separate statement containing details on waste, fraud, and abuse during such year.
First Reports.--The first reports under this section shall be submitted not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ANNUAL REPORT BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Annual GAO Report on Reports of Federal Departments and Agencies.--The Comptroller General shall submit to Congress an annual report on the results of the reports submitted under section 201(a).
First Report.--The first report under this section shall be submitted not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PLAN FOR REDUCTION OF OPERATIONAL COSTS OF FEDERAL DEPARTMENTS AND AGENCIES.
Plan Requirement.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, each Federal department or agency shall design a plan to reduce its operational costs from $.36 of every $1.00 appropriated to the department or agency to $.15 of every $1.00 (or reduce their operational costs by 41.67 percent) appropriated to the department or agency through the use of new technologies and standard management practices.
Implementation of Plan.--Not later than 10 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, each Federal department or agency shall implement the plan for the department or agency developed under subsection (a).
Annual Progress Reports.--Each Federal department or agency shall submit to Congress a report each year detailing the progress of the department or agency in implementing the plan for the department or agency developed under subsection (a).
Statement To Appear on Tax Returns.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall include, on each form for making the return of tax imposed under chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, a statement of the aggregate dollar amount of waste, fraud, and abuse by all Federal departments and agencies for the most recent year for which the Secretary has received information under subsection (b).
Determination of Aggregate Waste, Fraud, and Abuse by Comptroller General.--The Comptroller General shall annually report to the Secretary of the Treasury the aggregate dollar amount of waste, fraud, and abuse by all Federal departments and agencies as determined by the Comptroller General on the basis of the reports submitted by Federal departments and agencies under section 201.
TITLE III--PROVIDING EARMARK TRANSPARENCY SEC.
Earmark Transparency.-- Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 as amended by section 101 is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``earmark transparency ``Sec.
In General.--All requests for earmarks received by the Committee on Appropriations (or any subcommittee thereof) of the House of Representatives or the Senate shall be posted by the applicable Committee on Appropriations (or subcommittee thereof) on its website at least 14 calendar days before the committee or subcommittee, as applicable, begins marking up the applicable measure.
Each such posting of an earmark shall include the name of the Member requesting the earmark, the cost of the earmark, and a justification of why the earmark is needed.
Definition.--As used in subsection (a), the term `earmark' means-- ``(1) in the case of the House of Representatives, `congressional earmark' as such term is defined by clause 9(d) of rule XXI of the Rules of the House of Representatives; and ``(2) in the case of the Senate, `congressionally directed spending item' as such term is defined by clause 5 of rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the Senate.