DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR THE BENEFIT OF UNITS OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF OVERPAYMENTS AND CONTRIBUTIONS FOR THE BENEFIT OF UNITS OF THE NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM ``Sec.
In General.--In the case of an individual, with respect to each taxpayer's return for the taxable year of the tax imposed by chapter 1, such taxpayer may designate that-- ``(1) a specified portion (but not less than $1) of any overpayment of tax for such taxable year, and ``(2) any cash contribution which the taxpayer includes with such return, shall be used for the benefit of units of the National Park System.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year only at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Overpayments Treated as Refunded.--For purposes of this title, any portion of an overpayment of tax designated under subsection (a) shall be treated as being refunded to the taxpayer as of the last date prescribed for filing the return of tax imposed by chapter 1 (determined without regard to extensions) or, if later, the date the return is filed.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of overpayments and contributions for the benefit of units of the National Park System.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
NATIONAL PARKS TRUST FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
NATIONAL PARKS TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `National Parks Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the National Parks Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfer to National Parks Trust Fund of Amounts Designated.--There is hereby appropriated to the National Parks Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6097 and received in the Treasury.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall pay, not less often than quarterly, to the Director of the National Park Service from the National Parks Trust Fund an amount equal to the amount in such Fund as of the time of such payment less any administrative expenses of the Secretary which may be paid under paragraph (2).
Amounts paid under this subsection shall be used only for design, construction, rehabilitation, and repair of high priority facilities that directly enhance the experience of park visitors, including natural, cultural, and historical resource protection projects, within the units of the National Park System and may not be used for land acquisition.
Administrative expenses.--Amounts in the National Parks Trust Fund shall be available to pay the administrative expenses of the Department of the Treasury directly allocable to-- ``(A) modifying the individual income tax return forms to carry out section 6097, ``(B) carrying out this chapter with respect to such Fund, and ``(C) processing amounts received under section 6097 and transferring such amounts to such Fund.
Study.--Not later than 2 years following the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a study of the effects of the program established under the National Parks Trust Fund.
The study shall include information on the amount of money paid into such Fund, the projects that were undertaken with funds from such Fund, and any other information that the Secretary deems useful in evaluating the program's effectiveness.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
National Parks Trust Fund.''