ADJUSTMENTS OF DISCRETIONARY SPENDING LIMITS.
Adjustments.--The Director shall reduce the discretionary spending limit for new budget authority for a fiscal year set forth in section 601(a)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, as adjusted in strict conformance with section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, by the net aggregate amount for that fiscal year in all deficit reduction line items set forth in each appropriation bill or rescission bill.
The Director shall reduce the adjusted discretionary spending limit for outlays for that fiscal year and each outyear as set forth in such section 601(a)(2) as a result of the reduction of such budget authority, based upon the spendout rates applicable to the discretionary spending programs to which the deficit reduction line items apply.
Reductions (if any) shall occur on the day that each such appropriation bill is enacted into law.
For purposes of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, amounts in deficit reduction line items and outlay reductions associated with them shall be taken into account only to make the adjustments specified in this subsection.
For purposes of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, amounts in deficit reduction line items and outlay reductions associated with them shall be considered budget authority and outlays.
For all other purposes, including subchapter I of chapter 15 of title 31, United States Code (popularly known as the Anti-Deficiency Act), the amount in deficit reduction line items shall not be considered to provide authority to enter into obligations.
Whenever the Director makes any adjustment required by this subsection, he shall notify the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the President on the day such adjustment is made.
Definition.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``appropriation bill'' means any general or supplemental appropriation bill; (2) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; and (3) the term ``rescission bill'' means any bill which rescinds budget authority, including a bill referred to by section 1012 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974.
DEFICIT REDUCTION LINE ITEMS IN APPROPRIATION MEASURES AND IN RESCISSION BILLS.
Deficit Reduction Line Items.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``deficit reduction line items in appropriation bills and rescission bills ``Sec.
Whenever the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives reports an appropriation bill or a rescission bill, that bill may contain provisions entitled `Deficit Reduction Line Item', comprised solely of an amount of deficit reduction associated with a reduction in a specified discretionary appropriation.
(1) Any amendment offered in the Committee on Appropriations (or any subcommittee thereof) of either House of Congress or in either House of Congress to an appropriation bill or rescission bill to reduce a particular appropriation for a discretionary spending program may include a provision designating an amount (not to exceed the amount of the reduction) for a deficit reduction line item associated with that appropriation.
Any amendment offered in the Committee on Appropriations (or any subcommittee thereof) of either House of Congress or in either House of Congress to an appropriation bill or rescisison bill to increase a particular appropriation or reduce a rescission for a discretionary spending program may include a provision designating an amount (not to exceed the amount of the increase in the appropriation or reduction in the rescission) by which the amount for one or more specified deficit reduction line items is to be reduced (but the resulting amount may not be less than zero), notwithstanding that any such deficit reduction line item has been changed by an amendment.
No amendment establishing or increasing the amount for a deficit reduction line item shall be in order in the House of Representatives or Senate unless it is printed in the Congressional Record at least one day before it is offered.
It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or in the Senate to offer an amendment establishing or increasing the amount for a deficit reduction line item unless the amendment reduces an appropriation for a discretionary spending program associated with that line item by at least an equivalent amount.
It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider a conference report proposing an amendment to a deficit reduction line item respecting a particular discretionary spending program that is beyond the scope of that deficit reduction line item as so committed to the conference committee.
As used in this section-- ``(1) the term `appropriation bill' means any general or supplemental appropriation bill; and ``(2) the term `rescission bill' means any bill which rescinds budget authority, including a bill referred to by section 1012.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 313 the following new item: ``Sec.
Deficit reduction line items in appropriation bills.