This Act may be cited as the ``Sensible Advertising and Family Education Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Alcohol is by far the drug most widely used and abused by young people in the United States today, even though it is illegal for youths under the age of 21 to purchase alcohol in all 50 of the States and the District of Columbia.
According to the National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, an estimated 18,000,000 persons in the United States who are 18 or older currently experience problems as a result of alcohol use.
An estimated 4,500,000 young people are dependent on alcohol or are problem drinkers.
According to the 1995 National Institute on Drug Abuse survey of high school students and young adults (entitled ``Monitoring the Future''), 80 percent of high school seniors, 71 percent of tenth graders, and 56 percent of eighth graders had used alcohol at least once.
Twenty-eight percent of high school seniors, 24 percent of tenth graders, and 15 percent of eighth graders had experienced a ``binge'' of 5 or more drinks in a row within the past 2 weeks.
Among college students, 88 percent reported having used alcohol and 40 percent reported occasions of binge drinking, including 31 percent of the females and 52 percent of the males.
The average age at which young people begin drinking is 13.
By age 13, approximately 30 percent of boys and 22 percent of girls classify themselves as drinkers.
According to the 1995 ``Monitoring the Future'' survey, 14 percent of high school seniors reported having been drunk by eighth grade, 30 percent by ninth grade, 43 percent by tenth grade, and 60 percent by twelfth grade.
Studies demonstrate that the use of alcohol before the age of 15 appears to be one of the predictors of later heavy alcohol and other drug use.
According to a national survey on youth and alcohol (Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, 1991), the average binge drinker is a 16 year-old male in the tenth grade who was 12 years old when he took his first drink.
Young people are not well informed about the hazards of alcohol use.
More than one quarter of high school seniors do not view taking one or two drinks nearly every day as entailing great risk.
Approximately 45 percent of eighth graders, 47 percent of tenth graders, and 53 percent of twelfth graders do not perceive having 5 or more drinks once or twice a weekend as entailing a great risk (1995 ``Monitoring the Future'' survey).
More than 2.6 million students do not know a person can die from an overdose of alcohol.
A projected 259,000 students think that wine coolers or beer cannot get a person drunk, make a person sick, or do as much harm as other alcoholic beverages (Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services, 1991).
According to Healthy People 2000, the National Health Promotion and Disease Prevention Objectives-- (A) nearly one-half of all deaths from motor vehicle crashes are alcohol-related; (B) alcohol is implicated in nearly one-half of all fatal intentional injuries such as suicides and homicides; and (C) victims are intoxicated in approximately one- third of all homicides, drownings, and boating deaths.
An estimated 25 percent of all hospitalized persons have alcohol-related problems.
Alcohol in combination with other drugs is the leading cause of emergency room drug abuse episodes.
In 1995, chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis, was the 11th leading cause of death in the United States.
Of 41,000 deaths attributed to liver disease in the United States, 46 percent diagnostically were associated with alcohol.
Heavy alcohol use is considered the most important risk factor for chronic liver disease.
Even among liver disease deaths not coded as alcohol-related, approximately 50 percent are thought to be due to alcohol use.
Between 5 and 24 percent of hypertension cases are associated with alcohol.
Many cases diagnosed as essential hypertension (high blood pressure having no known causes) may actually have chronic alcohol ingestion as their cause.
Alcohol abuse is strongly associated with increased risk of cancer, especially cancer of the liver, esophagus, nasopharynx, and larynx.
Alcohol is also associated with dietary deficiency that may increase cancer risk.
Treatment costs for fetal alcohol syndrome (referred to in this paragraph as ``FAS'') and other alcohol-related birth defects in the United States are estimated at nearly a third of a billion dollars.
FAS is one of the top 3 known causes of birth defects with accompanying mental retardation and the only known preventable cause among the top three.
Among children born to women who drink heavily, the incidence of FAS may be as high as 25 per 1,000 live births.
Among children born to other women, the FAS incidence is between 1 to 3 infants with the syndrome per 1,000 live births.
The incidence of other alcohol-related birth defects is estimated to be 3 times greater than that of FAS.
The alcoholic-beverage industry spends approximately $2,000,000,000 each year on advertising and promotions in the United States.
Alcohol advertising, especially in the broadcast media, represents the single greatest source of alcohol education for persons in the United States.
According to a 1990 study of 10 to 13 year- olds, funded by the American Automobile Association Foundation for Traffic Safety, there is a relationship between exposure and attention by an individual to beer advertising and expectations that the individual drink as an adult.
A major 1981 federally funded study found a significant relationship between-- (A) exposure of individuals to alcoholic-beverage advertising as youth; and (B) drinking behaviors and attitudes of the individuals that can lead to certain forms of problem drinking.
According to the Department of Health and Human Services, sponsorships and promotions on college campuses by alcohol producers and the use of celebrities and youth-oriented musical groups in advertising create a pro-drinking environment.
Over 80 percent of 2,000 adults surveyed in 1988 for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms by the Opinion Research Corporation believe that alcohol advertising influences underage youth to drink alcoholic beverages.
The survey also found that the general public feels that the young people of the United States constitute the group that is most at risk from drinking alcoholic beverages.
The 1988 Surgeon General's Workshop on Drunk Driving has recommended-- (A) that the level of alcoholic-beverage advertising be matched with an equal number of pro- health and pro-safety messages; and (B) the inclusion of health warning messages in all alcohol advertising.
The National Commission on Drug-Free Schools' September 1990 Final Report, ``Toward a Drug-Free Generation: A Nation's Responsibility'' recommends that Congress-- (A) require additional health and safety messages on all alcohol products and advertising for the products; and (B) consider enacting a ban on advertising and promotion of alcohol if alcohol advertising still targets youth and glamorizes alcohol use two years following the publication of the report.
Over two-thirds of persons surveyed in a 1989 Wall Street Journal poll favor requiring warnings about the dangers of drinking both on alcoholic-beverage containers and in alcohol advertisements.
Nearly three- fourths of persons surveyed in a 1990 Gallup Poll favor requiring health warning messages in alcohol advertising.
In General.--On and after the expiration of the 6-month period following the date of enactment of this Act, it shall be an unfair or deceptive act or practice under section 6 of the Federal Trade Commission Act for any person to-- (1) advertise or cause to be advertised through magazines, newspapers, brochures, and promotional displays within the United States any alcoholic beverage unless the advertising bears, in accordance with requirements of section 3(a), one of the following health warnings: SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: If you are pregnant, don't drink.
Drinking alcohol during pregnancy may cause mental retardation and other birth defects.
Avoid alcohol during pregnancy.
If you are pregnant and can't stop drinking, call [insert appropriate toll free number].
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Alcohol is a drug and may be addictive.
If you know someone who has an alcohol or other drug problem or has trouble controlling their drinking, call [insert appropriate toll free number].
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Drive sober.
If you don't, you could lose your driver's license or even your life.
Alcohol impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery.
If you or people you love drink and drive, call [insert appropriate toll free number].
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Don't mix alcohol with over- the-counter, prescription, or illicit drugs.
For more information call [insert appropriate toll free number].
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: If you drink too much alcohol too fast, you can die.
You can be poisoned by alcohol if you drink [insert number of drinks] in [insert time].
To find out more about alcohol poisoning call [insert appropriate toll free number].
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Drinking increases your risks of high blood pressure, liver disease, and cancer.
The more you drink, the more likely it is that you will have such health problems.
To find out how to prevent getting such health problems call [insert appropriate toll free number]., or (2) advertise or cause to be advertised through radio, television broadcasting (including cable broadcasting and paid per view or subscription television), or other electronic means any alcoholic beverage unless the advertising includes, in accordance with requirements of section 3(b), one of the following health warnings: SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: If you are pregnant, don't drink alcohol.
Alcohol may cause mental retardation and other birth defects.
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Alcohol is a drug and may be addictive.
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Drive sober.
If you don't, you could lose your driver's license or even your life.
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Don't mix alcohol with over- the-counter, prescription, or illicit drugs.
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: If you drink too much alcohol too fast, you can die of alcohol poisoning.
SURGEON GENERAL'S WARNING: Drinking too much alcohol increases your risk of high blood pressure, liver disease, and cancer.
Toll Free Numbers.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall be responsible for establishing and maintaining the toll free numbers referred to in the health warnings required by subsection (a)(1).
The Secretary shall report to Congress annually on the number of calls received using those numbers.
In General.--The health warnings required for alcoholic beverage advertisements by section 3(a)(1) shall-- (1) be located in a conspicuous and prominent place on each such advertisement, as determined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in regulations to take effect no later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, (2) shall require that all the regulations issued by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall require that all letters in such health warnings appear in conspicuous and legible type that is not script or italic and that such health warnings be in contrast by typography, layout, and color with all other printed material in the advertisement, be surrounded by typographic lines that form a box, and, on an appropriate visual medium, appear on the front of an advertisement as indicated by labeling of the manufacturer or importer, and (3) be rotated in an alternating sequence on each advertisement of a brand style in accordance with a plan submitted by such manufacturer or importer to the Secretary.
The Secretary shall approve a plan submitted under paragraph (3) by a manufacturer or importer that assures that each sequence of the same or substantially similar advertisement for a brand style has displayed upon it an equal distribution of each health warning at the same time.
If an application is approved by the Secretary, the rotation shall apply with respect to the applicant during the one-year period beginning on the date of the application approval.
Radio and Television.-- (1) Warnings.--The health warnings required for alcoholic beverage advertisements placed on radio or television broadcasting by section 2(a)(2) shall-- (A) be included in a conspicuous and prominent manner in such advertisement, as determined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in regulations to take effect not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and (B) be rotated in an alternating sequence on each such advertisement of a brand style in accordance with a plan submitted by such manufacturer or importer to the Secretary.
The Secretary shall approve a plan submitted under subparagraph (B) by a manufacturer or importer that assures that an equal distribution of each of the health warnings is displayed on each sequence of the same or substantially similar advertisement for a brand style at the same time.
If an application is approved by the Secretary, the rotation shall apply with respect to the applicant during the one-year period beginning on the date of the application approval.
Regulations.--The regulations issued by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall require-- (A) that such health warnings be read as part of an alcoholic beverage advertisement in an audible and deliberate manner and in a length of time that allows for a clear understanding of the health warning message by the intended audience, and (B) that for television a graphic representation of such health warning be included after each advertisement, that all letters in such health warning appear in conspicuous and legible type that is not script or italic, that such health warning be surrounded by typographic lines that form a box, and that such health warning appear in the same length of time simultaneously with the reading of the message required by subparagraph (A).
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``alcoholic beverage'' includes any beverage in liquid form which contains not less than one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume and is intended for human consumption, (2) the term ``person'' includes a State, a State agency, or an officer or employee of a State or State agency, and (3) the term ``State'' includes-- (A) any political subdivision of a State, (B) the District of Columbia, (C) the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, (D) the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, (E) Guam, (F) the Virgin Islands, (G) American Samoa, (H) Wake Island, (I) the Midway Islands, (J) Kingman Reef, and (K) Johnston Island.
Investigation.--Not earlier than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct an appropriate investigation and consult with the Surgeon General to determine whether available scientific information would justify a change in, an addition to, or deletion of, a health warning set forth in section 3.
Report.--If the Secretary of Health and Human Services finds that available scientific information would justify the change, addition, or deletion described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall promptly submit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress containing-- (1) the information; and (2) specific recommendations for such amendments to this Act as the Secretary determines to be appropriate and in the public interest.