This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Violence-Related Injury Reduction Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Domestic violence and sexual assault represent serious threats to the health and well-being of millions of women in the United States.
Violence against women has serious health consequences for its victims, including fatality, severe trauma, repeated physical injuries, and chronic stress-related disorder.
Violence against women has serious mental health consequences for its victims, including substance abuse, severe psychological trauma, and suicide.
Approximately 4,000,000 women in the United States are victims of domestic violence each year.
One of two women is a victim of domestic violence or sexual assault during her lifetime.
Battering is the leading cause of injury to women.
It has been estimated that 1 in 6 pregnant women are battered, resulting in increased rates of miscarriage, stillbirths, and low-birthweight babies.
Domestic violence may account for as much as one-third of emergency-room visits by women, an annual total of approximately 28,700 such visits.
Estimates based on the National Crime Survey provide that domestic violence accounts for 21,000 hospitalizations, 99,800 days of hospitalization, and 39,900 visits to a physician each year.
Fewer than 5 percent of injured women are correctly diagnosed by medical personnel as being victims of domestic violence.
Hospitals and clinics do not have a uniform set of protocols for the identification and referral of victims of domestic violence and sexual assault, or for the training of health care professionals to perform such functions.
A national surveillance system for monitoring the health effects of domestic violence and sexual assault should be established to determine the nature and extent of such violence and assault in the United States.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CERTAIN HEALTH PROGRAMS REGARDING DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes), as amended by section 308 of Public Law 102-531 (106 United States Statutes at Large 3495), is amended by inserting after section 317D the following section: ``health programs regarding domestic violence and sexual assault ``Sec.
Demonstration Projects for Identification and Referrals of Victims.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out demonstration projects in which health care providers, in providing such care-- ``(A) identify individuals whose medical condition or statements indicate that the individuals are victims of domestic violence or sexual assault; and ``(B) refer the individuals to entities that provide services regarding such violence and assault, including referrals for counseling, housing (including temporary housing), legal services, and services of community organizations.
Training.--The Secretary may authorize grantees under paragraph (1) to expend the grants to train health care providers to carry out the activities described in such paragraph.
Protocols for identification, referrals, and training.--The Secretary may make a grant under paragraph (1) only if the applicant for the grant agrees that the demonstration project involved will not begin operation until the Secretary approves for the project protocols for identifying and referring victims, and training health care providers, for purposes of such paragraph.
The Secretary may authorize grantees under such paragraph to expend the grants to develop such protocols.
Consultation with relevant entities.--The Secretary may make a grant under paragraph (1) only if the applicant involved has, in developing the proposal of the applicant for a demonstration project under such paragraph, consulted with public and nonprofit private entities that, in the geographic area in which the project is to be carried out, provide services regarding domestic violence or sexual assault.
Reports.--The Secretary may make a grant under paragraph (1) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to submit to the Secretary a report describing the activities of the project under such paragraph for the fiscal year for which the grant is made.
Public Education.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry out a program to educate health care providers and the public on the consequences to the public health of domestic violence and sexual assault.
Epidemiological Research.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall provide for the conduct of epidemiological research on domestic violence and sexual assault.
In providing for such research, the Secretary shall ensure that, with respect to such violence and assault, data is collected on-- ``(A) the incidence of cases and the effect of the cases on the costs of health care in the United States; ``(B) the type and severity of injuries sustained and the type and severity of any other resulting health conditions; ``(C) the extent to which victims seek treatment, including a comparison of the incidence of cases with the incidence of seeking treatment; ``(D) a description of common circumstances influencing victims not to seek treatment; ``(E) the types of medical facilities and health care providers from which victims seek treatment; and ``(F) the demographic characteristics of the individuals from whom data described in subparagraphs (A) through (E) is collected.
National system.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Secretary shall cooperate with the States for the purpose of establishing, to the extent practicable, a national system for the collection of data regarding domestic violence and sexual assault.
Confidentiality.--Standards of confidentiality under section 308(d) shall apply to data collected under paragraph (1) to the same extent and in the same manner as such section applies to information obtained under section 304, 306, or 307.
Report.--Not later than February 1, 1996, and every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report summarizing the data collected under paragraph (1) for the preceding 2 years.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1997.
Allocation for demonstration projects.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make available not less than 60 percent for grants under subsection (a).