PLACEMENT PROGRAM FOR SEPARATED MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES IN EMPLOYMENT POSITIONS WITH LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Placement Program With Law Enforcement Agencies.--(1) Chapter 58 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Placement program for separated members to obtain employment with law enforcement agencies ``(a) Placement Program.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a placement program to assist eligible members of the armed forces to obtain employment by State and local law enforcement agencies upon their discharge or release from active duty.
Eligible Members.--A member of the armed forces shall be eligible for selection to participate in the placement program if the member-- ``(1) is involuntary separated (as described in section 1141 of this title), is approved for separation under section 1174a or 1175 of this title, or is given early retirement under section 4403 of the Defense Conversion, Reinvestment, and Transition Assistance Act of 1992 (division D of Public Law 102-484; 10 United States Code 1293 note) during the four-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section; ``(2) has a military occupational specialty, training, or experience related to law enforcement, such as service as a member of the military police; and ``(3) satisfies such other criteria for selection as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe.
Selection of Participants.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall select members to participate in the placement program on the basis of applications submitted to the Secretary before the date of the discharge or release of the members from active duty or as soon after such date as the Secretary may prescribe.
An application shall be in such form and contain such information as the Secretary may require.
The Secretary may not select a member to participate in the placement program unless the Secretary has sufficient appropriations for the placement program available at the time of the selection to satisfy the obligations to be incurred by the United States under this section with respect to that member.
Agreements With Law Enforcement Agencies.--(1) The Secretary of Defense may enter into an agreement with a State or local law enforcement agencies to facilitate the placement of participants in law enforcement employment positions if the law enforcement agency agrees-- ``(A) to select a participant in the placement program to receive training as a law enforcement officer; ``(B) to offer the participant full-time employment with the law enforcement agency as a law enforcement officer for a period of at least three years; and ``(C) to treat the participant so employed in the same manner (except with regard to tenure upon the completion of the required employment period) as any other law enforcement officer employed by the agency for purposes of determining seniority, duty assignments, and eligibility for benefits.
Under an agreement referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall agree to pay to the law enforcement agency for the first three years of employment of the participant an amount equal to 100 percent of the basic salary paid (not to exceed $45,000 per year) by the law enforcement agency to the participant as a law enforcement officer.
Payments required under paragraph (2) shall be made by the Secretary in quarterly installments in advance.
If the participant leaves the employment of the law enforcement agency before the end of the period covered by an advance payment, the law enforcement agency shall reimburse the Secretary for any portion of the advance payment that remains unpaid to the participant.
The Secretary may not enter into an agreement under this subsection with a law enforcement agency (and shall terminate any agreement so entered) if the Secretary determines that the agency-- ``(A) terminated the employment of another law enforcement officer in order to fill the vacancy so created with a participant in the placement program; or ``(B) seeks a participant in the placement program so as to avoid filling an existing employment vacancy with the agency.
The Secretary shall disseminate information and applications regarding the placement program to State and local law enforcement agencies eligible to enter into agreements under this subsection and may provide technical assistance to agencies seeking to enter into such an agreement.
Priority Given to High Crime Areas.--In entering into agreements with law enforcement agencies under subsection (d), the Secretary of Defense shall give priority to those law enforcement agencies performing law enforcement functions in high crime areas, as identified by the Attorney General.
Model Placement Agreements.--The Secretary of Defense shall endeavor to enter into agreements under subsection (d) with law enforcement agencies performing law enforcement functions in Atlanta, Georgia, Chicago, Illinois, Los Angeles, California, and New York, New York, for the placement of participants as law enforcement officers in these four cities.
To the extent participants in the placement program are available for placement with law enforcement agencies operating in these cities, the Secretary shall reserve 10 percent of the placements during each fiscal year for these cities.
Placements made under the authority of this subsection shall be in addition to any placements made under the placement program in these cities pursuant to the State allocation made under subsection (g).
Number of Participants per State.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the number of participants in the placement program who are placed in law enforcement employment positions in a particular State during a fiscal year may not exceed the number that-- ``(A) bears the same ratio to the total number of participants placed in law enforcement employment positions in that year (not counting participants placed under a model agreement under subsection (f)); as ``(B) the population of that State bears to the total population of all the States.
The Secretary of Defense may vary the placement ratios determined for States under paragraph (1) if the Secretary is unable to enter into a sufficient number of agreements under subsection (d) with law enforcement agencies in all States to permit compliance with the ratios.
Information Regarding Placement Program.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide information regarding the placement program to members of the armed forces as part of preseparation counseling provided under section 1142 of this title.
The information provided shall include an up-to-date list of all law enforcement agencies with which the Secretary has entered into agreements under subsection (d).
Special Eligibility of Certain Persons Already Separated.--A member of the armed forces described in subsection (b) who was involuntary separated (as described in section 1141 of this title), approved for separation under section 1174a or 1175 of this title, or given early retirement under section 4403 of the Defense Conversion, Reinvestment, and Transition Assistance Act of 1992 (division D of Public Law 102-484; 10 United States Code 1293 note) during the period beginning on October 1, 1990, and ending on the date of the enactment of this section may be selected to participate in the placement program if the member is otherwise eligible to participate.
Any selections made pursuant to this subsection shall be made not later than October 1, 1994.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `State' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Palau, and the Virgin Islands.
The term `law enforcement officer' means an individual involved in crime and juvenile delinquency control or reduction, or enforcement of the laws, including police, corrections, probation, parole, and judicial officers.
The term `placement program' means the placement program required to be established under this section.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``1152.
Placement program for separated members to obtain employment with law enforcement agencies.''.
Attorney General Report.--Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit to Congress a report evaluating the impact, if any, that the law enforcement placement program required by section 1152 of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), has had on reducing the incidence of crime in the United States.