EXCLUSION FROM INCOME OF EMPLOYER HOMEOWNERSHIP ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by inserting after section 139 the following new section: ``SEC.
Exclusion From Gross Income.-- ``(1) In general.--Gross income of an eligible employee does not include amounts paid or incurred by the employer of such employee for homeownership assistance provided to the employee if the assistance is furnished pursuant to a homeownership assistance program described in subsection (b).
Maximum exclusion.--The amount which may be excluded under paragraph (1) for homeownership assistance with respect to an eligible employee shall not exceed an amount equal to 10 percent of the maximum principal obligation for a mortgage insured under section 203 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1709) (as determined in accordance with subsection (b) of such section) with respect to the residence purchased.
Homeownership Assistance Program.--For purposes of this section, a homeownership assistance program is a separate written plan of an employer for the exclusive benefit of all employees-- ``(1) under which the employer provides employees with homeownership assistance, and ``(2) which meets the requirements of paragraphs (2) through (6) of section 127(b).
Definitions; Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible employee.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible employee' means an employee-- ``(i) with an adjusted gross income for the taxable year before the year in which the homeownership assistance is received which does not exceed-- ``(I) in the case of an individual described in subsection (c) or (d) of section 1, $40,000, ``(II) in the case of an individual described in section 1(b), $50,000, and ``(III) in the case of an individual described in section 1(a), $80,000, and ``(ii) who is a first-time homebuyer.
Cost-of-living adjustment.-- ``(i) In general.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 2003, each dollar amount under subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(I) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(II) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, determined by substituting `calendar year 2002' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Rounding rule.--If any amount after adjustment under clause (i) is not a multiple of $1,000, such amount shall be rounded to the next lower multiple of $1,000.
First-time homebuyer.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `first-time homebuyer' means any individual if such individual (and if married, such individual's spouse) had no present ownership in a principal residence located in the local area during the 2-year period ending on the date of the purchase of the principal residence to which this section applies.
One-time only.--If an individual is treated as a first-time homebuyer with respect to any principal residence, such individual may not be treated as a first-time homebuyer with respect to any other principal residence.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 121, except such term shall not include a residence with a purchase price in excess of an amount equal to 90 percent of the maximum principal obligation for a mortgage insured under section 203 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1709) (as determined in accordance with subsection (b) of such section) with respect to the residence.
Homeownership assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `homeownership assistance' means any assistance which is used with respect to a principal residence located in the local area-- ``(i) to pay qualified acquisition costs (as defined in section 72(t)(8)(C)), but only if the payment is made-- ``(I) in the case of acquisition costs, before the close of the 120th day after the day on which such assistance is received, and ``(II) in the case of costs for constructing or reconstructing such residence, before the close of the 30th day after the day on which such construction is complete, or ``(ii) to pay for alterations, repairs, and improvements to such residence, but only if the payment is made before the close of the 120th day after the day on which such residence is purchased.
Financing assistance; discharge of indebtedness.-- ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in regulations, if the assistance provided under any homeownership assistance program consists of providing (or reducing the costs of) financing, such assistance shall be treated as homeownership assistance.
Timing.--If the assistance consists of providing a loan and then discharging all or a portion of the loan upon completion of a required period of service, the assistance shall be treated as provided at the time such loan, or portion of such loan, is discharged.
Local area.--A residence shall be considered to be located in the local area with respect to the employee if such residence is not more than 50 miles from the employee's principal place of work.
For purposes of this paragraph, the distance between two points shall be the shortest of the more commonly traveled routes between such two points.
Employee.--The term `employee' does not include a self-employed individual described in section 401(c)(1).
Test not applicable.--A homeownership assistance program shall not be held or considered to fail to meet any requirements of subsection (b) merely because of utilization rates for the different types of homeownership assistance made available under the program.
Relationship to current law.-- ``(A) Disallowance of excluded amounts as credit or deduction.--No deduction or credit shall be allowed to the employee under any other section of this chapter for any amount excluded from income by reason of this section.
Basis adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if an exclusion is allowed under subsection (a) with respect to a residence, the basis of such residence shall be reduced by the amount of the exclusion.''.
Reporting Requirements.--Subsection (d)(1) of section 6039D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to returns and records with respect to certain fringe benefit plans) is amended by striking ``or 137'' and inserting ``137, or 139''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 139 the following new item: ``139A.
Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code (relating to adjustments to basis) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (27), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (28) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(29) in the case of a residence with respect to which amounts were excluded from income under section 139A, to the extent provided in section 139A(a).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning December 31, 2002.