In General.--Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6941 et sequentes) is amended by adding after section 4010 the following new section: ``SEC.
INTERSTATE TRANSPORTATION AND DISPOSAL OF MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE.
In General.--The Governor of any State may impose a limitation or prohibition on the receipt of out-of-State municipal solid waste by landfills or incinerators in the State.
Any affected local government of a political subdivision in a State may permit landfills or incinerators in the political subdivision to receive out- of-State municipal solid waste notwithstanding any such limitation or prohibition established by the Governor.
In the absence of any such limitation or prohibition imposed by the Governor of a State, any affected local government of any political subdivision in the State may impose a limitation or prohibition on the receipt of out-of-State municipal solid waste by landfills or incinerators in that political subdivision.
Waste Not Covered.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any of the following kinds of solid waste: ``(1) Any solid waste identified or listed as a hazardous waste under section 3001.
Any solid waste, including contaminated soil and debris, resulting from-- ``(A) a response action taken under section 104 or 106 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 United States Code 9604 or 9606), ``(B) a response action taken under a State law with authorities comparable to the authorities of section 104 or 106, or ``(C) a corrective action taken under this Act.
Recyclable materials that have been separated, at the source of the waste, from waste otherwise destined for disposal or that have been managed separately from waste destined for disposal.
Materials and products returned from a dispenser or distributor to the manufacturer or an agent of the manufacturer for credit, evaluation, and possible reuse.
Any solid waste that is-- ``(A) generated by an industrial facility; and ``(B) transported for the purpose of treatment, storage, or disposal to a facility that is owned or operated by the generator of the waste, or is located on property owned by the generator of a company with which the generator is affiliated.
Any medical waste that is segregated from or not mixed with other solid waste.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Affected local government.--For any landfill or incinerator, the term `affected local government' shall mean the public body authorized by State law to plan for the management of municipal solid waste, a majority of the members of which are elected officials, for the area in which the landfill or incinerator is located or proposed to be located, unless there is no such public body.
If there is no such body, such term shall mean the elected officials of the city, town, township, borough, county, or parish exercising primary responsibility for the use of land on which the facility is located or proposed to be located.
Municipal solid waste.--The term `municipal solid waste' means all waste materials discarded for disposal by households, including single and multifamily residences, and hotels and motels.
The term also includes each of the following: ``(A) Waste materials generated by commercial, institutional, and industrial sources.
Debris resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition of structures other than debris that is not otherwise commingled with other municipal solid waste and has been determined by the generator, to be contaminated.
For purposes of determining whether any such debris is contaminated, the generator shall conduct representative sampling and analysis of such debris, the results of which shall be submitted to the affected local government for record keeping purposes only, unless not required by the affected local government.
Any such debris that has been determined to be contaminated shall be disposed of in a landfill that meets, at a minimum, the requirements of this subtitle.
Out-of-state municipal solid waste.--The term `out- of-State municipal solid waste', means, with respect to any State, municipal solid waste generated outside of the State.
The term includes municipal solid waste generated outside of the United States.
Table of Contents Amendment.--The table of contents of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code prec.
6901) is amended by adding after the item relating to section 4010 the following new item: ``Sec.
Interstate transportation and disposal of municipal solid waste.