TEACHING CHILDREN TO SAVE LIVES.
Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8001 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part L as part M; and (2) by inserting after part K the following: ``PART L--TEACHING CHILDREN TO SAVE LIVES ``SEC.
``This part may be cited as the `Teaching Children To Save Lives Act'.
``The Congress finds the following: ``(1) Teaching school children to perform the life-saving skill of cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR), to identify and respond to choking victims, and to recognize the signs of stroke can improve their confidence in responding to an emergency and can encourage continued efforts to update these skills after graduation, thereby potentially reducing the rate of death from sudden cardiac arrest, choking and stroke.
Heart disease is the leading cause of death in the United States.
220,000 Americans die each year of sudden cardiac arrest.
The American Heart Association estimates that the lives of 50,000 cardiac arrest victims could be saved each year through initiating a course of action known as the `chain of survival'.
The chain of survival includes prompt notification of emergency services and early CPR, defibrillation, and advanced cardiac life support.
An important part of United States school children's education is learning healthy behaviors, including proper nutrition and physical activity.
This health education should also include basic emergency life-saving skills.
Incorporating these lifesaving training programs into the health curriculum of elementary and secondary schools will give school children these skills.
GRANTS FOR CPR TRAINING IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to State agencies to enable the State agencies to award grants to local agencies and targeted schools or school districts for cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) training in targeted localities.
Such training shall utilize nationally recognized training courses.
Such grants in conjunction with local efforts shall ensure that training sites have the ability to start up, including funds for instructor training, training in CPR instruction, purchase of printed informational or instructional materials, manikins, automated external defibrillator (AED) training devices, and other equipment.
Community Partnerships.--A State agency shall award grants under this section in a manner that encourages and fosters new and existing community partnerships with and among public and private organizations (such as local educational agencies, nonprofit organizations, public health organizations like the American Heart Association and the American Red Cross, emergency medical service providers, fire and police departments, and parent-teacher associations) to aid in providing CPR training in targeted schools.
Award Basis.--In awarding grants under this section a State agency shall take into consideration-- ``(1) the need for and existence of CPR training programs in targeted schools or communities served by targeted schools; ``(2) geographic barriers to coordinating CPR training programs; and ``(3) options to maximize the use of funds provided under this section.
AED Training Devices.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section for the purchase of an AED training device, a local agency or targeted school shall demonstrate that such agency or school is currently implementing a CPR training program.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) AED.--The term `AED' means automated external defibrillator.
CPR.--The term `CPR' means cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Instructor.--The term `instructor' means a nurse, principal, school counselor, teacher, or other qualified individual who is certified by a nationally recognized program to train individuals in CPR.
Targeted school.--The term `targeted school' means a public elementary school or secondary school that includes students in any of grades 6 through 12.
Regulations.--The Secretary may make rules to carry out this Act.
``The Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report regarding the activities assisted under this Act.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, $30,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004.