EXCLUSION FROM INCOME OF GAIN FROM SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
In General.--Section 121 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
EXCLUSION OF GAIN FROM SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
General Rule.--Gross income does not include gain from the sale or exchange of property if, during the 5-year period ending on the date of the sale or exchange, such property has been owned and used by the taxpayer as his principal residence for periods aggregating 3 years or more.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Property held jointly by husband and wife.--For purposes of this section, if-- ``(A) property is held by a husband and wife as joint tenants, tenants by the entirety, or community property, ``(B) such husband and wife make a joint return under section 6013 for the taxable year of the sale or exchange, and ``(C) one spouse satisfies the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property, then both husband and wife shall be treated as satisfying the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property.
Property of deceased spouse.--For purposes of this section, in the case of an unmarried individual whose spouse is deceased on the date of the sale or exchange of property, if the deceased spouse (during the 5-year period ending on the date of the sale or exchange) satisfied the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property, then such individual shall be treated as satisfying the holding and use requirements of subsection (a) with respect to such property.
Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--For purposes of this section, if the taxpayer holds stock as a tenant-stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in such section), then-- ``(A) the holding requirements of subsection (a) shall be applied to the holding of such stock, and ``(B) the use requirements of subsection (a) shall be applied to the house or apartment which the taxpayer was entitled to occupy as such stockholder.
Involuntary conversions.--For purposes of this section, the destruction, theft, seizure, requisition, or condemnation of property shall be treated as the sale of such property.
Property used in part as principal residence.--In the case of property only a portion of which, during the 5-year period ending on the date of the sale or exchange, has been owned and used by the taxpayer as his principal residence for periods aggregating 3 years or more, this section shall apply with respect to so much of the gain from the sale or exchange of such property as is determined, under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, to be attributable to the portion of the property so owned and used by the taxpayer.
Determination of marital status.--In the case of any sale or exchange, for purposes of this section-- ``(A) the determination of whether an individual is married shall be made as of the date of the sale or exchange; and ``(B) an individual legally separated from his spouse under a decree of divorce or of separate maintenance shall not be considered as married.
Application of section 1033.--In applying section 1033 (relating to involuntary conversions), the amount realized from the sale or exchange of property shall be treated as being the amount determined without regard to this section, reduced by the amount of gain not included in gross income pursuant to an election under this section.
Property acquired after involuntary conversion.--If the basis of the property sold or exchanged is determined (in whole or in part) under subsection (b) of section 1033 (relating to basis of property acquired through involuntary conversion), then the holding and use by the taxpayer of the converted property shall be treated as holding and use by the taxpayer of the property sold or exchanged.
Determination of use during periods of out-of- residence care.--In the case of a taxpayer who-- ``(A) becomes physically or mentally incapable of self-care, and ``(B) owns property and uses such property as the taxpayer's principal residence during the 5-year period described in subsection (a) for periods aggregating at least 1 year, then the taxpayer shall be treated as using such property as the taxpayer's principal residence during any time during such 5-year period in which the taxpayer owns the property and resides in any facility (including a nursing home) licensed by a State or political subdivision to care for an individual in the taxpayer's condition.
Election to Have Section Not Apply.--If the taxpayer so elects with respect to any sale or exchange, this section shall not apply to such sale or exchange.''
Repeal of Nonrecognition of Gain on Rollover of Principal Residence.--Section 1034 of such Code (relating to rollover of gain on sale of principal residence) is hereby repealed.
Clerical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The following provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 are each amended by striking ``section 1034'' and inserting ``section 121'': sections 25(e)(7), 56(e)(1)(A), 56(e)(3)(B)(i), 143(i)(1)(C)(i)(I), 163(h)(4)(A)(i)(I), 280A(d)(4)(A), 464(f)(3)(B)(i), 1033(h)(4), 1274(c)(3)(B), 6334(a)(13), and 7872(f)(11)(A).
Paragraph (4) of section 32(c) of such Code is amended by striking ``(as defined in section 1034(h)(3))'' and by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `extended active duty' means any period of active duty pursuant to a call or order to such duty for a period in excess of 90 days or for an indefinite period.''
Subparagraph (A) of 143(m)(6) of such Code is amended by inserting ``(as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1997)'' after ``1034(e)''.
Subsection (e) of section 216 of such Code is amended by striking ``such exchange qualifies for nonrecognition of gain under section 1034(f)'' and inserting ``such dwelling unit is used as his principal residence (within the meaning of section 121)''.
Section 512(a)(3)(D) of such Code is amended by inserting ``(as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this parenthetical)'' after ``1034''.
Paragraph (7) of section 1016(a) of such Code is amended by inserting ``(as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this parenthetical)'' after ``1034'' and by inserting ``(as so in effect)'' after ``1034(e)''.
Paragraph (3) of section 1033(k) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(3) For exclusion from gross income of gain from involuntary conversion of principal residence, see section 121.''
Subsection (e) of section 1038 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Principal Residences.--If-- ``(1) subsection (a) applies to a reacquisition of real property with respect to the sale of which gain was not recognized under section 121 (relating to gain on sale of principal residence); and ``(2) within 1 year after the date of the reacquisition of such property by the seller, such property is resold by him, then, under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, subsections (b), (c), and (d) of this section shall not apply to the reacquisition of such property and, for purposes of applying section 121, the resale of such property shall be treated as a part of the transaction constituting the original sale of such property.''
Paragraph (7) of section 1223 of such Code is amended by inserting ``(as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of this parenthetical)'' after ``1034''.
Paragraph (7) of section 1250(d) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(7) Disposition of principal residence.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to a disposition of property to the extent used by the taxpayer as his principal residence (within the meaning of section 121, relating to gain on sale of principal residence).''
Subsection (c) of section 6012 of such Code is amended by striking ``(relating to one-time exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence by individual who has attained age 55)'' and inserting ``(relating to gain from sale of principal residence)''.
Paragraph (2) of section 6212(c) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (C) and by redesignating the succeeding subparagraphs accordingly.
Section 6504 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (4) and by redesignating the succeeding paragraphs accordingly.
The item relating to section 121 in the table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence.''
The table of sections for part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 1034.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales and exchanges occurring after __________________.