This Act may be cited as the ``Technology for Excellence in Education Act''.
In General.--The terms used in this Act, unless otherwise specified, shall have the same meaning given to such terms by section 1471 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Additional Definitions.--For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Director'' means the Director of Educational Technology as established in title I of this Act; and (2) the term ``educational technology'' includes closed circuit television systems, public telecommunications entities, cable television, satellite, copper and fiber optic transmission, computer hardware and software, video and audio laser, and CD ROM disc, video and audio tapes, and other technologies related to educational services.
TITLE I--NATIONAL LEADERSHIP FOR EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY SEC.
The purposes of this title are-- (1) to establish a national agenda for the use of technology in education to assist all students in attaining world-class academic standards as a means to increasing academic achievement and learning and reaching the National Education Goals; (2) to assure that all children in the United States start school ready to learn; (3) to increase the high school graduation rate to at least 90 percent; (4) to provide all students the opportunity to demonstrate competency in challenging subject matter in core areas and ensure that all students learn to use their minds well; (5) to increase the mathematics and science achievement of all students; (6) to provide the opportunity for all adult Americans to achieve literacy; (7) to ensure that every school in the United States is free of drugs and violence and will offer a disciplined environment conducive to learning; (8) to coordinate Federal programs--whose support already accounts for 50 percent of all funds used by schools to purchase software, integrated learning systems, and hardware-- that provide for the development, purchase, or use of technology in education, including programs administered by the Department of Education and those administered by other Federal Departments; (9) to develop national standards and guidelines for State and local educational agencies to guide future projects and coordinate existing projects to ensure the compatibility of education-related computer and telecommunications networks on a national level; and (10) to permit funds distributed to the States and localities under existing Federal programs to be used for education-related technology purposes.
DIRECTOR OF EDUCATIONAL TECHNOLOGY.
The Secretary shall appoint a Director of Educational Technology within the Department of Education.
The Director shall be compensated at an annual rate of not less than a level GS-15 employee under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Duties.--The duties of the Director of Educational Technology are-- (1) to provide national leadership regarding the use of technology in education at all levels in achieving the National Education Goals, including-- (A) submission of an annual report to Congress regarding education-related technology use and recommendations for the continuation of current and the development of future uses of technology to achieve the National Education Goals; (B) promotion of the use of technology to achieve the National Education Goals in programs that receive Federal assistance, particularly programs under chapters 1 and 2 of title I and title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; (C) the development of support programs designed to increase the access of all children, particularly disadvantaged children from rural and urban poverty areas, to high-level learning through the use of quality technologies; and (D) the support of research, development, evaluation, and dissemination of educational technologies; (2) to provide a mechanism for coordinating existing Federal programs across agencies to encourage joint funding, planning, and implementation of projects; (3) to provide a mechanism for the development of standards and guidelines for State and local educational agencies in conjunction with industry to ensure the compatibility of educational computer and telecommunications networks on a national level; and (4) to provide support and training programs to educators in the use of technology to help obtain the National Education Goals.
TITLE II--STATE PLANNING GRANTS SEC.
The purposes of this title are-- (1) to ensure that State educational agencies have a clear, long-term strategic plan for incorporating the use of technology in education; and (2) to allow States which have developed a State technology plan to allocate planning funds to local educational agencies to implement strategies developed in such plan.
The Secretary of Education is authorized to provide a one-time competitive grant to State educational agencies 50 percent of which shall be allocated in accordance with the relative amount the State received under chapter 1 of title 1 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 for the preceding fiscal year and 50 percent of which shall be allocated in accordance with the relative amount the State received under part A of chapter 2 of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 for the preceding fiscal year.
State Plans.--A State educational agency which receives a grant under this title shall not later than 1 year after receipt of funds under this title undertake public hearings and complete a comprehensive State plan which includes-- (1) overall strategic goals for the use of technology in education at all levels within the State; (2) a 5-year standards and assessment process to measure progress toward the goals in paragraph (1); (3) a follow-up 10-year standards and assessment process to measure progress toward the goals in paragraph (1); (4) guidelines for local educational agencies for the incorporation of educational technology into institutions of education at all levels; (5) a plan for the dissemination and sharing of information to local educational agencies about innovative and cost- effective uses of educational technology; (6) a plan for training educational personnel in the use of technology in the classroom; (7) a coordination plan providing mechanisms for the use of educational technology to assist existing and future education reform efforts at both the State and local levels; and (8) a plan to leverage public and private support for the funding and provision of educational technology in a cost- effective manner to institutions of education at all levels.
Demonstration Subgrants.--States that have completed the State technology plan under subsection (a) may allocate funds received under this section as competitive subgrants to local educational agencies to implement strategies in such plan following the procedures in title III of this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums for fiscal years 1995-1999 to carry out the purposes of this title.
TITLE III--LOCAL CHALLENGE GRANTS SEC.
The purposes of this title are-- (1) to challenge local communities to incorporate quality, innovative educational technology in their education systems at all levels; and (2) to provide practical models of educational technology as provided for in the goals and guidelines under the State plans required in title II of this Act.
GRANTS TO LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES.
In General.--(1) The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to State educational agencies for the use by local educational agencies of 3-year competitive demonstration grants to implement State technology plans.
Such grants may be awarded only to States which have completed the State technology plan required by title II of this Act.
The Secretary may waive this requirement if a State has a plan in place which meets the criteria established in title II of this Act.
The State shall give priority consideration to demonstration programs that provide access to quality educational technology to disadvantaged urban and rural areas.
The State shall give priority consideration to demonstration programs that may be replicated in other areas throughout the Nation.
Dissemination of Model Programs.--The Secretary shall reserve not more than 5 percent of the funds authorized under this title to allow the Director of Educational Technology to disseminate effective models of the use of high-quality educational technology on a national basis.
Matching Requirement.--(1) The Federal share under this title may not exceed-- (A) 100 percent of the total cost of a program for the first year for which a State receives funds under this title; (B) 85 percent of the total cost of a program for the second year for which a State receives funds under this title; (C) 60 percent of the total cost of a program for the third year for which a State receives funds under this title; (D) 45 percent of the total cost of a program for the fourth year for which a State receives funds under this title; and (E) 33 percent of the total cost of a program for the fifth and any succeeding year for which a State receives funds under this title.
The remaining cost may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, and may be obtained from any source other than funds made available for programs under this title.
There are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary to carry out the projects under this title for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1999.
TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROGRAMS SEC.
The purpose of this title is to make the acquisition, use, and training of educational technology a permissible activity for existing Federal education programs.
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION.
The Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (1) in section 1011(a)(2)-- (A) by inserting ``, including computers, distance learning equipment, software, and other applications of educational technology related to the instructional program'' after ``instructional materials''; and (B) by inserting ``, including training in the use of educational technologies related to the instructional program'' before ``and, as appropriate''.
in section 1054(b), by inserting ``, including the use of educational technology'' after ``instructional programs''; (3) in section 1202(a)(1), by inserting ``which includes educational technology,'' after ``equipment''; (4) in section 1242(a), by inserting ``which includes educational technology,'' after ``equipment''; (5) in section 1531(b)-- (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``computer software and hardware for instructional use'' and inserting ``educational technology related to the improvement of instruction and learning,'' (B) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``, including training in the use of educational technology'' after ``training''; (6) in section 2006(b) by striking subparagraph (C) and inserting the following: ``(C) the purchase of, and training in the use of, educational technology related to the instruction of mathematics and science;''; and (7) in section 2015(e)-- (A) in the heading, by striking ``Computers''; and (B) in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), by striking ``computers'' each place it appears and inserting ``educational technology''.
The Indian Education Act of 1988 is amended in section 5321(c)(1)(A)(iii) by inserting ``, including educational technology'' after ``equipment''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO HEAD START PROGRAMS.
Amendments to the Head Start Act.--The Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831-9852) is amended-- (1) in section 637 by adding at the end the following: ``(12) The term `educational technology' has the meaning given such term in section 2(b) of the Excellence in Education Act.
'', (2) in section 640(a)(2)(C) by inserting ``(including training in the use of educational technology related to educational services)'' after ``training'', (3) in section 641(d)(2) by inserting ``(including educational services that use educational technology)'' after ``services'', and (4) in section 648(d) by inserting ``and educational technology'' after ``electronic media''.
Amendment to the Head Start Transition Project Act.--Section 136(a)(3) of the Head Start Transition Project Act (42 United States Code 9855d(a)(3)) is amended by inserting ``and the use of educational technology related to educational services'' before the semicolon at the end.
Section 235(c)(2) of the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Act is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``and educational technology training'' after ``instructional aids''; and (2) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``, including educational technology training'', after ``inservice training''.
INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES EDUCATION ACT.
State Plans.--Section 613(a)(3)(B)(iii) of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1413(a)(3)(B)(iii)) is amended by striking ``technology.''
and inserting the following: ``technology, including training in the use of educational technology related to the instructional program;''.
Grants for Personnel Training.--Section 631(c) of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1431(c)) is amended by striking ``assistive and instructional technology'' and inserting the following: ``assistive, instructional and other educational technology,''.
Financial Assistance.--Section 661(a) of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1461(a)) is amended in each of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) by striking ``assistive technology,'' each place such term appears and inserting ``assistive technology, educational technology,''.