This Act may be cited as the ``Bison Management Improvement Act of 1995''.
The Congress finds that: (1) The natural resources of Yellowstone National Park are unique to the world, and the free-ranging wildlife found within and adjacent to the park, including bison and elk, are of significant economic, recreational, and esthetic value to the American people.
The livestock industry is vital to the economy, culture, and lifestyle of the Yellowstone area.
The ability of livestock producers in Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho to freely market cattle is jeopardized by uncertainty concerning the application of the Uniform Methods and Rules of the National Brucellosis Eradication Program and by actions of other States.
The containment and eventual elimination of the disease brucellosis in the Yellowstone area is important to the maintenance of State livestock-dependent economies.
Better scientific information is needed regarding the etiology of Brucella abortus in wildlife, the potential for containment and eventual elimination of the disease, and the potential for transmission between wildlife and domestic livestock.
Bison are of significant cultural and spiritual value to Native Americans, and preservation and restoration of buffalo to tribal lands is important.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) provide a comprehensive framework to address plans for the containment and eventual elimination of brucellosis from the Yellowstone area by the year 2010; (2) recognize the cultural, spiritual, and economic value of bison to Native Americans and to promote the restoration of these animals to tribal lands; (3) to support, promote, and coordinate scientific research related to the management necessary to achieve containment and eventual elimination of brucellosis from the Yellowstone area; (4) to provide economic stability to the livestock producers in Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming by establishing criteria and regulatory guidelines for such management; (5) assure that brucellosis related management recommendations and decisions are based on defensible and factual scientific information; and (6) to ensure that Yellowstone wildlife are managed in a manner that allows bison and other ungulates to range across jurisdictional boundaries on public lands in the Yellowstone area.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``Yellowstone area'' means the area consisting of the lands, water, and interests therein within the area generally depicted on the map entitled ``Boundary Map'', numbered , and dated .
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Animal Plant Health Inspection Service, United States Department of Agriculture and the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
The Secretaries may from time to time make minor revisions in the boundary of the natural area to promote management effectiveness and efficiency in the furtherance of this Act.
The term ``brucellosis'' means a disease which causes abortion in cattle and some other ungulates as a result of infection by Brucella abortus.
The term ``Yellowstone Interagency Brucellosis Committee'' means the committee established by States of Wyoming, Idaho, and Montana, and the United States Department of Agriculture and the United States Department of the Interior, signatories to a Memorandum of Understanding.
The term ``surplus bison'' means populations, subpopulations, or individual bison that are located on or may enter on to private property against the wishes of the landowner, come into contract with or intermingle with the lawfully present livestock on public lands, or that have exceeded the numbers allowed under planning documents for discrete geographic areas.
The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior.
YELLOWSTONE BRUCELLOSIS FREE MANAGEMENT AREA.
For the purposes of protecting exceptional wildlife and agricultural values, providing for better management of Yellowstone National Park bison herds, and providing a comprehensive approach to the management, containment, and eventual elimination of brucellosis from the Yellowstone area, there is hereby established the Yellowstone Brucellosis Free Management Area.
This area is defined in section 4 as ``Yellowstone area''.
POWERS AND DUTIES OF SECRETARIES.
Within Yellowstone Brucellosis Free Management Area.--Within the Yellowstone Brucellosis Free Management Area, the Secretaries are authorized and directed to develop joint bison and elk management plans with the respective States of Montana, Wyoming, and Idaho.
Such plans shall provide for temporal and spatial separation of bison from lawfully present cattle on public lands unless the Secretary of Agriculture determines that currently available vaccination programs provide sufficient protection from Brucella abortus and that cattle and bison can be present on the same lands concurrently.
These plans shall allow for the seasonal migration of elk and bison populations.
Transport of Bison to Tribal Lands.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall develop plans and protocols that will allow quarantine of surplus bison and following quarantine transportation of such bison to tribal lands.
Wildlife Populations.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall develop and implement plans in cooperation with the respective States for the elimination of Brucella abortus from the wildlife populations of the Yellowstone area.
Such plans shall recognize the high public value associated with free-ranging ungulate herds.
Use of Yellowstone Interagency Brucellosis Committee.-- Notwithstanding the Federal Advisory Committee Act, the Secretaries may use the Yellowstone Interagency Brucellosis Committee, or any of its subcommittees, to develop the plans and recommendations necessary to achieve the purposes of this Act.
In General.--Based on the best scientific information available, the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized, with the concurrence of the Secretary of the Interior, to prescribe regulations necessary to carry out the purposes and objectives of this Act.
Factors.--In prescribing such regulations, the Secretaries shall give full consideration to all factors which affect the important ecological relationships of wildlife in the Yellowstone area and the need to provide market stability for cattle producers, including but not limited to-- (1) providing reasonable and achievable transportation protocols for the transportation, quarantine, and restoration of bison to Native American lands; (2) the need to provide the States of Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming reasonable assurances regarding their Class-Free Brucellosis Status and reduce any unfair market barriers imposed by other States as a result of free-ranging bison; and (3) provide special rules under the National Brucellosis Eradication Program that preserves the Class-Free Brucellosis Status for Montana, Idaho, and Wyoming outside of the Yellowstone area while recognizing the special needs and considerations within the Yellowstone Brucellosis Free Management Area.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall undertake a program of research through the Agricultural Research Service to understand the etiology of Brucella abortus in wild ungulate populations, brucellosis transmission from wild ungulates to domestic livestock, and to develop safe, effective vaccines and delivery systems that will prevent the transmission of the disease between ungulate species and ultimately eliminate the organism from the Yellowstone area.
Grants and Financial Assistance.--The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior are authorized to make grants, or to provide financial assistance in such other form as they deem appropriate, to any Federal or State agency, public or private institution, or other person for the purpose of assisting such agency, institution, or person to undertake research in subjects which are relevant to the management and elimination of the disease brucellosis from the Yellowstone area.
DISPOSITION OF SURPLUS BISON.
General Authorization.--The Secretaries shall work with the States and Indian tribes in the management and disposition of bison determined by the Secretary of the Interior to be surplus bison.
Facilities.--The Secretaries are authorized to construct temporary or permanent handling, capture, quarantine, or testing facilities on or adjacent to Federal lands.
Such facilities shall be subject to full compliance under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and applicable State laws.
Donation, Sale, or Disposal of Bison.--(1)(A) The Secretary of the Interior is authorized in his discretion under such conditions as he may prescribe to give bison to Federal, State, county, and municipal authorities for zoos, parks, or equivalent public purposes.
The Secretary may provide surplus bison to Native American tribes, tribal cooperatives, or other tribal organizations as he may prescribe.
The transportation costs associated with receiving elk or bison under subparagraph (A) shall be recovered from the benefiting organization.
The Secretary may sell or otherwise dispose of bison under such conditions as he may prescribe and all monies received from the sale of any such surplus bison shall be credited to the appropriation current at the time to offset management costs.
USE AND ACQUISITION OF LANDS.
Within the Yellowstone area, the Secretaries may acquire lands or interest in lands for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, including lands for handling, capturing, testing, quarantining, or transporting.
Acquisition or use is authorized by lease, cooperative agreement, donation, purchase with donated, or appropriated funds.
LIMITATION ON FEDERAL ACTION.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall take no action to downgrade the Class-Free Brucellosis Status of the states of Montana, Wyoming, or Idaho under the rules of the National Brucellosis Eradication Program as long as the Interim Bison Management Plan currently in effect and bison and elk management plans currently under development continue to provide adequate temporary and spatial separation between bison, elk, and livestock.
LIMITATION ON STATE ACTION.
No State shall impose requirements on livestock originating from Montana, Wyoming, or Idaho, that it does not impose on other States that have been designated Brucellosis Class-Free as long as the United States Department of Agriculture brucellosis free designation remains in place.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Funds appropriated for planning or research shall remain available until expended.