This Act may be cited as the ``Hazardous Agent Emergency Uniform Response Act''.
PROTOCOLS FOR UNIFORM NATIONAL RESPONSES TO PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCIES INVOLVING DANGEROUS BIOLOGICAL AGENTS OR DANGEROUS CHEMICALS.
In General.-- (1) Protocols through joint interdepartmental working group.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), in carrying out section 319F(b) of the Public Health Service Act, shall develop protocols for responding to public health emergencies resulting from the release of dangerous biological agents or dangerous chemicals, including the intentional release of such agents or chemicals.
Consultation with states.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall consult with the States, including the chief public health officers and the attorneys general of the States.
Hazardous Agents.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term ``hazardous agents'' means dangerous biological agents and dangerous chemicals.
Dangerous biological agents.--For purposes of this section, the term ``dangerous biological agent'' means a biological agent or toxin that-- (A) is on the list that is in effect pursuant to section 511(d)(1) of the Antiterrorism and Effective Death Penalty Act of 1996; and (B) has not been exempted from the applicability of regulations under section 511(e) of such Act.
Dangerous chemicals.-- (A) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term ``dangerous chemical'' means a chemical listed under subparagraph (B).
List of chemicals.--Not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board under section 112(r)(6) of the Clean Air Act, shall develop a list of chemicals that are considered by the Secretary-- (i) to be substances that are known to cause, or may reasonably be anticipated to cause, death or other serious adverse effects on human health, which substances shall include substances listed under section 112(r)(3) of such Act; and (ii) to be candidates for use by individuals who intend to cause death or other serious adverse effects on human health by intentionally releasing the chemicals.
Agent-Specific Protocols.--A protocol under subsection (a) shall be developed for each hazardous agent.
Such a protocol shall include provisions specific to the hazardous agent involved, unless the Secretary determines that the agent has no unique characteristics relevant to making an adequate response to a public health emergency resulting from the release of the agent.
Priorities; Timeframe.-- (1) Priorities.--Not later than 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall with respect to the development of protocols under subsection (a) establish priorities among hazardous agents.
Timeframe.--Promptly after establishing priorities under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall begin developing a protocol under subsection (a) for the hazardous agent assigned the highest priority.
In developing such protocol, and each other protocol under such subsection, the Secretary shall seek to complete development not later than 45 days after beginning the process of development.
Promptly after completing the development of one protocol, the Secretary shall begin developing another protocol.
Uniformity; Testing; Other Provisions.--The provisions of a protocol under subsection (a) shall include provisions for the following: (1) Ensuring that the protocol is applied uniformly in each public health emergency involving the hazardous agent for which the protocol is developed, subject to factual differences among emergencies.
Coordinating with public and private emergency response personnel, including State and local public health officials, to provide for such uniformity.
Providing medically appropriate information promptly to individuals who are present at buildings or other sites at which the public health emergency involved occurs, including individuals with employment functions at such sites.
Testing and treating affected individuals promptly with respect to such agent.
Decontaminating sites referred to in paragraph (3).
Providing for differences in responding to an emergency according to whether the release of the hazardous agent involved is accidental or intentional.
Such other provisions as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Periodic Review.--The Secretary shall periodically review protocols under subsection (a) and shall revise the protocols as appropriate.
Development Exemptions.--The requirement under subsection (a) to develop a protocol for a hazardous agent does not apply if the Secretary makes a determination that a protocol existing as of the date of the enactment of this Act meets the requirements of this section (which determination is referred to in this section as a ``development exemption'').
Not later than 30 days after such date of enactment, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report providing a list of the hazardous agents for which the Secretary has provided development exemptions.
Such an exemption may not be construed as affecting the applicability of the requirements of review and revision under subsection (f).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Such authorization of appropriations is in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for such purpose.