SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Home Health Care Prospective Payment Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Amendments to the Social Security Act.
Recapturing savings resulting from temporary freeze on payment increases for home health services.
Initial prospective payment for home health services.
Permanent prospective payment for home health services.
Payment based on location where home health service is furnished.
Elimination of periodic interim payments for home health agencies.
Establishment of home health benefit under Part A and transfer of other home health services to Part B. SEC.
AMENDMENTS TO THE SOCIAL SECURITY ACT.
Whenever in this title an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to or repeal of section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the Social Security Act.
RECAPTURING SAVINGS RESULTING FROM TEMPORARY FREEZE ON PAYMENT INCREASES FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Basing Updates to per Visit Cost Limits on Limits for Fiscal Year 1993.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) is amended by adding after subclause (iii) the following: ``(iv) In establishing limits under this subparagraph for cost reporting periods beginning after September 30, 1997, the Secretary shall not take into account any changes in the home health market basket, as determined by the Secretary, with respect to cost reporting periods which began on or after July 1, 1994, and before July 1, 1996.''.
No Exceptions Permitted Based on Amendment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall not consider the amendment made by subsection (a) in making any exemptions and exceptions pursuant to section 1861(v)(1)(L)(ii) of the Social Security Act.
INITIAL PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT SYSTEM FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Reductions in Cost Limits.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(I) (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(I)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``and before October 1, 1997,'' after ``July 1, 1987'' in subclause (III); (2) by striking the period at the end of the matter following subclause (III), and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subclause: ``(IV) October 1, 1997, 105 percent of the median of the labor-related and nonlabor per visit costs for freestanding home health agencies.''.
Delay in Updates.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(iii) (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(iii)) is amended by adding ``, or on or after July 1, 1997, and before October 1, 1997'' after ``July 1, 1996''.
Additions to Predetermined Rates.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) is amended by inserting after clause (iii) the following: ``(iv) Rates for fiscal years 1998 through 1999.--For services furnished by home health agencies for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1997, but before October 1, 1999, the Secretary shall provide for an interim system of rates.
A rate shall be a payment equal to the lower of-- ``(I) cost determined under the preceding provisions of this subparagraph; or ``(II) an agency-specific per beneficiary annual limitation calculated from the agency's 12-month cost reporting period ending on or after January 1, 1993, and on or before December 31, 1993, based on reasonable costs (including nonroutine medical supplies), updated by the home health market basket index.
The per beneficiary limitation shall be multiplied by the agency's unduplicated census count of patients (entitled to benefits under this title) for the year subject to the limitation or such other year determined by the Secretary to be required for the fair and efficient implementation of this section to determine the aggregate agency-specific per beneficiary limitation.
Special rules.--For services furnished by home health agencies for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1997, the following rules apply: ``(I) For new providers and those providers without a 12-month cost reporting period ending in calendar year 1994, the per beneficiary limitation shall be equal to the mean of these limits (or the Secretary's best estimates thereof) applied to home health agencies as determined by the Secretary.
Home health agencies that have altered their corporate structure or name shall not be considered new providers for payment purposes.
For beneficiaries who use services furnished by more than 1 home health agency, the per beneficiary limitations shall be prorated among the agencies.''.
Incentive payments.--Home health agencies whose year end reasonable costs are below the agency's per beneficiary aggregate limit (including costs and utilization) shall receive 50 percent of the difference between the reasonable costs and the aggregate limit.''.
Development of Case Mix System.--The Secretary shall expand research on a prospective payment system for home health agencies that ties prospective payments to a unit of service, including an intensive effort to develop a reliable case mix adjuster that explains a significant amount of the variances in costs.
Submission of Data for Case Mix System.--Effective for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1997, the Secretary may require all home health agencies to submit additional information that the Secretary considers necessary for the development of a reliable case mix system.
PERMANENT PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
Title XVIII (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) is amended by adding after section 1893 the following: ``SEC.
PERMANENT PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT FOR HOME HEALTH SERVICES.
In General.--Notwithstanding section 1861(v), the Secretary, for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1999, shall provide for payments for home health services in accordance with a prospective payment system established by the Secretary.
Elements of System.--Such a system shall include the following: ``(1) Prospective payment amount.--All services covered and paid on a reasonable cost basis under the medicare home health benefit as of the date of the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997, including medical supplies, shall be subject to the prospective payment amount.
In defining a prospective payment amount, the Secretary shall consider an appropriate unit of service and the number of visits provided within that unit, potential changes in the mix of services provided within that unit and their cost, and a general system design that provides for continued access to quality services.
The prospective payment amount shall be based on the most current audited cost report data available to the Secretary or such other year determined by the Secretary to be required for the fair and efficient implementation of this section.
Use of case mix.--The Secretary shall employ an appropriate case mix adjustment that explains a significant amount of the variation in cost.
Annual adjustments.--The prospective payment amount shall be adjusted annually by the home health market basket index.
The labor portion of the prospective payment amount shall be adjusted for geographic differences in labor-related costs based on the most current hospital wage index.
Outliers.--The Secretary may designate a payment provision for outliers, recognizing the need to adjust payments because of unusual variations in the type or amount of medically necessary care.
Proration of prospective payment amounts.--If a beneficiary elects to transfer to, or receive services from, another home health agency within the period covered by the prospective payment amount, the payment shall be prorated between home health agencies.
Savings.--Prior to implementing the permanent prospective system described in subsections (a) and (b) in a budget neutral fashion, the Secretary first shall reduce, up to 15 percent, the rates and per beneficiary limits described in section 1861(v)(1)(L), as those limits are in effect on September 30, 1999, in order to assure the projected scorable savings of this Act.''.
PAYMENT BASED ON LOCATION WHERE HOME HEALTH SERVICE IS FURNISHED.
Conditions of Participation.--Section 1891 (42 United States Code 1395bbb) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Payment on Basis of Location of Service.--A home health agency shall submit claims for payment for home health services under this title only on the basis of the geographic location at which the service is furnished, as determined by the Secretary.''.
Wage Adjustment.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(iii) (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(iii)) is amended by striking ``agency is located'' and inserting ``service is furnished''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1997.
ELIMINATION OF PERIODIC INTERIM PAYMENTS FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES.
In General.--Section 1815(e)(2) (42 United States Code 1395g(e)(2)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C); (2) by striking subparagraph (D); and (3) by redesignating subparagraph (E) as (D).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) apply to payments made on or after the implementation of section 1894 (as added by section 11273 of this Act).
ESTABLISHMENT OF HOME HEALTH BENEFIT UNDER PART A AND TRANSFER OF OTHER HOME HEALTH SERVICES TO PART B.
In General.--Section 1812(a)(3) (42 United States Code 1395d(a)(3)) is amended by inserting ``for up to 100 visits'' before the semicolon.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 1812(b) (42 United States Code 1395d(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (2); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding after paragraph (3) the following: ``(4) home health services furnished to the individual beginning after such services have been furnished to the individual for a total of 100 visits.''.
Clarification of Part-Time or Intermittent Nursing Care.-- Section 1861(m) (42 United States Code 1395x(m)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``For purposes of paragraphs (1) and (4), the term `part-time or intermittent services' means skilled nursing and home health aide services furnished any number of days per week as long as they are furnished (combined) less than 8 hours each day and 28 or fewer hours each week (or, subject to review on a case-by-case basis as to the need for care, less than 8 hours each day and 35 or fewer hours per week).
For purposes of sections 1814(a)(2)(C) and 1835(a)(2)(A), `intermittent' means skilled nursing care that is either provided or needed on fewer than 7 days each week, or less than 8 hours of each day of skilled nursing and home health aide services combined for periods of 21 days or less (with extensions in exceptional circumstances when the need for additional care is finite and predictable).''.
Payments Under Part B.--Subparagraph (A) of section 1833(a)(2) (42 United States Code 1395l(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) with respect to home health services (other than a covered osteoporosis drug (as defined in section 1861(kk)), and to items and services described in section 1861(s)(10)(A), the amounts determined under section 1861(v)(1)(L) or section 1893, or, if the services are furnished by a public provider or services, or by another provider which demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that a significant portion of its patients are low-income (and requests that payment be made under this provision), free of charge, or at nominal charges to the public, the amount determined in accordance with section 1814(b)(2);''.
Exclusion of Additional Part B Costs From Determination of Part B Monthly Premium.--Section 1839(a) (42 United States Code 1395r(a)) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of paragraph (3) (as amended by section 11301(a) of this Act), by inserting ``(except as provided in paragraph (5))'' before the period; and (2) by adding after paragraph (4) the following: ``(5) Exclusion of home health costs.--In estimating (for purposes of determining the monthly premium rate under paragraph (3)) the benefits and administrative costs which will be payable from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund for a year, the Secretary shall exclude an estimate of any benefits and administrative costs attributable to home health services for which payment would have been made under part A during the year but for paragraph (4) of section 1812(b).''.
Definition of Homebound.--Section 1814(a) (42 United States Code 1395f(a)) and section 1835(a) (42 United States Code 1395n(a)) are each amended by adding the following at the end: ``With respect to the previous two sentences, the individual must have a condition due to an illness or injury that restricts the individual's ability to leave the home for more than an average of 16 hours per calendar month for purposes other than to receive medical treatment that cannot be provided in the home; infrequent means an average of 5 or fewer absences per calendar month, excluding absences to receive medical treatment that cannot be furnished in the home; short duration means an absence from the home of 3 or fewer hours, on average per absence, within a calendar month excluding absences to receive medical treatment that cannot be furnished in the home; and medical treatment means services that are furnished by the physician or furnished based on and in conformance with the physician's order, by or under the supervision of a licensed health professional, and for the purpose of diagnosis or treatment of an illness or injury.''.
Normative Standards for Home Health Claims Denials.--Section 1862(a)(1) (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(1)) (as amended by section 11243(b)(2)(A) of this Act) is further amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (F); (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by adding the following after subparagraph (G): ``(H) the frequency and duration of home health services which are in excess of normative guidelines that the Secretary shall establish by regulation;''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section apply to services furnished on or after October 1, 1997.
Special rule.--If an individual is entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes), but is not enrolled in the insurance program established by part B of that title, the individual also shall be entitled under part A of that title to home health services that are not posthospital home health services (as those terms are defined under that title) furnished before the 19th month that begins after the date of enactment of this Act.