This Act may be cited as the ``China Human Rights and Democracy Act of 1997''.
UNITED STATES INTERNATIONAL BROADCASTING TO CHINA.
Authorization of Appropriations for International Broadcasting to China.--In addition to such sums as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated for ``International Broadcasting Activities'' for fiscal years 1998 and 1999, there are authorized to be appropriated for ``International Broadcasting Activities'' $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, which shall be available only for broadcasting to China.
Of the funds authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1998, $10,000,000 is authorized to be appropriated for capital expenditures for the purchase and construction of transmission facilities.
Of the funds authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 1998 and fiscal year 1999, $20,000,000 is authorized to be appropriated for Radio Free Asia.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that United States international broadcasting through Radio Free Asia and Voice of America should be increased to provide continuous 24-hour broadcasting in multiple languages and dialects which shall include Mandarin, Cantonese, Tibetan, and Uighur.
DEMOCRACY BUILDING IN CHINA.
Authorization of Appropriations for NED.--In addition to such sums as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated for the ``National Endowment for Democracy'' for fiscal years 1998 and 1999, there are authorized to be appropriated for the ``National Endowment for Democracy'' $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, which shall be available to promote democracy, civil society, and the development of the rule of law in China.
East Asia-Pacific Regional Democracy Fund.--The Secretary of State shall use funds available in the East Asia-Pacific Regional Democracy Fund to provide grants to nongovernmental organizations to promote democracy, civil society, and the development of the rule of law in China.
HUMAN RIGHTS IN CHINA.
Reports.--Not later than March 30, 1998, and each subsequent year thereafter, the Secretary of State shall submit to the International Relations Committee of the House of Representatives and the Foreign Relations Committee of the Senate an annual report on human rights in China, including religious persecution, the development of democratic institutions, and the rule of law.
Reports shall provide information on each region of China.
Prisoner Information Registry.--The Secretary of State shall establish a Prisoner Information Registry for China which shall provide information on all political prisoners, prisoners of conscience, and prisoners of faith in China.
Such information shall include the charges, judicial processes, administrative actions, use of forced labor, incidences of torture, length of imprisonment, physical and health conditions, and other matters related to the incarceration of such prisoners in China.
The Secretary of State is authorized to make funds available to nongovernmental organizations presently engaged in monitoring activities regarding Chinese political prisoners to assist in the creation and maintenance of the registry.
Human Rights Officers in China.--The Secretary of State shall designate or assign not less than 6 foreign service officers to the United States Embassy and consular offices in China with the principal assignment of monitoring and reporting on human rights matters in China.
In addition, the number of officers assigned to the United States diplomatic missions in China whose principal assignment is commerce or trade may not exceed the number of officers in China whose principal assignment is human rights matters.
REPORTS TO CONGRESS ON CHINESE MILITARY AND INTELLIGENCE ACTIVITIES.
Report Concerning Chinese Intelligence Activities Directed Against United States Interests.--No later than March 30 of each calendar year, the President shall report in both classified and unclassified form on all Chinese intelligence collection activities directed against United States interests to the Committees on National Security, International Relations, and Intelligence of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Armed Services, Foreign Relations, and Intelligence of the Senate.
Information Concerning Commercial Enterprises Affiliated With the Chinese Military.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretaries of State, Defense and Treasury and the Director of the Central Intelligence Agency, shall compile and make available to the public through all appropriate means, including internet technology, information concerning Chinese commercial enterprises or joint ventures in which the Chinese Ministry of Defense, the Peoples Liberation Army, affiliated commercial entities, or senior officials of such entities and their immediate family, have an ownership interest.
PRINCIPLES THAT SHOULD BE ADHERED TO BY ANY UNITED STATES NATIONAL CONDUCTING AN INDUSTRIAL COOPERATION PROJECT IN THE PEOPLE'S REPUBLIC OF CHINA.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to create principles governing the conduct of industrial cooperation projects of United States nationals in the People's Republic of China.
Statement of Principles.--It is the sense of the Congress that any United States national conducting an industrial cooperation project in the People's Republic of China should: (1) Suspend the use of any goods, wares, articles, or merchandise that the United States national has reason to believe were mined, produced, or manufactured, in whole or in part, by convict labor or forced labor, and refuse to use forced labor in the industrial cooperation project.
Seek to ensure that political or religious views, sex, ethnic or national background, involvement in political activities or nonviolent demonstrations, or association with suspected or known dissidents will not prohibit hiring, lead to harassment, demotion, or dismissal, or in any way affect the status or terms of employment in the industrial cooperation project.
The United States national should not discriminate in terms or conditions of employment in the industrial cooperation project against persons with past records of arrest or internal exile for nonviolent protest or membership in unofficial organizations committed to nonviolence.
Ensure that methods of production used in the industrial cooperation project do not pose an unnecessary physical danger to workers and neighboring populations or property, and that the industrial cooperation project does not unnecessarily risk harm to the surrounding environment; and consult with community leaders regarding environmental protection with respect to the industrial cooperation project.
Strive to establish a private business enterprise when involved in an industrial cooperation project with the Government of the People's Republic of China or other state entity.
Discourage any Chinese military presence on the premises of any industrial cooperation projects which involve dual-use technologies.
Undertake to promote freedom of association and assembly among the employees of the United States national.
The United States national should protest any infringement by the Government of the People's Republic of China of these freedoms to the International Labor Organization's office in Beijing.
Provide the Department of State with information relevant to the Department's efforts to collect information on prisoners for the purposes of the Prisoner Information Registry, and for other reporting purposes.
Discourage or undertake to prevent compulsory political indoctrination programs from taking place on the premises of the industrial cooperation project.
Promote freedom of expression, including the freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any media.
To this end, the United States national should raise with appropriate authorities of the Government of the People's Republic of China concerns about restrictions on the free flow of information.
Undertake to prevent harassment of workers who, consistent with the United Nations World Population Plan of Action, decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children; and prohibit compulsory population control activities on the premises of the industrial cooperation project.
Promotion of Principles by Other Nations.--The Secretary of State shall forward a copy of the principles set forth in subsection (b) to the member nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and encourage them to promote principles similar to these principles.
Registration Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Each United States national conducting an industrial cooperation project in the People's Republic of China shall register with the Secretary of State and indicate whether the United States national agrees to implement the principles set forth in subsection (b).
No fee shall be required for registration under this subsection.
Preference for participation in trade missions.--The Secretary of Commerce shall consult the register prior to the selection of private sector participants in any form of trade mission to China, and undertake to involve those United States nationals that have registered their adoption of the principles set forth above.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``industrial cooperation project'' refers to a for-profit activity the business operations of which employ more than 25 individuals or have assets greater than $25,000; and (2) the term ``United States national'' means-- (A) a citizen or national of the United States or a permanent resident of the United States; and (B) a corporation, partnership, or other business association organized under the laws of the United States, any State or territory thereof, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
PROMOTION OF EDUCATIONAL, CULTURAL, SCIENTIFIC, AGRICULTURAL, MILITARY, LEGAL, POLITICAL, AND ARTISTIC EXCHANGES BETWEEN THE UNITED STATES AND CHINA.
Exchanges Between the United States and China.--Agencies of the United States Government which engage in educational, cultural, scientific, agricultural, military, legal, political, and artistic exchanges shall endeavor to initiate or expand such exchange programs with regard to China.
Legislative Exchange Program.--It is the sense of the Congress, that the Speaker of the House and the Majority Leader of the Senate should establish a legislative exchange program with the National Peoples Congress of China.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that a federally chartered not-for-profit organization should be established to fund exchanges between the United States and China through private donations.
DENIAL OF ENTRY INTO THE UNITED STATES OF CERTAIN CHINESE GOVERNMENT APPLICANTS.
Denial of Entry.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary of State may not issue any visa to, and the Attorney General may not admit to the United States, any national of the People's Republic of China where a consular officer or the Attorney General knows or has reasonable grounds to believe-- (1) the applicant has been materially involved in the commission of human rights violations, as defined in subsection (c), within the People's Republic of China; or (2) the applicant has been materially involved in the proliferation of conventional or nuclear weapons technology, or other sensitive or dual-use technologies, in contravention of United States interests.
Waiver.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the President may waive the applicability of subsection (a) with respect to any applicant otherwise covered by that paragraph if the President determines that the waiver with respect to the applicant is in the national interest of the United States.
Notice.-- (A) Requirement.--The President may not exercise the authority provided in paragraph (1) with respect to an applicant unless the President submits to Congress a written notification of the exercise of the authority.
Contents.--Notices of the exercise of waiver authority shall include-- (i) a statement of the activities of the applicant which triggered the application of this statute; and (ii) an explicit statement detailing the policy reasons and factual bases for the finding that the issuance of a visa to the applicant at issue is in the national interest of the United States.
Other reports.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall provide to the Congress, not later than March 1 of each calendar year following the enactment of this statute, a report concerning the application of this provision.
This report should include information on all instances in which this statute was triggered by an applicant and the subsequent disposition of the application.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this Act, the term ``human rights violations'' means actions which are in contravention of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights or the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, including, but not limited to, material involvement in the suppression of the free practice of religion, the creation and implementation of coercive family planning policies or the massacre of nonviolent demonstrators in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989.
SENSE OF CONGRESS CONCERNING ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMISSION ON SECURITY AND COOPERATION IN ASIA.
It is the sense of the Congress that Congress, the President, and the Secretary of State should work with the governments of other countries to establish a Commission on Security and Cooperation in Asia which would be modeled after the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe.