This Act may be cited as the ``Nurse Reinvestment Act''.
AMENDMENT TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT.
Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 846(a)(3), by inserting ``in a nursing home, in a hospice, in a home health agency,'' after ``in a public hospital,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``PART H--INITIATIVES TO COMBAT NURSING SHORTAGES ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary shall develop and issue public service announcements that shall advertise and promote the nursing profession, highlight the advantages and rewards of nursing, and encourage individuals from diverse communities and backgrounds to enter the nursing profession.
Method.--The public service announcements described in subsection (a) shall be broadcast in appropriate languages via appropriate media outlets, including on television or radio, in a manner intended to reach as wide and diverse an audience as possible.
STATE AND LOCAL PUBLIC SERVICE ANNOUNCEMENTS.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to support State and local advertising campaigns via appropriate media outlets to promote the nursing profession, highlight the advantages and rewards of nursing, and encourage individuals from disadvantaged communities and backgrounds to enter the nursing profession.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means a professional State nursing association, State health care provider association, accredited school of nursing, and any other entity that provides similar services or serves a like function.
State health care provider association.--The term `State health care provider association' means a professional association of hospitals, nursing homes, home health care agencies, hospices, consortia of said associations, or other such entities deemed eligible by the Secretary.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds received through such grant to buy local television and radio time, place advertisements in local newspapers, post information on billboards or on the Internet, or utilize other appropriate media outlets in order to-- ``(1) advertise and promote the nursing profession; ``(2) promote nursing education programs; ``(3) inform the public of public assistance regarding such education programs; ``(4) highlight individuals in the community that are presently practicing nursing in order to recruit new nurses; or ``(5) provide any other information to recruit individuals to enroll in nursing programs.
Method.--The campaigns described in subsection (a) shall be broadcast in appropriate languages on television or radio, or placed in newspapers as advertisements, posted on billboards or the Internet, or publicized via other appropriate media outlets in a manner intended to reach as wide and diverse an audience as possible.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
NURSE RECRUITMENT GRANT PROGRAM.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to increase nursing education opportunities.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds received from such grant to-- ``(1) support outreach programs at primary, junior, and secondary schools that inform guidance counselors and students of education opportunities regarding nursing; ``(2) carry out special projects to increase nursing education opportunities for individuals who are from disadvantaged backgrounds (including economically disadvantaged backgrounds and racial and ethnic minorities underrepresented among registered nurses) by providing student scholarships or stipends, pre-entry preparation, or retention activities; ``(3) provide assistance to diploma, associate degree, and collegiate schools of nursing to support remedial education programs for nursing students who require assistance with math, science, English, and medical terminology; or ``(4) meet the costs of child care and transportation for individuals who are taking part in a nursing education program at any level.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, $20,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2004.
``PART I--INITIATIVES TO STRENGTHEN THE NURSING WORKFORCE ``SEC.
CAREER LADDER GRANT PROGRAM.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to assist individuals in obtaining education required to enter the nursing profession and advance within such profession.
Eligible Entity.--The term `eligible entity' means a diploma, associate degree, or collegiate school of nursing.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds under such grant to establish student scholarships or stipends for nurse professionals, licensed practical nurses, certified nurse assistants, and home health aides who enroll in entry level nursing programs, advanced practice nursing degree programs, RN/Master's nursing degree programs, doctoral nursing programs, public health nursing programs, nurse educator programs, nurse administrator programs, and training programs focused on specific technology use or disease management.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
GRANTS FOR CURRICULUM DEVELOPMENT.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to develop and incorporate gerontology curriculum and competencies.
Eligible Entity.--The term `eligible entity' means a diploma, associate degree, or collegiate school of nursing.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds under such grant to develop stand alone courses in geriatric nursing to support concentrations, minors, and majors in the discipline, to hire faculty who are certified in geriatric nursing, to train nursing faculty members in gerontology, to provide continuing education in gerontology for practicing nurses at diploma, associate degree, and baccalaureate schools of nursing.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to form partnerships to carry out the activities described in subsection (d).
Eligible Entity.--The term `eligible entity' means an accredited school of nursing and a health care facility that forms a partnership to provide the services described in this section.
Health Care Facility.--The term `health care facility' means a hospital, nursing home, home health care agency, hospice, federally qualified health center, rural health clinic, or public health clinic.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds received through such grant to-- ``(1) provide employees of the facility advanced training and education at the school or facility; ``(2) establish or expand nursing practice arrangements in noninstitutional settings to demonstrate methods to improve access to primary health care in medically underserved communities; and ``(3) purchase distance learning technology to extend general education and training programs to rural areas, and to extend specialty education and training programs to all areas.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under subsection (a) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part, $20,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2004.
``PART J--NATIONAL NURSING SERVICE CORPS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM ``SEC.
NATIONAL NURSING SERVICE CORPS SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall establish a National Nurse Service Corps Scholarship program (referred to in this section as the `program') that provides scholarships to individuals seeking nursing education in exchange for service by such individuals in areas with nursing shortages.
Preference.--In awarding scholarships under this section, the Secretary shall give preference to applicants with the greatest financial need, and applicants who agree to serve in health facilities experiencing nursing shortages in medically underserved areas.
Requirements.--To be eligible to participate in the program, an individual must-- ``(1) be accepted for enrollment, or be enrolled, in an accredited school of nursing, to take courses leading to a baccalaureate or associate degree in nursing, or a diploma in nursing; ``(2) submit an application to participate in the program; and ``(3) enter into an agreement with the Secretary, at the time of submittal of such application, to-- ``(A) accept payment of a scholarship and remain enrolled in a nursing school; ``(B) maintain an acceptable level of academic standing; and ``(C) serve as a nurse for a period of not less than 2 years in an Indian Health Service health center, a Native Hawaiian health center, a public hospital, a migrant health center, a community health center, a rural health clinic, a nursing home, a home health agency, hospice, or a public or nonprofit private health facility determined by the Secretary to have a critical shortage of nurses.
Applications.-- ``(1) In general.--The application forms for the programs shall include-- ``(A) a fair summary of the rights and liabilities of an individual whose application is approved by the Secretary; and ``(B) information respecting meeting a service obligation and such other information as may be necessary for the individual to understand the program.
Accessibility.--The application form and all other information furnished by the Secretary shall be written so that it may be understood by the average individual applying to participate in the program.
The Secretary shall make such application forms, and other information available to individuals desiring to participate in the program, on a date sufficiently early to ensure that such individuals have adequate time to carefully review and evaluate such forms and information.
Distribution.--The Secretary shall distribute to nursing schools materials providing information on the program and shall encourage the schools to disseminate the materials to students of the schools.
Scholarship.-- ``(1) In general.--A scholarship provided to a student for a school year under a written contract under the program shall consist of-- ``(A) payment to, or (in accordance with paragraph (2)) on behalf of the student of-- ``(i) the tuition of the student in such school year; and ``(ii) all other reasonable educational expenses and support services, including fees, books, and laboratory expenses incurred by the student in such school year; and ``(B) payment to the student of a stipend of $400 per month (adjusted in accordance with paragraph (3)) for each 12 consecutive months beginning with the first month of the school year.
Contract.--The Secretary may contract with a nursing school, in which a participant in the program is enrolled, for the payment to the nursing school of the amounts of tuition and other reasonable educational expenses described in paragraph (1)(A).
Monthly stipend.--The amount of the monthly stipend, specified in paragraph (1)(B) and as previously adjusted (if at all) in accordance with this paragraph, shall be increased by the Secretary as the Secretary determines to be reasonable.
Breach of Agreement.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual who enters into an agreement under this section to provide service as a nurse in consideration for receiving a scholarship, such individual is liable to the Federal Government for the amount of such scholarship, and for interest on such scholarship at the maximum legal prevailing rate, if the individual-- ``(A) fails to maintain an acceptable level of academic standing in the nursing program; ``(B) is dismissed from the nursing program for disciplinary reasons; ``(C) voluntarily terminates the nursing program; or ``(D) fails to provide services in accordance with the program under this section for the period of time applicable under the program.
Waiver or suspension of liability.--The Secretary shall provide for the waiver or suspension of liability under this section if compliance by the individual with the agreement is impossible, or would involve extreme hardship to the individual, or if enforcement of the agreement with respect to the individual would be unconscionable.
Date certain for recovery.--Subject to paragraph (2), any amount that the Federal Government is entitled to recover under paragraph (1) shall be paid to the United States not later than the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date the United States becomes so entitled.
Availability.--Amounts recovered under paragraph (1) with respect to a program under this section shall be available for the purposes of such program, and shall remain available for such purposes until expended.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Community health center.--The term ``community health center'' has the meaning given such term in section 330(a).
Rural health clinic.--The term ``rural health clinic'' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(aa)(2) of the Social Security Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of payments under agreements entered into under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $65,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2004.