This Act may be cited as the ``Rocky Flats Open Space Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Federal Government, through the Atomic Energy Commission, acquired the Rocky Flats site in 1951 and began operations there in 1952.
Since 1992, the mission of the Rocky Flats site has changed from the production of nuclear weapons components to managing wastes and materials and cleaning up and converting the site to beneficial uses in a manner that is safe, environmentally and socially responsible, physically secure, and cost-effective.
The buffer zone has generally remained undisturbed since the acquisition of the Rocky Flats site.
The buffer zone possesses an impressive diversity of plant and animal species and provides important wildlife habitat for a number of threatened and endangered species.
The State of Colorado is experiencing increasing growth and development, especially in the metropolitan Denver Front Range area in the vicinity of the Rocky Flats site.
This growth and development reduces the amount of open space and thereby diminishes for many metropolitan Denver communities the vistas of the striking Front Range mountain backdrop.
The national interest requires that the ongoing cleanup and closure of the Rocky Flats site be completed without unnecessary delay and that the site thereafter be retained by the United States and managed so as to preserve its value for open space and wildlife habitat.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for the management of the buffer zone at the Rocky Flats site as open space and to establish a process for determining and implementing appropriate policies for the management of the Rocky Flats site after the ongoing cleanup and closure is completed.
FUTURE OWNERSHIP AND MANAGEMENT.
Federal Ownership.--Unless Congress provides otherwise in an Act enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act, all right, title, and interest of the United States, held on or acquired after the date of the enactment of this Act, to lands within the boundaries of the Rocky Flats site shall be retained by the United States.
Open Space Management of Buffer Zone.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the buffer zone shall be managed as open space.
The structures that comprise the former Lindsay Ranch homestead site within the Rock Creek Reserve area of the buffer zone shall be preserved and maintained to protect their historic significance and provide appropriate enjoyment for visitors.
Management of Industrial Area.--Subsection (b) shall not be construed to affect the management of the industrial area or to preclude the management of the industrial area as open space after cleanup and closure is completed.
ROCKY FLATS OPEN SPACE ADVISORY COUNCIL.
Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall establish a council to be known as the Rocky Flats Open Space Advisory Council.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Council shall be to examine the options for long-term oversight and management of the Rocky Flats site and to make recommendations for such oversight and management.
Duties.--The Council shall-- (1) identify the Federal, State, and local agencies and other entities that could effectively manage the buffer zone to protect its wildlife, wildlife habitat, and open space resources; (2) identify, with respect to the various portions of the buffer zone, the management policies that would be most appropriate, consistent with the protection of the wildlife, wildlife habitat, and open space resources; (3) make recommendations regarding the management of the buffer zone after completion of the cleanup and closure, including the appropriate entity or entities to carry out the management, the appropriate management policies, any appropriate implementing legislation, and any other recommendations that the Council considers appropriate; and (4) make any recommendations regarding the management of the industrial area that the Council considers appropriate.
Composition.--The Secretary shall ensure that the membership of the Council includes representatives of appropriate Federal, State, and local entities, including the following: (1) The offices of the Governor and the Attorney General of the State of Colorado.
The counties in Colorado of Jefferson and Boulder.
The cities in Colorado of Arvada, Boulder, Broomfield, Westminster, Superior, Thornton, Golden, and Northglenn.
The Rocky Flats Citizens Advisory Board and the Rocky Flats Coalition of Local Governments.
The Department of Public Health and Environment and the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Colorado.
The Department of Energy.
The United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
The Environmental Protection Agency.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Council shall be appointed by the Secretary and shall be a member of the Council who is a representative of the Department of Energy.
Public Involvement.--The Council shall be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
The Council's deliberations shall be open to the public, and the Council shall endeavor to seek out and provide opportunities for public input.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the establishment of the Council, the Council shall submit a report to the Secretary, the Governor of the State of Colorado, and the Congress.
The report shall contain the identifications and recommendations of the Council under subsection (c).
Implementation of Council Recommendations.--Subject to section 5(a) and any other provision of Federal law, the Secretary may, after the submission of the report by the Council under subsection (g), provide for the management of the buffer zone in accordance with the recommendations in that report.
CONTINUATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL CLEANUP AND CLOSURE.
Ongoing Cleanup and Closure.--The Secretary shall continue to carry out to completion the cleanup and closure activities at the Rocky Flats site, including any such actions within the buffer zone that are necessary under applicable requirements of Federal or State laws and regulations.
Rules of Construction.--(1) Nothing in this Act, and no action taken under this Act, shall relieve the Secretary or any other person from any obligation or other liability with respect to the Rocky Flats site under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes), the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes), the Colorado Hazardous Waste Act (Colo. Rev.
United States Statutes at Large 25-15-301 et sequentes), or any other applicable Federal or State law or regulation.
This Act shall not be construed to restrict or lessen the degree of cleanup at the Rocky Flats site, including the buffer zone, required under the 1996 Rocky Flats Cleanup Agreement or any other applicable requirements.
The level of cleanup at the Rocky Flats site shall not be affected by the requirements of this Act for open space management of the buffer zone, but rather shall be based on considerations of public health and safety.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Rocky Flats'' or ``Rocky Flats site'' means the Rocky Flats Environmental Technology Site, Colorado.
The term ``Rocky Flats map'' means the map of the Rocky Flats site titled ``Rocky Flats Environmental Technology Site, Colorado'' and dated June 1999.
The term ``open space'' means an area free of new structures that is managed for its open space characteristics and for its wildlife, wildlife habitat, and potential recreational opportunities.
The term ``buffer zone'' means the land within the Rocky Flats site between the industrial area and the boundary of Federal land at the Rocky Flats site, comprising approximately 6,000 acres, as generally depicted on the Rocky Flats map.
The term ``industrial area'' means the facilities and structures on the Rocky Flats site that comprise the former nuclear weapons production activities, comprising approximately 385 acres, as generally depicted on the Rocky Flats map.
The term ``cleanup and closure'' means the remedial actions and decommissioning activities being undertaken at the Rocky Flats site by the Department of Energy under the 1996 Rocky Flats Cleanup Agreement, the closure plans and baselines, and any other relevant documents.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
The term ``Council'' means the Rocky Flats Open Space Advisory Council.