TITLE I--FEDERAL TORT CLAIMS AMENDMENTS SEC.
REMEDY FOR UNLAWFUL HUMAN EXPERIMENTATION.
Chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2680 the following: ``Sec.
Human Experimentation ``Section 2680 shall not apply to-- ``(1) any claim arising out of conduct or research involving a human being as an experimental subject without the informed consent of the subject or a legal representative of the subject; or ``(2) any claim arising out of the subjection of a human being to any experimental chemical, radiological, or biological agent, drug, or other test article without the informed consent of the human subject or a legal representative of the subject.
Nuclear Weapons Facility Operations.
``Section 2680 shall not apply to any claim arising out of operations of any federally owned nuclear weapons facility involved in the production of nuclear weapons under the authority of the Secretary of Energy or any predecessor which had such authority.''.
The table of contents for such chapter 171 is amended by adding after the item relating to section 2680 the following: ``2681.
Nuclear weapons facility operations.''.
TITLE II--CONSTITUTIONAL AND HUMAN RIGHTS VIOLATIONS SEC.
JURISDICTION OF DISTRICT COURTS.
Section 1346(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(b)''; (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(2) Subject to the provisions of chapter 172, the district courts shall have exclusive jurisdiction of civil actions on claims for money damages based on constitutional torts.''.
Title 28 of the United States Code is amended by inserting after chapter 171 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 172--CONSTITUTIONAL TORTS ``Sec.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter and sections 1346(b)(2) and 2401(b)(2)-- ``(1) the term `Federal agency' includes any executive department, military department, independent establishment of the United States, any person or entity acting as an instrumentality or agent of the United States, any contractor with the United States, any other establishment of the United States (including the Executive Office of the President), and any party acting in concert with the United States; ``(2) the term `employee of the Government' includes officers and employees in the executive branch of the Federal Government, members of the military or naval forces of the United States, members of the National Guard while engaged in training or duty under section 316, 502, 503, 504, or 505 of title 32, and any person acting on behalf of or in concert with a Federal agency, temporarily or permanently in the service of the United States, whether with or without compensation, and whose acts or omissions are done with the knowledge or consent of the United States; and ``(3) the term `constitutional tort' means a violation of the Constitution of the United States or violation of human rights resulting from or caused by the act or omission of a Federal agency or an employee of the Government while acting within the scope of the employee's office, employment, or apparent authority, or which results from the negligent supervision of an employee of the Government.
Administrative adjustment of claims ``(a) The head of each Federal agency may, in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Attorney General, compromise and settle any claim for money damages based on a constitutional tort, except that any award, compromise, or settlement in excess of $25,000 shall be effected only with the prior written approval of the Attorney General.
Any award, compromise, settlement, or determination made under this section shall be final and conclusive on the United States, except when procured by means of fraud.
Payment of any award, compromise, or settlement made under this section or made by the Attorney General in any amount under section 2697 shall be paid in a manner similar to judgments and compromises in like causes.
Appropriations or funds available for the payment of such judgments and compromises shall be available for the payment of awards, compromises, or settlements under this chapter.
The acceptance by a claimant of any award, compromise, or settlement made under this section or section 2697 shall be final and conclusive on the claimant, and shall constitute a complete release of any claim against the United States and against the employee of the Government whose act or omission gave rise to the claim, by reason of the same subject matter.
Liability of the United States ``(a) The United States shall be liable for compensatory damages for any constitutional tort, but shall not be liable for interest prior to judgment or for punitive damages except as herein provided.
With respect to any claim for money damages based on a constitutional tort, the United States shall be liable for an amount not greater than either-- (1) actual damages, or (2) nominal damages in an amount which is the greater of-- (A) $25,000, or (B) in the case of a continuing violation, $500 per day for each violation.
If the conduct giving rise to the constitutional tort claim was undertaken willfully or recklessly, the court shall award, in addition, exemplary damages as are just and reasonable under the circumstances, as determined by the trier of fact.
A class action in conformity with the requirements of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure may be instituted on a constitutional tort claim if it satisfies the provisions of rule 23 thereof, and shall be maintained where certified by the court before which the action is filed.
Disposition by Federal agency as prerequisite; evidence ``(a) An action shall not be instituted upon a claim against the United States for money damages based on a constitutional tort unless the claimant shall have first presented the claim to the appropriate Federal agency and that claim shall have been finally denied by the agency in writing and sent to the claimant by certified or registered mail.
The failure of an agency to make final disposition of a claim within 6 months after it is filed shall, at the option of the claimant any time thereafter, be deemed a final denial of the claim for purposes of this section.
This subsection shall not apply to such claims as may be asserted under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure by third-party complaint, cross-claim, or counterclaim.
Except as to a class action claim or if damages are not fully ascertainable at the time of presentation pursuant to subsection (a), an action under this section shall not be instituted for any sum in excess of the amount of the claim presented to the Federal agency, except where the increased amount is based upon newly discovered evidence not reasonably discoverable at the time of presenting the claim to the Federal agency or upon allegation and proof of intervening facts, relating to the amount of the claim.
Jury trial ``Any action brought pursuant to this chapter upon a claim for money damages based on a constitutional tort shall, at the request of any party to such action, be tried by the court with a jury.
Judgment as bar ``The judgment in an action under section 1346(b)(2) shall constitute a complete bar to any action by the claimant involved, by reason of the same constitutional violation against the employee of the Government whose act or omission gave rise to the claim, but shall not act as a release on any claim for violation of any other law.
Compromise ``The Attorney General may arbitrate, compromise, or settle any claim cognizable under section 1346(b)(2), after the commencement of an action on that claim.
Attorney fees; penalty ``(a) Any claimant to whom a judgment is awarded under section 1346(b)(2), or to whom an award, compromise, or settlement is made under section 2697 or 2692 shall, in addition to such judgment, award, compromise, or settlement, be entitled to receive a reasonable attorney's fee and other litigation costs reasonably incurred, including attorney fees and costs attributable to processing an administrative claim under section 2692.
The amount of such attorney's fee may not exceed 25 per cent of any judgment rendered under section 1346(b)(2) or any award, compromise, or settlement made under section 2697, except as otherwise approved by the court before whom the action is filed, or 20 per cent of any award, compromise, or settlement made under section 2692.
Any attorney who charges, demands, receives, or collects for services rendered in connection with a judgment, award, compromise, or settlement described in subsection (a) any amount in excess of that allowed under subsection (a) shall, if recovery be had, be fined not more than $2,000 or imprisoned not more than one year, or both.
Exclusiveness of remedy ``(a) The authority of any Federal agency to sue and be sued in its own name shall not be construed to authorize suits against such Federal agency on constitutional tort claims arising under this chapter which are cognizable under section 1346(b)(2), and the remedies provided by this title in such case shall be exclusive.
(1) Upon filing a claim with the district court under section 1346(b)(2), the remedy against the United States provided by section 2693 for claims for money damages based on constitutional torts shall be exclusive of any other Federal civil action or proceeding for money damages by reason of the same subject matter against the employee whose act or omission gave rise to the claim or against the estate of such employee.
Paragraph (1) does not extend or apply to a civil action against an employee of the Government-- ``(A) which is brought against the employee for acting outside the scope of the employee's office or employment in violation of the Constitution of the United States, or ``(B) which is brought for a violation of a statute of the United States or a statute of any State under which such action against an individual is otherwise authorized.
The provisions of this chapter shall be limited to constitutional tort claims against Federal agencies or employees of the Government.
Nothing in this chapter shall preclude or preempt suit against any person or entity on any other claim, whether based on international, Federal, State, or common law, and no provision of this chapter shall act as a release, waiver, or bar to such claim.
Upon certification by the Attorney General pursuant to subsection (e), the Attorney General shall defend any civil action or proceeding brought in any court against any employee of the Government or against the estate of such employee for money damages based on any constitutional tort.
The employee against whom such civil action or proceeding is brought shall deliver within such time after date of service or knowledge of service as determined by the Attorney General, all process served upon the employee or an attested true copy thereof to the employee's immediate superior or to whomever was designated by the head of the employee's department to receive such papers and such person shall promptly furnish copies of the pleadings and process therein to the United States attorney for the district embracing the place wherein the proceeding is brought, to the Attorney General, and to the head of the employee's employing Federal agency.
(1) Upon certification by the Attorney General that the defendant was acting within the scope of the defendant's office or employment at the time of the incident out of which the claim arose, any civil action or proceeding commenced upon such claim in a United States district court shall be deemed an action against the United States under the provisions of this title and all references thereto, and the United States shall be substituted as the party defendant.
Upon certification by the Attorney General that the defendant was acting within the scope of the defendant's office or employment at the time of the incident out of which the claim arose, any civil action or proceeding commenced upon such claim in a State court shall be removed without bond at any time before trial by the Attorney General to the district court of the United States for the district and division embracing the place in which the action or proceeding is pending.
Such action or proceeding shall be deemed to be an action or proceeding brought against the United States under the provisions of this title and all references thereto, and the United States shall be substituted as the party defendant.
This certification of the Attorney General shall conclusively establish scope of office or employment for purposes of removal.
In the event that the Attorney General has refused to certify scope of office or employment under this section, the employee may at any time before trial, petition the court to find and certify that the employee was acting within the scope of the employee's office or employment.
Upon such certification by the court, such action or proceeding shall be deemed to be an action or proceeding brought against the United States under the provisions of this title and all references thereto, and the United States shall be substituted as the party defendant.
A copy of the petition shall be served upon the United States in accordance with the provisions of rule 4(d)(4) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
In the event the petition is filed in a civil action or proceeding pending in a State court, the action or proceeding may be removed without bond by the Attorney General to the district court of the United States for the district and division embracing the place in which it is pending.
If, in considering the petition, the district court determines that the employee was not acting within the scope of the employee's office or employment, the action or proceeding shall be remanded to the State court.
Upon certification, any action or proceeding subject to paragraph (1), (2), or (3) shall proceed in the same manner as any action against the United States filed pursuant to section 1346(b)(2) and shall be subject to the limitations and exceptions applicable to those actions.
Whenever an action or proceeding in which the United States is substituted as the party defendant under this subsection is dismissed for failure to first present a claim pursuant to section 2694(a), such a claim shall be deemed to be timely presented under section 2401(b)(2) if-- ``(A) the claim would have been timely had it been filed on the date the underlying civil action was commenced, and ``(B) the claim is presented to the appropriate Federal agency within 60 days after dismissal of the civil action.
The Attorney General may compromise or settle any claim asserted in any civil action or proceeding described in this section in the manner provided in section 2697, and with the same effect.
Administrative action concerning employee ``Where an action or proceeding under section 1346(b)(2) or 2692 on a constitutional tort results in a judgment against the United States or an award, compromise, or settlement paid by the United States, the Attorney General shall forward the matter to the head of the Federal agency which employed the employee at the time of the employee's alleged act or omission giving rise to the claim upon which the action or proceeding was based, for such further administrative investigation or disciplinary action as may be appropriate.
In any administrative proceeding relating to such investigation or disciplinary action, the employee may assert as a defense the employee's reasonable good-faith belief in the lawfulness of the employee's conduct.''.
STATUTE OF LIMITATION, TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Section 2401.--Section 2401(b) of title 28, United States Code, concerning the statute of limitations, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' immediately after ``(b)''; (2) by inserting ``cognizable under section 1346(b)(1) of chapter 171'' after ``United States''; (3) by adding at the end the following: ``any claim arising out of unlawful human experimentation within the meaning of section 2681 shall not be barred if presented in writing to the appropriate Federal agency within 3 years from the date of the enactment of section 2681.
''; and (4) by adding after paragraph (1) the following: ``(2) A claim for money damages based on a constitutional tort against the United States cognizable under section 1346(b)(2) of chapter 172 shall be forever barred unless it is presented in writing to the appropriate Federal agency within 2 years after such claim accrues or unless action is begun within 6 months after the date of mailing, by certified or registered mail, of notice of final denial of the claim by the agency to which it was presented, except that any claim accruing prior to enactment of chapter 172 shall not be barred if presented in writing to the appropriate Federal agency within 3 years from the date of enactment of chapter 172.''.
Section 2402.--Section 2402 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or 1346(b)(2)'' after ``1346(a)(1)''.
Section 2674.--Section 2674 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting immediately after ``claims'' the following: ``to which section 1346(b)(1) of this title applies''.
Multiple Sections.--Sections 2676, 2677, 2678, and 2679 of title 28, United States Code, are amended by striking out ``1346(b)'' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``1346(b)(1)''.
Section 2680.--Section 2680 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``1346(b)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1346(b)(1)''.
Section 1402.--Section 1402(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``subsection (b)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsections (b)(1) and (b)(2)''.
Table of Chapters.--The table of chapters for part VI of title 28, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 171 the following new item: ``172.