This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Payment Equity Act of 1994''.
LIMITATION ON PAYMENT OF CERTAIN BENEFITS IN EXCESS OF CONTRIBUTIONS DURING YEARS OF HIGHER INCOME.
In General.--Section 202 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 402) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Limitation on Payment of Certain Benefits in Excess of Contributions During Years of Higher Income ``(y)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, if, with respect to any year of higher income for an individual-- ``(A) the total amount of the adjusted values of all benefits under subsections (a), (b), and (c) paid in months prior to such year based on the wages and self-employment income of such individual exceed ``(B) the total amount of the adjusted values of all OASDI taxes paid with respect to the wages and self-employment income of such individual, determined as of the beginning of such year of higher income, then the monthly benefits under subsections (a), (b), and (c) based on the wages and self-employment income of such individual paid for any month in such year shall be reduced (after all other deductions and reductions applicable under this title) by the percentage reduction specified under paragraph (2).
Benefits, as reduced under this paragraph, if not a multiple of $1, shall be increased to the next higher multiple of $1.
(A) In the case of an individual who is not married as of the beginning of such individual's taxable year, the percentage reduction is the percentage specified in the following table: ``If such individual's adjusted The percentage is: gross income for the taxable year is: Over $50,000 but not over $52,000............. 10 percent.
Over $52,000 but not over $54,000............. 20 percent.
Over $54,000 but not over $56,000............. 30 percent.
Over $56,000 but not over $58,000............. 40 percent.
Over $58,000 but not over $60,000............. 50 percent.
Over $60,000 but not over $62,000............. 60 percent.
Over $62,000 but not over $64,000............. 70 percent.
Over $64,000 but not over $66,000............. 80 percent.
Over $66,000 but not over $68,000............. 90 percent.
Over $68,000.................................. 100 percent.
In the case of an individual who is married as of the beginning of such individual's taxable year, the percentage reduction is the percentage specified in the following table: ``If the total adjusted gross The percentage is: income of such individual and such individual's spouse for the taxable year is: Over $100,000 but not over $104,000........... 10 percent.
Over $104,000 but not over $108,000........... 20 percent.
Over $108,000 but not over $112,000........... 30 percent.
Over $112,000 but not over $116,000........... 40 percent.
Over $116,000 but not over $120,000........... 50 percent.
Over $120,000 but not over $124,000........... 60 percent.
Over $124,000 but not over $128,000........... 70 percent.
Over $128,000 but not over $132,000........... 80 percent.
Over $132,000 but not over $136,000........... 90 percent.
Over $136,000................................. 100 percent.
For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) The term `year of higher income' for an individual means any taxable year-- ``(I) if, in the case of an individual who is not married as of the beginning of such taxable year, the adjusted gross income of such individual for such taxable year exceeds $50,000, or ``(II) if, in the case of an individual who is married as of the beginning of such taxable year, the total adjusted gross income of such individual and such individual's spouse for such taxable year exceeds $100,000.
The term `adjusted gross income' has the meaning provided in section 62 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The term `adjusted value' of an amount means such amount, plus interest on such amount computed at a rate equal to 2 percent, compounded annually.
The term `OASDI taxes' means the taxes imposed under sections 1401(a), 3101(a), and 3111(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The Commissioner of Social Security shall provide by regulation for the maintenance of such records, relating to individuals on the basis of whose wages and self-employment income benefits under subsection (a), (b), and (c) are otherwise payable under this section, of total benefits paid and OASDI taxes paid, as is necessary to preclude, to the maximum extent practicable, overpayments and underpayments of benefits resulting from the operation of this subsection.
The Commissioner and the Secretary of the Treasury shall enter into such arrangements as are necessary to ensure that such records maintained by the Commissioner are currently accurate at all times.
(A) In any case in which a taxable year of an individual is a year of higher income for such individual, if a benefit under subsection (a), (b), or (c) has been paid for any month in such year on the basis of such individual's wages and self-employment income, such individual (or the individual who is in receipt of such benefit on his behalf) shall make a report to the Commissioner of Social Security of his adjusted gross income, and (if he is married) the adjusted gross income of his spouse, for such taxable year.
Such report shall be made on or before the fifteenth day of the fourth month following the close of such year, and shall contain such information and be made in such manner as the Commissioner may by regulations prescribe.
The Commissioner may grant a reasonable extension of time for making such report if he finds that there is valid reason for a delay, but in no case may the period be extended more than three months.
If an individual fails to make a report required under subparagraph (A), within the time prescribed by or in accordance with such subparagraph, for any taxable year and a benefit based on such individual's wages and self-employment income is paid for any month in such taxable year or the next following taxable year which is in excess of the amount payable by reason of this subsection, he shall be deemed to have been overpaid for such month an additional amount as follows: ``(i) in the case of the first such month for which a benefit is paid in excess of the amount payable by reason of this subsection, the additional amount shall be equal to the amount of such excess; ``(ii) in the case of the second such month for which a benefit is paid in excess of the amount payable by reason of this subsection, the additional amount shall be equal to two times the amount of such excess; and ``(iii) in the case of the third or a subsequent such month for which a benefit is paid in excess of the amount payable by reason of this subsection, the additional amount shall be equal to three times the amount of such excess; except that additional amounts of overpayment determined under this paragraph shall be determined only for months for which the benefit in excess of the amount payable was received and accepted.
(i)(I) If the Commissioner of Social Security determines, on the basis of information obtained by or submitted to him, that it may reasonably be expected that benefits under subsection (a), (b), or (c) based on an individual's wages and self-employment income will not be payable (in whole or in part) for any month in a taxable year of such individual by reason of this subsection, the Commissioner may, before the close of such taxable year, suspend the payment (in whole or in part) for each month in such year (or for only such months as the Commissioner may specify) of such benefits.
Such suspension shall remain in effect with respect to the benefits for any month until the Commissioner has determined the extent to which benefits are payable under this subsection.
The Commissioner of Social Security may, before the close of the taxable year of an individual on whose wages and self-employment income benefits are otherwise payable during such year, request of such individual that he make, at such time or times as the Commissioner may specify, a declaration of his estimated adjusted gross income (or the estimated total adjusted gross income for him and his spouse) for the taxable year and that he furnish to the Commissioner such other information with respect to such income as the Commissioner may specify.
A failure by such individual to comply with any such request shall in itself constitute justification for a determination under subclause (I) that it may reasonably be expected that such benefits are not payable (in whole or in part) by reason of this subsection.
If the payment of benefits under subsection (a), (b), or (c) based on the wages and self-employment income of an individual have been suspended (in whole or in part) for all months in any taxable year of such individual under subclause (I), no payment of such unpaid benefits shall be made for any such month in such taxable year after the expiration of the period of three years, three months, and fifteen days following the close of such taxable year unless within such period the individual, or some other person entitled to benefits under this title on the basis of the same wages and self-employment income, files with the Commissioner of Social Security information showing that the unpaid portion of a benefit for such month is payable to such individual.
If, after the close of a taxable year of an individual on whose wages and self-employment income benefits under subsection (a), (b), or (c) were otherwise payable for months in such year, the Commissioner of Social Security requests such individual to furnish a report of his adjusted gross income (or the total adjusted gross income of him and his spouse) for such taxable year or any other information with respect to such income which the Commissioner may specify, and the individual fails to comply with such request, such failure shall in itself constitute justification for a determination that such benefits were not payable (in whole or in part) for each month in such taxable year (or only for such months thereof as the Commissioner may specify) by reason of this subsection.
The Commissioner of Social Security shall develop and implement procedures in accordance with this paragraph to avoid paying more than the correct amount of benefits under subsection (a), (b), or (c) as a result of the failure of the individual on whose wages and self-employment income such benefits are based to file a correct report or estimate of adjusted gross income.
Such procedures may include identifying categories of individuals on the basis of whose wages and self-employment income benefits which are not payable (in whole or in part) under this subsection are likely to be paid and requesting that they estimate their adjusted gross income (or the total adjusted gross income of them and their spouses) more frequently than other persons subject to this subsection.
Benefits which would, but for the provisions of paragraph (1), be payable under this title, on the basis of the wages and self- employment income of the individual referred to in paragraph (1), to any other individual (other than the individuals to whom benefits based on such wages and self-employment income are not payable by reason of paragraph (1)) shall be payable as though such individuals were receiving such benefits.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to benefits otherwise payable in taxable years ending after December 31, 1995.
INFORMATION RELATING TO BENEFIT LIMITATIONS PROVIDED IN SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT STATEMENTS.
In General.--Section 1143 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320b-13) is amended-- (1) in the heading for subsection (a), by striking ``Upon Request'' and inserting ``of Annual Statements''; (2) in subsection (a)(1), by striking ``Beginning'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``Not later than October 1 of each year, the Commissioner of Social Security shall provide an annual social security account statement (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `statement') to each eligible individual for whom a mailing address can be determined through such methods as the Commissioner determines to be appropriate.
''; (3) in subsection (a)(2)(A), by striking ``at the date of the request''; (4) in subsection (a)(2)(B), by striking ``on the date of the request''; (5) in subsection (a)(2)(C), by striking ``on the date of the request'' and by striking ``and'' at the end; (6) in subsection (a)(2)(D), by inserting ``in the case of individuals not receiving benefits,'' after ``(D)'', and by striking ``title XVIII.''
and inserting ``title XVIII; and''; (7) by adding after subparagraph (D) the following: ``(E) a table setting forth an estimate, in relation to 1980 and every 10th year thereafter through 2030, of the following information: ``(i) the total amount of the adjusted values of all employee, employer, and self-employment contributions made with respect to the wages and self- employment income of the average earner retiring at retirement age in each such year; ``(ii) the total amount of the adjusted values of the monthly benefits paid under subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 202, as of the date of the statement, on the basis of the wages and self- employment income of the average earner retiring at retirement age in each such year; and ``(iii) the total amount of the adjusted values of the monthly benefits which will have been paid under such subsections, as of the time of the death of the average earner retiring at retirement age in each such year, on the basis of his or her wages and self- employment income, determined under generally accepted actuarial assumptions.
For purposes of subparagraph (E), the term `adjusted value' of an amount means such amount, plus interest on such amount computed at a rate equal to 2 percent, compounded annually.
''; (8) by striking subsection (b); (9) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking the heading and inserting the following: ``Required Estimates of Benefits''; (B) by striking ``(c)(1) By not later'' and all that follows through ``With respect to'' in paragraph (2) and inserting ``(b) With respect to''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The Commissioner shall provide such estimates of retirement benefit amounts to eligible individuals who have not attained age 50 upon request.
''; and (10) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Inclusion of Statements to Retirees with Other Mailings ``(c) The Commissioner of Social Security shall ensure that statements provided to eligible individuals who are receiving benefits under title II are included to the maximum extent practicable with mailings otherwise made to such individuals.
The Commissioner shall consult with the Secretary of the Treasury in carrying out the requirement of this subsection and such Secretary shall provide such appropriate assistance to the Commissioner as is necessary to carry out such requirements.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to statements provided on or after October 1, 1995.
GRADUAL INCREASE IN RETIREMENT AGE COMMENCING WITH CALENDAR YEAR 1996 AND REACHING AGE 68 FOR THOSE ATTAINING AGE 65 IN OR AFTER CALENDAR YEAR 2031.
In General.--Section 216(l)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 416(l)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraphs (A) through (E) and inserting the following: ``(A) with respect to an individual who attains early retirement age (as defined in paragraph (2)) before January 1, 1993, 65 years of age; ``(B) with respect to an individual who attains early retirement age after December 31, 1992, and before January 1, 2028, 65 years of age plus the number of months in the age increase factor (as determined under paragraph (3)) for the calendar year in which such individual attains early retirement age; and ``(C) with respect to an individual who attains early retirement age after December 31, 2027, 68 years of age.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 216(l)(3) of such Act (42 United States Code 416(l)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) The age increase factor for any individual who attains early retirement age in the 35-year period consisting of calendar years 1993 through 2027 shall be equal to \1/12\ of the number of months in the period beginning with January 1993 and ending with the last month of the calendar year in which the individual attains early retirement age.''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to benefits for months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transition rule.--In any case in which an individual is entitled to a benefit under title II of the Social Security Act for the month in which this Act is enacted, the amount of any benefit of such individual under such title II for any subsequent month (based on the primary insurance amount of the individual on whose primary insurance amount such benefit for the month in which this Act is enacted is based) shall not be reduced, solely by reason of the amendments made by this section, below the amount of such benefit for the month in which this Act is enacted.