This Act may be cited as the ``War Crimes Disclosure Act''.
REQUIREMENT OF DISCLOSURE UNDER FOIA OF INFORMATION REGARDING INDIVIDUALS WHO COMMITTED NAZI WAR CRIMES.
In General.--Section 552 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d)(1)(A) Notwithstanding subsection (b), this section shall apply to any matter, in the possession or control of a specified agency, that relates to any individual as to whom there exists reasonable grounds to believe that such individual, during the period beginning on March 23, 1933, and ending on May 8, 1945, under the direction of, or in association with-- ``(i) the Nazi government of Germany, ``(ii) any government in any area occupied by the military forces of the Nazi government of Germany, ``(iii) any government established with the assistance or cooperation of the Nazi government of Germany, or ``(iv) any government which was an ally of the Nazi government of Germany, ordered, incited, assisted, or otherwise participated in the persecution of any person because of race, religion, national origin, or political opinion.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `specified agency' means the following entities, any predecessor of such an entity, and any component of such an entity (or of such a predecessor): ``(i) The Central Intelligence Agency.
The Department of Defense.
The National Security Agency.
The National Security Council.
The Department of State.
The Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The United States Information Agency.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to-- ``(A) any matter that is referred to in subsection (b)(6); ``(B) any matter the disclosure of which would-- ``(i) reveal an intelligence agent regarding whom there is clear and convincing evidence that the identity of such agent currently requires protection; ``(ii) by revealing the name or identity of a living person who provided confidential information to the United States, constitute a substantial risk of harm to such person (as determined by clear and convincing evidence); or ``(iii) compromise the existence of an understanding of confidentiality currently requiring protection between an agent of the Government and a cooperating individual or a foreign government, and (as determined by clear and convincing evidence) cause harm that substantially outweighs the public interest in the disclosure; ``(C) any matter regarding which there is clear and convincing evidence that the current or future threat to national security, military defense, intelligence operations, or the conduct of foreign relations of the United States substantially outweighs the public interest in disclosure of the matter; ``(D) any matter created (by any person) in connection with an investigation, inquiry, or prosecution by the Office of Special Investigations of the Department of Justice; or ``(E) any portion, of any matter, that-- ``(i) does not relate to any individual referred to in paragraph (1); and ``(ii) is reasonably segregable from any other portions of the matter that relate to an individual referred to in paragraph (1).
Any reasonably segregable portion of a matter referred to in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of paragraph (2) shall be provided, after deletion of all portions of the matter that are referred to in such subparagraph, to any person requesting the matter under this section if the reasonably segregable portion would otherwise be required to be disclosed under this section.
In the case of a request under this section for any matter required to be disclosed under this subsection, if the agency receiving such request is unable to locate the records so requested, such agency shall promptly supply, to the person making such request, a description of the steps which were taken by such agency to search the indices and other locator systems of the agency to determine whether such records are in the possession or control of the agency.''.
Inapplicability of National Security Act of 1947 Exemption.-- Section 701 of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 431) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections (f) and (g), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (d) the following new subsection: ``(e) Subsection (a) shall not apply to any operational file, or any portion of any operational file, required to be disclosed under section 552(d) of title 5, United States Code (Freedom of Information Act).''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to requests made after the expiration of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.