This Act may be cited as the ``Bombing Prevention Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the number of criminal bombing incidents in the United States has doubled since 1988; (2) each year, hundreds of millions of pounds of explosives are purchased without a permit being required; (3) about one-third of the bombs used in crime in recent years have contained black powder or smokeless powder as filler; (4) the terrorist bombing of the World Trade Center and Pan Am Flight 103 and a series of bombings in western New York State demonstrate the grave dangers of bomb attacks; (5) effective regulation of interstate commerce in explosives is possible only with changes in the regulatory framework; (6) explosive materials, by their nature, are composed of numerous different substances, many of which have travelled in interstate or foreign commerce; and (7) the protection of the safety and property of the citizenry, including the infrastructure vital to the conduct of interstate and foreign commerce, requires more careful regulation of explosives transactions.
TITLE I--GENERAL REFORMS SEC.
PERMITS FOR PURCHASE OF EXPLOSIVES.
In General.--Section 842 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by amending subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (a)(3) to read as follows: ``(A) to transport, ship, cause to be transported, or receive any explosive materials; or ``(B) to distribute explosive materials to any person other than a licensee or permittee.
''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by adding ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1); (B) by striking ``; or'' at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a period; and (C) by striking paragraph (3).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to conduct engaged in after the 18-month period that begins with the date of the enactment of this Act.
Regulations.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue final regulations with respect to the amendments made by subsection (a), which shall take effect 18 months after such date of enactment.
Notice to states.--On the issuance of regulations pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the States of the regulations so that the States may consider revising their explosives laws.
LICENSES AND USER PERMITS.
Section 843(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``, including fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant'' before the period at the end of the 1st sentence; and (2) by striking the 2nd sentence and inserting the following: ``Each applicant for a license shall pay for each license a fee established by the Secretary that shall not exceed $300.
Each applicant for a permit shall pay for each permit a fee established by the Secretary that shall not exceed $100.''.
USE OF NATIONAL INSTANT CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM TO INVESTIGATE APPLICANTS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Secretary of the Treasury may use the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act to investigate each applicant for a license or permit under chapter 40 of title 18, United States Code.
REQUIREMENTS FOR PURCHASES OF BLACK POWDER AND SMOKELESS POWDER.
In General.--Section 845 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(4), by striking ``and components thereof''; (2) in subsection (a)(5), by striking ``commercially manufactured black powder in quantities not to exceed fifty pounds,''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Except in the case of section 842(f), and subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), and (i) of section 844, this chapter shall not apply to commercially manufactured black powder or smokeless powder in quantities not to exceed 5 pounds.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 926 of such title is amended by striking subsection (c).
Pursuant to its authority under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, the United States Sentencing Commission shall promulgate amendments to the sentencing guidelines to appropriately enhance the penalties for a violation of any provision of chapter 40 of title 18, United States Code, the penalties for which are not as severe as the penalties for a comparable violation of chapter 44 of such title 18, so that the penalties for the violation of the provision of such chapter 40 are the same as the penalties for a comparable violation of such chapter 44.
DESTRUCTION OF SEIZED EXPLOSIVES THAT ARE UNSAFE.
Section 844(c) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; and (2) by adding after and below the end the following: ``(2) Notwithstanding paragraph (1), in the case of the seizure of any explosive materials for any offense for which the materials would be subject to forfeiture in which it would be impracticable or unsafe to remove the materials to a place of storage or would be unsafe to store them, the seizing officer may destroy the explosive materials forthwith.
Any destruction under this paragraph shall be in the presence of at least 1 credible witness.
The seizing officer shall make a report of the seizure and take such samples as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.
Within 60 days after any destruction of property pursuant to paragraph (2), the owner of (including any person having an interest in) the property may apply to the Secretary for reimbursement of an amount equal to the fair market value of the property.
If the claimant establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the seizure was wrongful, the Secretary shall make an allowance to the claimant not exceeding the fair market value of the property destroyed.''.
FORFEITURE OF INSTRUMENTALITIES OF EXPLOSIVES OFFENSES.
Civil Forfeiture.--Section 981(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(G) Any property, real or personal, involved in a violation of chapter 40 (relating to importation, manufacture, distribution, and storage of explosive materials), or in a conspiracy to commit such a violation, and any other property traceable to such property.''.
Criminal Forfeiture.--Section 982(a) of such title is amended by inserting the following: ``(6) The court, in imposing a sentence on a person convicted of a violation of chapter 40 or of conspiring to commit such a violation, shall order the person to forfeit to the United States any property, real or personal, involved in the violation or in the conspiracy, and any other property traceable to such property.''.
TITLE II--PLASTIC EXPLOSIVES SEC.
Section 841 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(o) `Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives' means the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the purpose of Detection, done at Montreal on March 1, 1991.
`Detection agent' means any substance specified or referred to in this subsection if introduced into a plastic explosive or formulated in such explosive as a part of the manufacturing process in such a manner as to achieve homogeneous distribution in the finished explosive, including-- ``(1) Ethylene glycol dinitrate (EGDN),C&lt;INF&gt;2H&lt;INF&gt;4(NO&lt;INF&gt;3)&lt;INF&gt;2, molecular weight 152, when the minimum concentration in the finished explosive is 0.2 percent by mass; ``(2) 2,3-Dimethyl-2,3-dinitrobutane (DMNB), C&lt;INF&gt;6H&lt;INF&gt;12(NO&lt;INF&gt;2)&lt;INF&gt;2, molecular weight 176, when the minimum concentration in the finished explosive is 0.1 percent by mass; ``(3) Para-Mononitrotoluene (p-MNT), C&lt;INF&gt;7H&lt;INF&gt;7NO&lt;INF&gt;2, molecular weight 137, when the minimum concentration in the finished explosive is 0.5 percent by mass; ``(4) Ortho-Mononitrotoluene (o-MNT), C&lt;INF&gt;7H&lt;INF&gt;7NO&lt;INF&gt;2, molecular weight 137, when the minimum concentration in the finished explosive is 0.5 percent by mass; and ``(5) any other substance in the concentration specified by the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, which has been added to the table in part 2 of the Technical Annex to the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives.
`Plastic explosive' means an explosive material in flexible or elastic sheet form formulated with 1 or more high explosives which in their pure form have a vapor pressure less than 10&lt;SUP&gt;-4 Pascals at a temperature of 25 deg.
Celsius, is formulated with a binder material, and is as a mixture malleable or flexible at normal room temperature.''.
REQUIREMENT OF DETECTION AGENTS FOR PLASTIC EXPLOSIVES.
Section 842 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(l) It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture any plastic explosive which does not contain a detection agent.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to import or bring into the United States, or export from the United States, any plastic explosive which does not contain a detection agent.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the importation or bringing into the United States, or the exportation from the United States, of any plastic explosive which was imported, brought into, or manufactured in the United States before the effective date of this subsection by or on behalf of any agency of the United States performing military or police functions (including any military reserve component) or acting on behalf of the National Guard of any State, not later than 15 years after the date of entry into force of the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives, with respect to the United States.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to ship, transport, transfer, receive, or possess any plastic explosive which does not contain a detection agent.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply to-- ``(A) the shipment, transportation, transfer, receipt, or possession of any plastic explosive which was imported, brought into, or manufactured in the United States before the effective date of this subsection by any person during a period not exceeding 3 years after such effective date; or ``(B) the shipment, transportation, transfer, receipt, or possession of any plastic explosive, which was imported, brought into, or manufactured in the United States before the effective date of this subsection by or on behalf of any agency of the United States performing a military or police function (including any military reserve component) or by or on behalf of the National Guard of any State, not later than 15 years after the date of entry into force of the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives, with respect to the United States.
It shall be unlawful for any person, other than an agency of the United States (including any military reserve component) or the National Guard of any State, possessing any plastic explosive on the effective date of this subsection to fail to report to the Secretary within 120 days after the effective date of this subsection the quantity of such explosives possessed, the manufacturer or importer, any marks of identification on such explosives, and such other information as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.''.
Section 844(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Any person who violates subsections (a) through (i) or (l) through (n) of section 842 shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''.
Section 845 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by inserting ``(l), (m), (n), and (o) of section 842 and subsections'' after ``subsections''; and (B) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and which pertains to safety'' before the semicolon; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(c)(1) It is an affirmative defense against any proceeding involving subsection (l), (m), (n), or (o) of section 842 if the defendant proves by a preponderance of the evidence that the plastic explosive-- ``(A) consisted of a small amount of plastic explosive intended for and utilized solely in lawful-- ``(i) research, development, or testing of new or modified explosive materials; ``(ii) training in explosives detection or development or testing of explosives detection equipment; or ``(iii) forensic science purposes; or ``(B) was plastic explosive which, within 3 years after the date of entry into force of the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives, with respect to the United States, will be or is incorporated in a military device within the territory of the United States and remains an integral part of such military device, or is intended to be, or is incorporated in, and remains an integral part of a military device that is intended to become, or has become, the property of any agency of the United States performing military or police functions (including any military reserve component) or the National Guard of any State, wherever such device is located.
For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `military device' includes shells, bombs, projectiles, mines, missiles, rockets, shaped charges, grenades, perforators, and similar devices lawfully manufactured exclusively for military or police purposes.''.
Section 846 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``The''; (2) in the last sentence, by inserting ``subsection (m) or (n) of section 842 or'' before ``subsection''; and (3) by adding after and below the end the following: ``(b) The Attorney General shall exercise authority over violations of subsections (m) or (n) of section 842 only when they are committed by a member of a terrorist or revolutionary group.
In any matter involving a terrorist or revolutionary group or individual, as determined by the Attorney General, the Attorney General shall have primary investigative responsibility and the Secretary shall assist the Attorney General as requested.''.
The amendments made by this title shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.