CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES BY PERSONS SERVING WITH, EMPLOYED BY, OR ACCOMPANYING THE ARMED FORCES.
In General.--Subtitle A of title 10 of the United States Code is amended by inserting after chapter 49 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 50--CRIMINAL OFFENSES COMMITTED OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES ``Sec.
Persons serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside United States: trial by United States.
Persons serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside the United States: delivery to authorities of foreign country.
Military tribunals: concurrent jurisdiction.
Persons serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside United States: trial by United States ``(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, any person who, while serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside of the United States, engages in conduct which would constitute a criminal offense if the conduct were engaged in within the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States shall be guilty of a like offense against the United States and shall be subject to the same punishment as is provided under title 18 for such like offense.
A person serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside the United States is not punishable under subsection (a) for conduct described in that subsection if that person is not a national of the United States and was appointed to that person's position of employment in the country in which the person engaged in that conduct.
(1) Except in the case of a prosecution approved as provided in paragraph (2) or a prosecution before a court-martial, military commission, provost court, or other military tribunal, prosecution of a person may not be commenced under this section for an offense described in subsection (a) if a foreign government, in accordance with jurisdiction recognized by the United States, has prosecuted such person for the conduct constituting the offense described in subsection (a).
The Attorney General of the United States, the Deputy Attorney General of the United States, the Associate Attorney General of the United States, or an Assistant Attorney General of the United States may approve a prosecution which, except for this paragraph, is prohibited under paragraph (1).
An approval of prosecution under this paragraph must be in writing.
The authority to approve a prosecution under this paragraph may not be delegated below the level of Assistant Attorney General.
(1) The Secretary of Defense may designate and authorize any person serving in a law enforcement position in a criminal investigative agency of the Department of Defense to apprehend and detain, outside the United States, any person described in subsection (a) who is reasonably believed to have engaged in an offense under that subsection.
A person apprehended and detained under paragraph (1) shall be released to the custody of civilian law enforcement authorities of the United States for removal to the United States for judicial proceedings in relation to the conduct referred to in that paragraph unless (A) that person is delivered to authorities of a foreign country under section 992 of this title, or (B) that person is pending court- martial under chapter 47 of this title (the Uniform Code of Military Justice) for charges arising from such conduct.
Persons serving with, employed, by or accompanying the armed forces outside the United States: delivery to authorities of foreign country ``(a) A person designated and authorized under section 991(d) of this title may deliver any person to the appropriate authorities of a foreign country in which that person is alleged to have engaged in an offense under section 991(a) of this title if-- ``(1) the appropriate authorities of that country request the delivery of the person to such country for trial for such conduct as an offense under the laws of that country; and ``(2) the delivery of such person to that country is authorized by a treaty or other international agreement to which the United States is a party.
The Secretary of Defense may confine or otherwise restrain a person whose delivery is requested under subsection (a) until the completion of the trial of that person by the foreign country making the request.
The Secretary of Defense shall determine what officials of a foreign country constitute appropriate authorities for the purposes of this section.
Military tribunals: concurrent jurisdiction ``Nothing contained in this chapter deprives courts-martial, military commissions, provost courts, or other military tribunals of concurrent jurisdiction with respect to offenders or offenses that by statute or by the law of war may be tried by courts-martial, military commissions, provost courts, or other military tribunals.
Regulations ``The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations governing apprehension, detention, and removal of persons under this chapter.
Such regulations shall apply uniformly throughout the Department of Defense.
Definitions ``In this chapter: ``(1) The term `person serving with, employed by, or accompanying the armed forces outside of the United States' includes a person who is-- ``(A) a dependent of a member of the armed forces residing with the member outside the United States; ``(B) a civilian employee of a military department who is not a national of the host nation and is residing outside the United States in connection with that employment or a dependent of such an employee who is residing with that employee outside the United States; and ``(C) an employee of a Department of Defense contractor who is not a national of the host nation and is residing outside the United States in connection with that employment or a dependent of such an employee who is residing with that employee outside the United States.
The term `criminal offense' means an offense against the United States other than an infraction.
The term `national of the United States' means-- ``(A) a citizen of the United States; or ``(B) a person who, though not a citizen of the United States, owes permanent allegiance to the United States.
The term `United States', when used in a geographical sense, includes the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
The term `special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States' has the meaning given that term in section 7 of title 18.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of such subtitle, and at the beginning of part II of such subtitle, are each amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 49 the following: ``50.
Criminal Offenses Committed Outside the United States.