This Act may be cited as the ``Upper Mississippi Conservation and River Protection Act of 2012'' or the ``Upper Mississippi CARP Act''.
In this Act: (1) Alternative technology barrier.--The term ``alternative technology barrier'' means-- (A) an electric barrier; (B) an acoustic barrier; (C) a bubble barrier; and (D) any other barrier the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Asian carp.--The term ``Asian carp'' means-- (A) grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella); (B) silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix); (C) bighead carp (Hypophthalmichthys nobilis); and (D) black carp (Mylopharyngodon piceus).
Lock and dam 2.--The term ``Lock and Dam 2'' means the lock and dam located on Mississippi River mile 815.2 upstream of Hastings, Minnesota.
Lock and dam 4.--The term ``Lock and Dam 4'' means the lock and dam located on Mississippi River mile 752.8 in Alma, Wisconsin.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army, acting through the Chief of Engineers.
Upper st. anthony falls lock and dam.--The term ``Upper St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam'' means the lock and dam located on Mississippi River mile 853.9 in Minneapolis, Minnesota.
FEASIBILITY STUDY ON TEMPORARY CLOSURE OF UPPER ST. ANTHONY FALLS LOCK.
Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study on the feasibility of temporarily closing the lock at the Upper St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam to manage the threat of Asian carp traveling up the Mississippi River in the State of Minnesota.
Potential Impacts.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall assess the potential impacts, including environmental and economic impacts of-- (1) temporary closure of the lock; and (2) continuing to operate the lock.
Consultation.--The Secretary shall carry out the study in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior and appropriate Federal, State, and local entities.
Public Comment.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall provide an opportunity for, and take into consideration, public comments.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study.
FEASIBILITY STUDY ON USE OF OTHER ASIAN CARP CONTROL MEASURES.
Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study on the feasibility of implementing control measures at the Upper St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam to manage the threat of Asian carp traveling up the Mississippi River in the State of Minnesota.
Types of Control Measures.--The study shall include an examination of-- (1) permanent closure of the lock; (2) modified lock operations; (3) the use of an alternative technology barrier; and (4) any other control measures the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Potential Impacts.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall assess the potential impacts, including environmental and economic impacts of-- (1) implementing each of the control measures described in subsection (b); and (2) not implementing any control measures.
Consultation.--The Secretary shall carry out the study in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior and appropriate Federal, State, and local entities.
Public Comment.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall provide an opportunity for, and take into consideration, public comments.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study.
CLOSURE OF LOCKS TO PREVENT SPREAD OF ASIAN CARP.
Discretionary Closure.--The Secretary may close the lock at the Upper St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam if the Secretary determines in writing, based on the assessment of potential impacts under section 3(b), that closure of the lock is justified as a method to manage the threat of Asian carp traveling up the Mississippi River in the State of Minnesota.
Mandatory Closure.--The Secretary shall close the lock at the Upper St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam if the Secretary determines that-- (1) 1 or more live adult Asian carp has been captured above Lock and Dam 2; or (2) 1 or more juvenile Asian carp has been captured above Lock and Dam 4.
Period of Closure.--If the Secretary closes the lock under this section, the Secretary may reopen the lock after the Secretary determines in writing that adequate measures are in place to manage the threat of Asian carp moving upstream of the Upper St. Anthony Falls Lock and Dam.
Emergency Operations.--Nothing in this section shall prevent the Secretary from carrying out emergency lock operations necessary to mitigate flood damage.
ASIAN CARP CONTROL STRATEGY FRAMEWORK.
The Council on Environmental Quality shall incorporate the Upper Mississippi River and tributaries, the Minnesota River, and the St. Croix River into the Asian Carp Control Strategy Framework of the Council.
It is the sense of Congress that, to the maximum extent practicable, Federal agencies researching Asian carp control technologies should partner with State and local shareholders, giving priority to those collaborative partnerships in which the State and local shareholders contribute to the cost of the research.