This Act may be cited as the ``World War II Peace Accords Commemorative Coin Act''.
CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The date of September 2, 1995, will mark the 50th anniversary of the signing of the peace accords among the nations involved in World War II in the Pacific.
Such date marked the end of all hostilities in the largest war the world has ever known.
September 2, 1945, also marked the birth of a democratic form of government in Japan.
Sense of the Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the 50th anniversary of the signing of the peace accords on the U.S.S.
Missouri should not go unrecognized at the national level; and (2) the United States should recognize such anniversary by minting and issuing a commemorative coin.
Half Dollar Clad Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 500,000 half dollar coins which shall be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Design.--The design of the half dollar coins shall be emblematic of the signing of the peace accords on September 2, 1945.
On each coin shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1995'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5132(a)(1) of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Admiral Nimitz Foundation and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Period for Issuance.--The coins minted under this Act may be issued by the Secretary beginning on January 1, 1995.
Termination of Authority.--Coins may not be minted under this Act after December 31, 1995.
Proof and Uncirculated Coins.--The coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Sale Price.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall sell the coins minted under this Act at a price equal to the face value, plus the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make any bulk sales of the coins minted under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sale prices with respect to such prepaid orders shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $5.00 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
The surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of the coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Admiral Nimitz Foundation for the purpose of preserving the Pacific War heritage of the United States.
The Comptroller General shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Admiral Nimitz Foundation as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under section 8.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.