PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN OFFICES AND POSITIONS WITHIN THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH.
Salary of the Vice President.-- (1) In general.--Section 104 of title 3, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsection (a) as subsection (a)(1) and subsection (b) as paragraph (2); and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1)(A) Effective at the beginning of the first month in which any comparability payment becomes payable under section 5304 or 5304a of title 5 with respect to General Schedule employees within the District of Columbia during any year, the per annum rate of salary of the Vice President (exclusive of any previous adjustment under this subsection) shall be adjusted by an amount, rounded to the nearest multiple of $100 (or if midway between multiples of $100, to the next highest multiple of $100) equal to the percentage of such per annum rate which corresponds to the percentage adjustment becoming so payable with respect to General Schedule employees within the District of Columbia under such section 5304 or 5304a (as applicable).
If an adjustment under this subsection is scheduled to take effect on the same date as an adjustment under subsection (a), the adjustment under subsection (a) shall be made first.
The rate of salary of the Vice President, as adjusted under paragraph (1), shall for all purposes be treated as the rate of salary of the Vice President, except as otherwise provided in subsection (a), paragraph (1), or any other provision of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be considered to permit or require the continuation of an adjustment under paragraph (1) after the comparability payment (for General Schedule employees within the District of Columbia) on which it was based has been terminated or superseded.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 104 of title 3, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in the second sentence of subsection (a)(1) (as so redesignated)-- (i) by striking ``Subject to subsection (b),'' and inserting ``Subject to paragraph (2),''; and (ii) by inserting ``(exclusive of any previous adjustment under subsection (b))'' after ``the salary of the Vice President''; and (B) in subsection (a)(2) (as so redesignated), by striking ``subsection (a)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''.
Executive Schedule Pay Rates.-- (1) In general.--Section 5318 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsection (a) as subsection (a)(1) and subsection (b) as paragraph (2); and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1)(A) Effective at the beginning of the first applicable pay period commencing on or after the first day of the month in which any comparability payment becomes payable under section 5304 or 5304a with respect to General Schedule employees within the District of Columbia during any year, the annual rate of pay for positions at each level of the Executive Schedule (exclusive of any previous adjustment under this subsection) shall be adjusted by an amount, rounded to the nearest multiple of $100 (or if midway between multiples of $100, to the next highest multiple of $100) equal to the percentage of such annual rate of pay which corresponds to the percentage adjustment becoming so payable with respect to General Schedule employees within the District of Columbia under such section 5304 or 5304a (as applicable).
If an adjustment under this subsection is scheduled to take effect on the same date as an adjustment under subsection (a), the adjustment under subsection (a) shall be made first.
An annual rate of pay, as adjusted under paragraph (1), shall for all purposes be treated as the annual rate of pay for the positions involved, except as otherwise provided in subsection (a), paragraph (1), or any other provision of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be considered to permit or require the continuation of an adjustment under paragraph (1) after the comparability payment (for General Schedule employees within the District of Columbia) on which it was based has been terminated or superseded.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 5318 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in the first sentence of subsection (a)(1) (as so redesignated)-- (i) by striking ``Subject to subsection (b),'' and inserting ``Subject to paragraph (2),''; and (ii) by inserting ``(exclusive of any previous adjustment under subsection (b))'' after ``Executive Schedule''; and (B) in subsection (a)(2) (as so redesignated), by striking ``subsection (a)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''.
Amendments Relating to Certain Limitation and Other Provisions.-- (1) Provisions to be applied by excluding executive schedule comparability adjustment.--Sections 5303(f), 5304(h)(1)(F), 5306(e), and 5373(a) of title 5, United States Code, are each amended by inserting ``, exclusive of any adjustment under section 5318(b)'' after ``Executive Schedule''.
Limitation on certain payments.--Section 5307(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) In the case of an employee who is receiving basic pay under section 5372, 5376, or 5383, paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `the annual rate of salary of the Vice President of the United States' for `the annual rate of basic pay payable for level I of the Executive Schedule'.
Regulations under subsection (c) may extend the application of the preceding sentence to other equivalent categories of employees.''.
References to level iv of the executive schedule.-- Sections 5372(b)(1)(C), 5372a(b)(1), 5376(b)(1)(B), and 5382(b) of title 5, United States Code, are each amended by striking ``level IV'' each place it appears and inserting ``level III''.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO CERTAIN OFFICES AND POSITIONS WITHIN THE JUDICIAL BRANCH.
Increase in Maximum Rates of Basic Pay Allowable.-- (1) For positions covered by section 604(a)(5) of title 28, united states code.--Section 604(a)(5) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``by law'' and inserting ``by law (except that the rate of basic pay fixed under this paragraph for any such employee may not exceed the rate for level IV of the Executive Schedule)''.
For circuit executives.--Section 332(f)(1) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315'' and inserting ``level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314''.
For personnel of the administrative office of the united states courts.-- (A) In general.--Section 3(a) of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts Personnel Act of 1990 (Public Law 101-474; 28 United States Code 602 note) is amended-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``level V'' and inserting ``level IV''; and (ii) in paragraph (10), by striking ``level IV'' and inserting ``level III''.
Provisions relating to certain additional positions.--Section 603 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315'' and inserting ``level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314''.
Salary of the Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts.--Section 603 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``district'' and inserting ``circuit''.
The amendments made by this Act shall be effective with respect to pay periods beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.