This Act may be cited as the ``National Constitution Center Commemorative Coin Act of 2002''.
Congress finds that-- (1) a Constitutional Convention was convened in the summer of 1787 in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania for the purposes of replacing the failed Articles of Confederation as a framework for governing the 13 American colonies newly independent from Great Britain; (2) the United States Constitution produced by the Convention would set the United States of America on a unique course of experiment in self-government that would profoundly impact the United States and the world; (3) in its deliberations and promotion through such literary works as The Federalist Papers, the United States Constitution drew upon the successes and failures of nations and peoples dating as far back as the city-state republics of ancient Greece in forming representative governments; (4) the first 10 amendments to the Constitution, known as the Bill of Rights, comprise the best written set of legal protections of the rights and dignity of the individual in the history of human civilization and continue to be the benchmark for nations' adherence to human rights standards; (5) the principles of the United States Constitution have been enacted into the governing laws of numerous free countries around the globe, and are reflected in the founding documents of the United Nations; (6) the United States Constitution created the framework for what is now the oldest representative democracy in the world; (7) in its wisdom, the Constitutional Convention created a mechanism through which the United States Constitution can be perfected, as it has been 27 times to date, to better reflect its founding ideals, as well as to accommodate changing circumstances; (8) the rights and freedoms secured to Americans by the United States Constitution have and continue to draw millions from around the globe to the shores of this Nation; (9) all Americans should gain an understanding of and appreciation for the United States Constitution and the role this remarkable document plays in the freedoms and quality of life they enjoy; (10) the National Constitution Center was established by the Constitution Heritage Act of 1988 (16 United States Code 407aa et seq.
), which was signed into law by President Ronald Reagan on September 16, 1988, to provide for continuing interpretation of the Constitution and to establish a national center for the United States Constitution; and (11) the National Constitution Center, located at the site of the birth of the Constitution, only steps away from the Liberty Bell and Independence Hall in the Independence National Historic Park in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, is the only center in the world solely dedicated to promoting understanding of the Constitution and its values and ideals.
$1 Silver Coins.--The Secretary of the Treasury (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act, to the extent available, and from other available sources, if necessary.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the National Constitution Center in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act, there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2003''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Design Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the Constitution Center Coin Advisory Committee; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to mint coins under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning on January 1, 2003, and ending when the quantity of coins issued under this Act reaches the limit under section 3(a).
Sale Price.--The coins minted under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this Act shall include a surcharge established by the Secretary, in an amount equal to not more than $10 per coin.
In General.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, the proceeds from the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins minted under this Act shall be paid promptly by the Secretary to the National Constitution Center.
Use of Proceeds.--The proceeds received by the National Constitution Center under subsection (a) shall be used by the Center to promote a greater understanding of the Constitution and its values and ideals.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the National Constitution Center as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (a).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act, unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution, the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration.