This Act may be cited as the ``1993 World Trade Center Victims Compensation Act''.
TITLE I--COMPENSATION PROVISIONS SEC.
In this title, the following definitions apply: (1) Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means an individual filing a claim for compensation under section 104(a)(1).
Collateral source.--The term ``collateral source'' means all collateral sources, including life insurance, pension funds, death benefit programs, and payments by Federal, State, or local governments related to the terrorist-related bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City on February 26, 1993.
Economic loss.--The term ``economic loss'' means any pecuniary loss resulting from harm (including the loss of earnings or other benefits related to employment, medical expense loss, replacement services loss, loss due to death, burial costs, and loss of business or employment opportunities) to the extent recovery for such loss is allowed under applicable State law.
Eligible individual.--The term ``eligible individual'' means an individual determined to be eligible for compensation under section 104(c).
Noneconomic losses.--The term ``noneconomic losses'' means losses for physical and emotional pain, suffering, inconvenience, physical impairment, mental anguish, disfigurement, loss of enjoyment of life, loss of society and companionship, loss of consortium (other than loss of domestic service), hedonic damages, injury to reputation, and all other nonpecuniary losses of any kind or nature.
Special master.--The term ``Special Master'' means the Special Master appointed under section 404(a) of the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund of 2001 (title IV of the Air Transportation Safety and System Stabilization Act (Public Law 107-42; 115 United States Statutes at Large 237)).
It is the purpose of this title to provide compensation to any individual (or relatives of a deceased individual) who was physically injured or killed as a result of the terrorist-related bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City on February 26, 1993.
In General.--The Attorney General, acting through the Special Master, shall-- (1) administer the compensation program established under this title; (2) promulgate all procedural and substantive rules for the administration of this title; and (3) employ and supervise hearing officers and other administrative personnel to perform the duties of the Special Master under this title.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to pay the administrative and support costs for the Special Master in carrying out this title.
DETERMINATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR COMPENSATION.
Filing of Claim.-- (1) In general.--A claimant may file a claim for compensation under this title with the Special Master.
The claim shall be on the form developed under paragraph (2) and shall state the factual basis for eligibility for compensation and the amount of compensation sought.
Claim form.-- (A) In general.--The Special Master shall develop a claim form that claimants shall use when submitting claims under paragraph (1).
The Special Master shall ensure that such form can be filed electronically, if determined to be practicable.
Contents.--The form developed under subparagraph (A) shall request-- (i) information from the claimant concerning the physical harm that the claimant suffered, or in the case of a claim filed on behalf of a decedent information confirming the decedent's death, as a result of the terrorist- related bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City on February 26, 1993; (ii) information from the claimant concerning any possible economic and noneconomic losses that the claimant suffered as a result of such bombing; and (iii) information regarding collateral sources of compensation the claimant has received or is entitled to receive as a result of such bombing.
Limitation.--No claim may be filed under paragraph (1) after the date that is 2 years after the date on which regulations are promulgated under section 106.
Review and Determination.-- (1) Review.--The Special Master shall review a claim submitted under subsection (a) and determine-- (A) whether the claimant is an eligible individual under subsection (c); (B) with respect to a claimant determined to be an eligible individual-- (i) the extent of the harm to the claimant, including any economic and noneconomic losses; and (ii) the amount of compensation to which the claimant is entitled based on the harm to the claimant, the facts of the claim, and the individual circumstances of the claimant.
Negligence.--With respect to a claimant, the Special Master shall not consider negligence or any other theory of liability.
Determination.--Not later than 120 days after that date on which a claim is filed under subsection (a), the Special Master shall complete a review, make a determination, and provide written notice to the claimant, with respect to the matters that were the subject of the claim under review.
Such a determination shall be final and not subject to judicial review.
Rights of claimant.--A claimant in a review under paragraph (1) shall have-- (A) the right to be represented by an attorney; (B) the right to present evidence, including the presentation of witnesses and documents; and (C) any other due process rights determined appropriate by the Special Master.
No punitive damages.--The Special Master may not include amounts for punitive damages in any compensation paid under a claim under this title.
Collateral compensation.--The Special Master shall reduce the amount of compensation determined under paragraph (1)(B)(ii) by the amount of the collateral source compensation the claimant has received or is entitled to receive as a result of the terrorist-related bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City on February 26, 1993.
Eligibility.-- (1) In general.--A claimant shall be determined to be an eligible individual for purposes of this subsection if the Special Master determines that such claimant-- (A) is an individual described in paragraph (2); and (B) meets the requirements of paragraph (3).
Individuals.--A claimant is an individual described in this paragraph if the claimant is-- (A) an individual who-- (i) was present at the World Trade Center in New York City at the time, or in the immediate aftermath, of the terrorist-related bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City on February 26, 1993; (ii) suffered physical harm or death as a result of such bombing; and (iii) is not identified by the Attorney General to have been a participant or conspirator in such bombing; or (B) in the case of a decedent who is an individual described in subparagraph (A), the personal representative of the decedent who files a claim on behalf of the decedent.
Requirements.-- (A) Single claim.--Not more than one claim may be submitted under this title by an individual or on behalf of a deceased individual.
Limitation on civil action.-- (i) In general.--Upon the submission of a claim under this title, the claimant waives the right to file a civil action (or to be a party to an action) in any Federal or State court for damages sustained as a result of the terrorist- related bombing of the World Trade Center in New York City on February 26, 1993.
The preceding sentence does not apply to a civil action to recover collateral source obligations.
Pending actions.--In the case of an individual who is a party to a civil action described in clause (i), such individual may not submit a claim under this title unless such individual withdraws from such action by the date that is 90 days after the date on which regulations are promulgated under section 106.
PAYMENTS TO ELIGIBLE INDIVIDUALS.
In General.--Not later than 20 days after the date on which a determination is made by the Special Master regarding the amount of compensation due a claimant under this title, the Special Master shall authorize payment to such claimant of the amount determined with respect to the claimant.
Payment Authority.--This title constitutes budget authority in advance of appropriations Acts and represents the obligation of the Federal Government to provide for the payment of amounts for compensation under this title.
Additional Funding.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General is authorized to accept such amounts as may be contributed by individuals, business concerns, or other entities to carry out this title, under such terms and conditions as the Attorney General may impose.
Use of separate account.--In making payments under this section, amounts contained in any account containing funds provided under paragraph (1) shall be used prior to using appropriated amounts.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Special Master, shall promulgate regulations to carry out this title, including regulations with respect to-- (1) forms to be used in submitting claims under this title; (2) the information to be included in such forms; (3) procedures for hearing and the presentation of evidence; (4) procedures to assist an individual in filing and pursuing claims under this title; and (5) other matters determined appropriate by the Attorney General.
The United States shall have the right of subrogation with respect to any claim paid by the United States under this title.
TITLE II--INCOME TAX PROVISIONS SEC.
In General.--Section 692(d)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definition of specified terrorist victim) is amended by inserting ``February 26, 1993,'' before ``April 19, 1995''.
Effective Date; Waiver of Limitations.-- (1) Effective date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Waiver of limitations.--If refund or credit of any overpayment of tax resulting from the amendment made by this section is prevented at any time before the close of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act by the operation of any law or rule of law (including res judicata), such refund or credit may nevertheless be made or allowed if claim therefor is filed before the close of such period.