This Act may be cited as the ``Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 2002''.
STATEMENT OF POLICY; FINDINGS.
Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to work cooperatively with the Russian Federation to prevent the diversion of weapons of mass destruction and material (including nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons) and scientific and technical expertise necessary to design and build weapons of mass destruction.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) It is in the national security interest of the United States to reduce the number of nuclear warheads in the United States and Russian arsenals, to reduce the quantity of nuclear weapons materials in the United States and Russia, and to expand existing programs to prevent diversion and proliferation of Russian nuclear weapons and fissile materials.
The President should have at his disposal the ability to successfully implement cooperative threat reduction programs that prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction.
As part of the effort to prevent the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, the United States should work with the Russian Federation to create a comprehensive inventory and data exchange of all United States and Russian nuclear weapons- grade material.
There should be a clear plan for the implementation of the reductions in nuclear arsenals agreed upon by President Bush and President Putin.
The United States should continue to observe the currently maintained moratorium on nuclear tests.
If the President determines that it is in the interest of the United States to resume testing, then he should inform Congress 12 months prior to the resumption of testing, giving Congress an opportunity to express itself on this most important issue.
TITLE I--COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION WAIVER AUTHORITY SEC.
COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION WAIVER AUTHORITY.
Section 1203 of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Act of 1993 (22 United States Code 5952) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Waiver.--The restrictions in subsection (d) and section 502 of the Freedom Support Act (P.L.
102-511) shall not apply if the President certifies in writing to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate that waiving such restrictions is important to the national security interests of the United States.''.
TITLE II--DATA EXCHANGE WITH RUSSIA RELATING TO WEAPONS OF MASS DESTRUCTION SEC.
Inventories and Data Exchanges.--It is the policy of the United States to establish cooperatively with Russia-- (1) comprehensive inventories of the weapons-grade nuclear materials, tritium, and assembled warheads of the United States and of Russia; and (2) exchanges between the United States and Russia of information as to the quantities of such materials, tritium, and warheads in such inventories.
Priority.--In carrying out the policy set forth in subsection (a), priority shall be placed on establishing comprehensive inventories of, and exchanges of information as to the quantities of, tactical nuclear warheads.
COMMUNICATION OF RESTRICTED DATA.
Subsection d. of section 144 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2164) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``, tritium,'' after ``fissile material''; (B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting ``, including tactical weapons and warheads'' after ``atomic weapons''; and (C) in subparagraph (D), by inserting ``, including data on tritium'' after ``related data''; and (4) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) is part of a reciprocal exchange of information; and''.
Report Required.--Not later than six months after the date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter the President shall submit to Congress a report describing the progress that has been made on the implementation of section 201.
Form of Report.--Each report under subsection (a) shall be submitted in both an unclassified and classified format as necessary.
Termination.--The requirement under subsection (a) shall terminate when the comprehensive inventory (as specified in section 201(a)(1)) is completed and information is exchanged between the United States and Russian governments (as specified in section 201(a)(2)).
TITLE III--EXPANDED NON-PROLIFERATION FUNDING SEC.
To carry out cooperative threat reduction and related programs in fiscal year 2003, there is authorized to be appropriated: (1) For the Department of Defense, $600,000,000, of which $180,000,000 is authorized for chemical weapons destruction activities in the Russian Federation, including the construction of facilities at Shchuch'ye.
For the Department of Energy, $1,400,000,000 of which-- (A) with respect to defense nuclear nonproliferation-- (i) $340,000,000 is authorized for nonproliferation verification and research and development; (ii) $295,000,000 is authorized for international nuclear materials disposition; (iii) $60,000,000 is authorized for Russian transition initiatives; and (iv) $25,000,000 is authorized for international nuclear safety; and (B) $520,000,000 is authorized for weapons activities, campaigns, and high energy density physics, of which $50,000,000 may be used for experimental support technologies.
For the Department of State, $300,000,000.
TITLE IV--MATTERS RELATING TO THE NUCLEAR POSTURE REVIEW SEC.
SUPPORT OF PRESIDENT'S OBJECTIVE FOR OPERATIONALLY DEPLOYED NUCLEAR WARHEADS.
Congress supports the President's objective, as stated in the Nuclear Posture Review dated January 2002, for achieving, as of fiscal year 2012, a posture under which the United States maintains a number of operationally deployed nuclear warheads at a level of from 1,700 to 2,200 such warheads.
ANNUAL REPORT ON NUMBER AND POSTURE OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
Not later than October 1 of each year, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a report on the number and posture of the nuclear warheads of the United States.
The report shall specify the number of such warheads-- (1) operationally deployed; (2) in the responsive force; (3) in the reserve force, including the number of active weapons and the number of inactive weapons; and (4) scheduled to be dismantled.
REPORT ON OPTIONS FOR ACHIEVING, PRIOR TO FISCAL YEAR 2012, PRESIDENT'S OBJECTIVE FOR OPERATIONALLY DEPLOYED NUCLEAR WARHEADS.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a report on options for achieving, prior to fiscal year 2012, a posture under which the United States maintains a number of operationally deployed nuclear warheads at a level of from 1,700 to 2,200 such warheads.
The report shall include the following: (1) For each of fiscal years 2006, 2008, and 2010, an assessment of the options for achieving such posture as of such fiscal year.
An assessment of the effects of achieving such posture prior to fiscal year 2012 on cost, compliance with environmental law, the dismantlement workforce, relations with Russia, and any other affected matter.
TITLE V--NUCLEAR TESTING SEC.
MORATORIUM ON UNDERGROUND TESTING OF NUCLEAR WEAPONS.
Extension of Moratorium.--The moratorium on underground testing of nuclear weapons maintained by the United States shall continue to be maintained through fiscal year 2003.
Notification.--Not less than 12 months before the United States conducts an underground test of a nuclear weapon, the President shall submit to Congress a report on the test to be conducted.
The report shall include each of the following: (1) The date on which the President intends such test to be conducted.
The President's certification that the national security of the United States requires that such test be conducted, and an explanation of the reasons why the national security so requires.
An assessment of the expected reactions of other nations to the test.
Report on Test Readiness.--Not later than March 1, 2003, the Secretary of Energy shall submit to Congress a report on the options for reducing the amount of time required to conduct an underground test of a nuclear weapon after a decision to conduct such a test is made.
The report shall include the following: (1) The findings of the study carried out by the Department of Energy in fiscal year 2002 that examined such options.
The assessment of the Secretary as to whether reducing such amount of time to less than 24 to 36 months is feasible.
The technical challenges and requirements associated with reducing such amount of time to less than 24 to 36 months.
The cost, during the period from fiscal year 2003 to 2012, associated with reducing such amount of time to less than 24 to 36 months.