This Act may be cited as the ``Indian Gaming Regulatory Improvement Act of 2001''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE INDIAN GAMING REGULATORY ACT.
The Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (25 United States Code 2701 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 4(7) (25 United States Code 2703(7)), by adding at the end the following: ``(G) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, sections 1 through 7 of the Act of January 2, 1951 (commonly known as the Gambling Devices Transportation Act (15 United States Code 1171-1177)) shall not apply to any gaming described in subparagraph (A)(i) (class II gaming) where electronic, computer, or other technologic aids are used in connection with any such gaming.
''; (2) in section 7 (25 United States Code 2706)-- (A) in subsection (c)-- (i) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and'' at the end thereof; (ii) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5); and (iii) by inserting after paragraph (3), the following: ``(4) the strategic plan for Commission activities.
''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Strategic Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--The strategic plan required under subsection (c)(4) shall include-- ``(A) a comprehensive mission statement covering the major functions and operations of the Commission; ``(B) the general goals and objectives, including outcome-related goals and objectives, for the major functions and operations of the Commission; ``(C) a description of how the general goals and objectives are to be achieved, including a description of the operational processes, skills and technology, and the human, capital, information, and other resources required to meet those goals and objectives; ``(D) a performance plan that shall be related to the general goals and objectives of the strategic plan; ``(E) an identification of the key factors external to the Commission and beyond its control that could significantly affect the achievement of the general goals and objectives; and ``(F) a description of the program evaluations used in establishing or revising the general goals and objectives, with a schedule for future program evaluations.
Term of plan.--The strategic plan shall cover a period of not less than 5 fiscal years beginning with the fiscal year in which the plan is submitted.
The strategic plan shall be updated and revised at least every 4 years.
Performance plan.--The performance plan under paragraph (1)(D) shall be consistent with the strategic plan.
In developing the performance plan, the Commission should be consistent with the requirements of section 1115 of title 31, United States Code (the Government Performance and Results Act).
Consultation.--In developing the strategic plan, the Commission shall consult with the Congress and tribal governments, and shall solicit and consider the views and suggestions of those entities that may be potentially affected by or interested in such a plan.
''; (3) in section 11(b)(2)(F)(i) (25 United States Code 2710(b)(2)(F)(i)), by striking ``primary management'' and all that follows through ``such officials'' and inserting ``tribal gaming commissioners, key tribal gaming commission employees, and primary management officials and key employees of the gaming enterprise and that oversight of primary management officials and key employees''; (4) in section 18(a) (25 United States Code 2717(a))-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``by each'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``pursuant to section 22(a)''; (B) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3); and (C) by redesignating paragraphs (4) through (6) as paragraphs (2) through (4), respectively; (5) by redesignating section 22 (25 United States Code 2721) as section 25; and (6) by inserting after section 21 (25 United States Code 2720) the following: ``SEC.
Establishment of Schedule of Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in this section, the Commission shall establish a schedule of fees to be paid annually to the Commission by each gaming operation that conducts a class II or class III gaming activity that is regulated by this Act.
Rates.--The rate of fees under the schedule established under paragraph (1) that are imposed on the gross revenues from each activity described in such paragraph shall be as follows: ``(A) A fee of not more than 2.5 percent shall be imposed on the first $1,500,000 of such gross revenues.
A fee of not more than 5 percent shall be imposed on amounts in excess of the first $1,500,000 of such gross revenues.
Total amount.--The total amount of all fees imposed during any fiscal year under the schedule established under paragraph (1) shall not exceed $8,000,000.
Commission Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--By a vote of not less than 2 members of the Commission the Commission shall adopt the schedule of fees provided for under this section.
Such fees shall be payable to the Commission on a quarterly basis.
Fees assessed for services.--The aggregate amount of fees assessed under this section shall be reasonably related to the costs of services provided by the Commission to Indian tribes under this Act (including the cost of issuing regulations necessary to carry out this Act).
In assessing and collecting fees under this section, the Commission shall take into account the duties of, and services provided by, the Commission under this Act.
Rulemaking.--The Commission shall promulgate regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection.
Consultation.--In establishing a schedule of fees under this section, the Commission shall consult with Indian tribes.
Fee Reduction Program.-- ``(1) In general.--In making a determination of the amount of fees to be assessed for any class II or class III gaming activity under the schedule of fees under this section, the Commission may provide for a reduction in the amount of fees that otherwise would be collected on the basis of the following factors: ``(A) The extent of the regulation of the gaming activity involved by a State or Indian tribe (or both).
The extent of self-regulating activities, as defined by this Act, conducted by the Indian tribe.
Other factors determined by the Commission, including ``(i) the unique nature of tribal gaming as compared to commercial gaming, other governmental gaming, and charitable gaming; ``(ii) the broad variations in the nature, scale, and size of tribal gaming activity; ``(iii) the inherent sovereign rights of Indian tribes with respect to regulating the affairs of Indian tribes; ``(iv) the findings and purposes under sections 2 and 3; ``(v) the amount of interest or investment income derived from the Indian gaming regulation accounts; and ``(vi) any other matter that is consistent with the purposes under section 3.
Rulemaking.--The Commission shall promulgate regulations as may be necessary to carry out this subsection.
Consultation.--In establishing any fee reduction program under this subsection, the Commission shall consult with Indian tribes.
Indian Gaming Regulation Accounts.-- ``(1) In general.--All fees and civil forfeitures collected by the Commission pursuant to this Act shall be maintained in separate, segregated accounts, and shall only be expended for purposes set forth in this Act.
Investments.--It shall be the duty of the Commission to invest such portion of the accounts maintained under paragraph (1) as are not, in the judgment of the Commission, required to meet immediate expenses.
The Commission shall invest the amounts deposited under this Act only in interest- bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the accounts maintained under paragraph (1), except special obligations issued exclusively to such accounts, may be sold by the Commission at the market price, and such special obligations may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest.
Credits to the indian gaming regulatory accounts.-- The interest on, and proceeds from, the sale or redemption of any obligations held in the accounts maintained under paragraph (1) shall be credited to and form a part of such accounts.
Class I Gaming.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, class I gaming on Indian lands shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Indian tribes and shall not be subject to the provisions of this Act.
Class II Gaming.--Effective on the date of enactment of this section, an Indian tribe shall retain primary jurisdiction to regulate class II gaming activities which, at a minimum, shall be conducted in conformity with section 11 and regulations promulgated pursuant to subsection (d).
Class III Gaming.--Effective on the date of enactment of this section, an Indian tribe shall retain primary jurisdiction to regulate class III gaming activities authorized under this Act.
Any class III gaming operated by an Indian tribe pursuant to this Act shall be conducted in conformity with section 11 and regulations promulgated pursuant to subsection (d).
Rulemaking.-- ``(1) In general.-- ``(A) Promulgation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Improvement Act of 2001, the Commission shall develop procedures under subchapter III of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, to negotiate and promulgate regulations relating to-- ``(i) the monitoring and regulation of tribal gaming; ``(ii) the establishment and regulation of internal control systems; and ``(iii) the conduct of background investigation.
Publication of proposed regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Improvement Act of 2001, the Commission shall publish in the Federal Register proposed regulations developed by a negotiated rulemaking committee pursuant to this section.
Committee.--A negotiated rulemaking committee established pursuant to section 565 of title 5, United States Code, to carry out this subsection shall be composed only of Federal and Indian tribal government representatives, a majority of whom shall be nominated by and be representative of Indian tribes that conduct gaming pursuant to this Act.
Existing Regulations.--Regulations that establish minimum internal control standards that are promulgated by the Commission and in effect on the date of enactment of this section shall, effective on the date that is 1 year after such date of enactment, have no force or effect.
USE OF NATIONAL INDIAN GAMING COMMISSION CIVIL FINES.
In General.--Amounts collected by the Commission pursuant to section 14 shall be deposited in a separate Indian gaming regulation account as established under section 22(d).
Funds in such accounts shall be available to the Commission, as provided for in advance in appropriations Acts, for carrying out this Act.
Use of Funds.--The Commission may provide grants and technical assistance to Indian tribes from any funds secured by the Commission pursuant to section 14, which funds shall be made available only for the following purposes: ``(1) To provide technical training and other assistance to Indian tribes to strengthen the regulatory integrity of Indian gaming.
To provide assistance to Indian tribes to assess the feasibility of non-gaming economic development activities on Indian lands.
To provide assistance to Indian tribes to devise and implement programs and treatment services for individuals diagnosed as problem gamblers.
To provide other forms of assistance to Indian tribes not inconsistent with the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act.
Source of Funds.--Amounts used to carry out subsection (b) may only be drawn from funds-- ``(1) collected by the Commission pursuant to section 14; and ``(2) the use of which has been authorized in advance by an appropriations Act.
Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Commission shall consult with Indian tribes and any other appropriate tribal or Federal officials.
Regulations.--The Commission may promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this section.