This Act may be cited as the ``Stop Tuberculosis (TB) Now Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1)(A) Tuberculosis is a great health and economic burden to impoverished nations and a health and security threat to the United States and other industrialized countries.
Tuberculosis is one of the greatest infectious causes of death of adults worldwide, killing nearly 2,000,000 people per year--one person every 15 seconds.
An estimated 8,000,000 individuals develop active tuberculosis each year.
Today, tuberculosis is the leading killer of women of reproductive age and of people who are HIV-positive.
Tuberculosis is spreading as a result of inadequate treatment and is a disease that knows no national borders.
With over 50 percent of tuberculosis cases in the United States attributable to foreign-born individuals and with the increase in international travel, commerce, and migration, elimination of tuberculosis in the United States depends on efforts to control the disease in developing countries.
The threat that tuberculosis poses for Americans derives from the global spread of tuberculosis and the emergence and spread of strains of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB).
Up to 50,000,000 individuals may be infected with multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.
In the United States, tuberculosis treatment, normally about $2,000 per patient, increases to as much as $1,000,000 per patient to treat multi-drug resistant tuberculosis, and treatment may not even be successful.
Without access to treatment, multi-drug resistant tuberculosis is a virtual death sentence.
There is a highly effective and inexpensive treatment for standard tuberculosis.
Recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO) as the best curative method for tuberculosis, this strategy, known as DOTS (Directly Observed Treatment Short-course), includes low-cost effective diagnosis, treatment, monitoring, and record keeping, as well as a reliable drug supply.
A centerpiece of DOTS is observing patients to ensure that they take their medication and complete treatment.
DOTS is one of the most cost-effective health interventions available today.
A full course of DOTS drugs costs as little as $10 in low-income countries.
Proper DOTS treatment is imperative to prevent the development of dangerous multi-drug resistant tuberculosis that arises through improper or incomplete tuberculosis treatment.
Building upon the DOTS strategy, DOTS-Plus is a comprehensive tuberculosis management strategy that works as a supplement to the standard DOTS strategy to address areas where there is high prevalence of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.
The Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria is an important new global partnership established to combat these 3 infectious diseases that together kill 6,000,000 people a year.
Expansion of effective tuberculosis treatment programs constitutes a major component of Global Fund investment, along with integrated efforts to address HIV and tuberculosis in areas of high prevalence.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) is actively involved with global tuberculosis control efforts since the global tuberculosis epidemic directly impacts tuberculosis in the United States, and because Congress has strongly urged the CDC each year to increase its involvement with international tuberculosis control efforts.
The CDC is assisting countries with a high burden of tuberculosis-- (A) to implement the World Health Organization- recommended control strategies, DOTS and DOTS-Plus; (B) to identify and treat persons with multi-drug resistant tuberculosis; and (C) to conduct research to identify new diagnostics, treatments, and interventions to control tuberculosis.
FOREIGN ASSISTANCE FOR TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION, TREATMENT, AND CONTROL.
Amendment to Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.--Chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 104 the following new section: ``SEC.
ASSISTANCE FOR TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION, TREATMENT, AND CONTROL.
Statement of Policy.--Congress recognizes the growing international problem of tuberculosis and the impact its continued existence has on those nations that had previously largely controlled the disease.
Congress further recognizes that the means exist to control and treat tuberculosis, and that it is therefore a major objective of the foreign assistance program to control the disease.
Assistance.-- ``(1) In general.--In meeting the objective described in subsection (a), the President shall provide assistance for the prevention, treatment, and control of tuberculosis.
Additional requirements.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the President shall-- ``(A) coordinate with the World Health Organization (WHO), the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, the Department of Health and Human Services (including Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the National Institutes of Health), and other organizations with respect to the development and implementation of a comprehensive tuberculosis control program; ``(B) set as a goal the detection of at least 70 percent of the cases of infectious tuberculosis, the cure of at least 85 percent of the cases detected by focusing efforts on the use of the Directly Observed Treatment Short-course (DOTS) strategy or other internationally accepted primary tuberculosis control strategies, in those countries in which the United States Agency for International Development has established development programs, by December 31, 2010, and the reduction of tuberculosis-related deaths by 50 percent, by December 31, 2010; and ``(C) give priority to activities that increase Directly Observed Treatment Short-course (DOTS) coverage and treatment of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis where needed using DOTS-Plus, including funding for the Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility, the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership, and the Global Alliance for TB Drug Development.
Allocation of Funds.--In carrying out subsection (b), the President shall ensure that-- ``(1) not less than 75 percent of the amount made available to carry out this section for a fiscal year shall be expended for antituberculosis drugs, supplies, direct patient services, and training in diagnosis and treatment for Directly Observed Treatment Short-course (DOTS) coverage and treatment of multi- drug resistant tuberculosis using DOTS-Plus; and ``(2) not less than 10 percent of the amount made available to carry out this section for a fiscal year shall be expended to provide a United States contribution to the Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility.
Annual Report.--Not later than January 31 of each year, the President shall transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that contains a summary of all programs, projects, and activities carried out under this section for the preceding fiscal year, including a description of the increase in the number of individuals treated and cured through each program, project, and activity.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the President to carry out this section $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2004 and 2005.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until expended.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term `appropriate congressional committees' means the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
DOTS.--The term `DOTS' or `Directly Observed Treatment Short-course' means the World Health Organization- recommended strategy for treating tuberculosis.
DOTS-plus.--The term `DOTS-Plus' means a comprehensive tuberculosis management strategy that is built upon and works as a supplement to the standard DOTS strategy, and which takes into account specific issues (such as use of second line anti-tuberculosis drugs) that need to be addressed in areas where there is high prevalence of multi-drug resistant tuberculosis.
Global alliance for tuberculosis drug development.-- The term `Global Alliance for Tuberculosis Drug Development' means the public-private partnership that brings together leaders in health, science, philanthropy, and private industry to ensure that new medications are available and affordable in high tuberculosis burden countries and other affected countries.
Global tuberculosis drug facility.--The term `Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility (GDF)' means the new initiative of the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership to increase access to high- quality tuberculosis drugs to facilitate DOTS expansion.
Stop tuberculosis partnership.--The term `Stop Tuberculosis Partnership' means the partnership of the World Health Organization, donors including the United States, high tuberculosis burden countries, multilateral agencies, and nongovernmental and technical agencies committed to short- and long-term measures required to control and eventually eliminate tuberculosis as a public health problem in the world.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 104(c) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151b(c)) is amended by striking paragraph (7).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2003, or the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs later.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR GLOBAL TUBERCULOSIS ACTIVITIES OF THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION.
For the purpose of carrying out global tuberculosis activities through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, there are authorized to be appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2005.
Such authorization is in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for such purpose.
Amounts appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.