This Act may be cited as the ``Cost of Production Safety Net Act of 1998''.
In this Act: (1) Loan commodity.--The term ``loan commodity'' means wheat, corn, oats, rye, barley, and grain sorghums.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
FAIR RETURN COMMODITY LOANS FOR WHEAT AND FEED GRAINS.
In General.-- (1) Loans.--For each of the 1998 and subsequent crops of a loan commodity, the Secretary shall make available to producers on a farm described in paragraph (2) nonrecourse fair return commodity loans at such rate as the Secretary determines will provide a fair return to the producers in relation to the cost of production of the loan commodity.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to obtain a loan for a loan commodity under paragraph (1), the producers on a farm must agree to forgo obtaining a marketing assistance loan under subtitle C of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7231 et sequentes) with respect to the loan commodity.
Loan Rates.-- (1) Wheat and corn.-- (A) In general.--The loan rate for wheat and corn, respectively, determined under subsection (a) shall not be less than 75 percent of the simple average of the annual economic costs of production of wheat and corn, respectively, in the United States during the most recent 5 crop years for which data are available.
Calculation.--The costs of production under subparagraph (A) shall be based on the yield for each planted acre, as determined by the Secretary using the economic costs of production data series of the Economic Research Service.
Other feed grains.--The loan rate for grain sorghum, barley, and oats, respectively, determined under subsection (a) shall be established at such level as the Secretary determines is fair and reasonable in relation to the rate that loans are made available for corn, taking into consideration the feeding value of the commodity in relation to the feeding value of corn.
Term of Loans.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a fair return commodity loan made under this section shall have a term of 12 months beginning on the first day of the first month after the month in which the loan is made.
Extension.--The Secretary may extend the term of a fair return commodity loan made to producers on a farm for any loan commodity for 1 6-month period if the Secretary determines that the extension would be beneficial to the producers in marketing the loan commodity.
Repayment Rates.--The Secretary shall permit the producers on a farm to repay a fair return commodity loan under this section for a loan commodity at a rate that is the lesser of-- (1) the loan rate established for the loan commodity under subsection (b), plus interest (as determined by the Secretary); or (2) a rate that the Secretary determines will-- (A) minimize potential loan forfeitures; (B) minimize the accumulation of stocks of the loan commodity by the Federal Government; (C) minimize the cost incurred by the Federal Government in storing the loan commodity; and (D) allow the loan commodity produced in the United States to be marketed freely and competitively, domestically and internationally.
Maximum Quantity of Loan Commodities.--The maximum quantity of a loan commodity that producers on a farm are eligible to place under loan to receive a fair return commodity loan under this Act during any crop year shall be-- (1) in the case of wheat, 20,000 bushels; (2) in the case of corn, 30,000 bushels; and (3) in the case of grain sorghum, barley, and oats, a quantity that the Secretary determines is equivalent to 30,000 bushels of corn.
Maximum Amount of Loans and Payments.-- (1) In general.--The total amount of fair return commodity loans that a person shall be entitled to receive under this Act for 1 or more loan commodities during any crop year shall not exceed $100,000.
Regulation.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall promulgate a regulation-- (i) defining the term ``person'' for purposes of this subsection; and (ii) prescribing such rules as the Secretary determines are necessary to ensure a fair and reasonable application of the limitation established under this subsection.
Related provisions.--Except as provided in subsection (g), the regulation shall be consistent with paragraphs (5) through (7) of section 1001 of the Food Security Act of 1985 (7 United States Code 1308).
Eligibility for Loans and Payments.--To be eligible for a fair return commodity loan for a loan commodity under this Act, the producers on a farm shall-- (1) be individuals who own the loan commodity, directly or indirectly; (2) provide resident, day-to-day labor for and management of the farm; and (3) provide capital investment in-- (A) the operation of the farm; and (B) the leasing or ownership of the farm.
Regulations.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary and the Commodity Credit Corporation, as appropriate, shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Related Provisions.--Subtitle E of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7281 et sequentes) shall apply to fair return commodity loans made under this Act.
EXTENSION OF MARKETING ASSISTANCE LOANS.
Section 133 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7233) is amended by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following: ``(c) Extension.--The Secretary may extend the term of a marketing assistance loan made to producers on a farm for any loan commodity for 1 9-month period if the Secretary determines that the extension would be beneficial to the producers in marketing the loan commodity.