This Act may be cited as the ``Cancer Screening Incentive Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Studies have shown that early detection and screening for cancer can reduce cancer morbidity by as much as 50 percent for certain types of cancer.
Of the 1.17 million Americans diagnosed with cancer in 1993, the American Cancer Society estimates that 100,000 deaths could be avoided through early detection and prompt treatment.
Physicians report that concern about the costs of early detection procedures is one of the main reasons for hesitating to order such procedures.
Many low-income Americans lack comprehensive health insurance coverage and the majority of existing health insurance policies do not adequately cover the costs of cancer early detection and screening procedures.
Socioeconomically disadvantaged Americans are disproportionately affected by cancer in terms of incidence and mortality.
Demographic forecasts predict that the elderly population will double by the year 2020.
Since cancer mortality and incidence rates rise dramatically with age, cancer prevention in the elderly population will become increasingly important.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
CANCER SCREENING TEST CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year expenditures paid or incurred during the taxable year for any qualified cancer screening test which is included in the list under subsection (c) and which is not compensated by insurance or otherwise, as follows: ``(1) Eligible individual.--In the case of an eligible individual, the amount of the credit allowable under this subsection shall not exceed-- ``(A) $250, or ``(B) $200 in the case of a taxpayer with taxable income for the taxable year in excess of the maximum rate of taxable income to which the 15-percent rate applies under the applicable table under section 1.
Qualified cancer screening provider.--In the case of a qualified cancer screening provider, the amount of the credit allowable under this subsection shall be an amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) the lower of-- ``(i) the usual and customary charges for qualified cancer screening tests, or ``(ii) the rate of payment established by the Health Care Financing Administration for qualified cancer screening tests, multiplied by-- ``(B) the number of qualified cancer screening tests provided without charge during the taxable year to qualifying low-income individuals.
Definitions.--For purposes of subsection (a)-- ``(1) Eligible individual.--The term `eligible individual' means an individual who is-- ``(A) the taxpayer, ``(B) the taxpayer's spouse, or ``(C) any individual for whom the taxpayer is allowed an exemption under section 151.
Qualified cancer screening provider.--The term `qualified cancer screening provider' means a medical practitioner, facility, hospital, laboratory, or similar institution licensed under State law to provide 1 or more qualified cancer screening tests.
Qualifying low-income individual.--The term `qualifying low-income individual' means an individual-- ``(A) whose income level does not exceed 150 percent of the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981) applicable to a family of the size involved, and ``(B) with respect to whom identifying information is maintained.
Qualified Cancer Screening Tests.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the Secretary, after consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and cancer research and prevention organizations, shall publish, not later than December 31, 1993, and annually thereafter, a list of cancer screening tests which qualify for the credit allowable under this section.
Cancer screening tests.--The list of cancer screening tests which qualify under this section shall include at least the following tests: ``(A) Physical breast examination and mammogram for female breast cancer.
Digital rectal examination, proctosigmoidoscopy, and blood stool test for colon and rectum cancer.
Rectal examination for prostate cancer.
Pap test for uterine cancer.
Pelvic examination for ovarian cancer.
Identifying Information.--No credit shall be allowed under this section unless the qualified cancer screening provider maintains, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, adequate records regarding the name and address, date of testing, and type of test provided with respect to each qualifying low-income individual with respect to whom a credit is claimed.''
Coordination With Deductions for Medical Expenses.--Section 213(f) of such Code (relating to coordination with health insurance credit under section 32) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``and the amount (if any) of the cancer screening test credit allowable to the taxpayer for the taxable year under section 35(a)(1)'' before the end period; and (2) by inserting ``and Cancer Screening Test Credit Under Section 35'' in the heading after ``Section 32''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 35 and inserting: ``Sec.
Cancer screening test credit.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.