This Act may be cited as the ``Intellectual Property Protection Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1337) is one of the most important laws available to United States businesses to deal with unfair practices in import trade and to enforce intellectual property rights against infringing imports.
On November 23, 1988, a panel of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (hereafter in this Act referred to as ``GATT'') found section 337 to be in violation of United States obligations under the GATT, because certain procedures under section 337 did not provide national treatment for imported goods and because some aspects of the procedures were unnecessary for effective compliance with United States patent law.
On November 7, 1989, the United States allowed adoption of the GATT panel report on section 337, thereby assuming an obligation to reform section 337 to comply with its obligations under the GATT.
Because of the special difficulties in enforcing intellectual property rights against unfairly traded imports, special enforcement procedures that apply only to imports are necessary to effectively enforce intellectual property rights against infringing imports.
The GATT allows special enforcement procedures when such procedures are not less favorable than the procedures used against domestic products or such procedures are necessary to secure compliance with copyright, patent, trademark, and mask work registration protection laws or regulations.
To be effective, such enforcement procedures must establish administrative proceedings which can reach multiple parties in one forum, allow efficient foreign discovery, provide expeditious dispute resolution, and provide border enforcement by the United States Customs Service.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to conform section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930 and title 28 of the United States Code to the provisions of the GATT to ensure that section 337 procedures can reach multiple parties in one forum, allow efficient foreign discovery, provide expeditious dispute resolution even in the absence of a deadline for final determinations, and provide border enforcement of determinations.
AMENDMENT OF SECTION 337 OF THE TARIFF ACT OF 1930.
Investigation.--Section 337(b) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1337(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``; Time Limits'' in the heading; (2) in paragraph (1), by striking ``The Commission shall conclude any such investigation'' and all that follows through the end period and inserting the following: ``The Commission shall conclude any such investigation and make its determination under this section at the earliest practicable time after the date of publication of notice of such investigation.
To promote expeditious adjudication, the Commission shall, within 30 days of the initiation of an investigation, establish a target date for its final determination.
''; and (3) by striking the fifth sentence in paragraph (3).
Determination; Review.--Section 337(c) of such Act is amended-- (1) by striking ``a settlement agreement'' in the first sentence and inserting ``an agreement between the parties''; (2) by striking ``subsection (d) or (e)'' in the second sentence and inserting ``subsection (d), (e), or (f) (and each declaration under subsection (o))''; and (3) by striking ``(f), or (g)'' in the fourth sentence and inserting ``(f), (g), or (o)''.
Exclusion of Articles From Entry.--Section 337(d) of such Act is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``No article shall be excluded from entry where the Commission determines that the owner, importer, or consignee of the article has established a sufficient counterclaim directly related to the unfair methods or acts determined by the Commission to exist.''.
Entry Under Bond.--Section 337(e) of such Act is amended-- (1) in the last sentence of paragraph (1), by striking ``determined by the Commission'' and all that follows through the end period and inserting: ``prescribed by the Secretary in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to protect the complainant from any injury.
If the Commission later determines that the respondent has violated the provisions of this section, the bond may be forfeited to the complainant.
''; (2) by adding at the end of paragraph (2), the following new sentence: ``If the Commission later determines that the respondent has not violated the provisions of this section, the bond may be forfeited to the respondent.
''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) The Commission may prescribe the terms and conditions under which bonds may be forfeited under paragraphs (1) and (2).''.
Cease and Desist Orders.--Section 337(f)(1) of such Act is amended-- (1) by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``A permanent cease and desist order shall not be issued if the Commission determines that the owner, importer, or consignee of the article has established a sufficient counterclaim directly related to the unfair methods or acts determined by the Commission to exist.
''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``If a temporary cease and desist order is issued in addition to, or, in lieu of, an exclusion order under subsection (e), the Commission may require the complainant to post a bond as a prerequisite to the issuance of an order under this subsection.
If the Commission later determines that the respondent has not violated the provisions of this section, the bond may be forfeited to the respondent.
The Commission may prescribe the terms and conditions under which bonds may be forfeited under this paragraph.''.
Conditions Applicable for General Exclusion Orders.--Section 337(g) of such Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) The authority of the Commission to issue an exclusion from entry of articles shall be limited to persons determined by the Commission to be violating this section unless the Commission determines that-- ``(A) a general exclusion from entry of articles is necessary to prevent circumvention of an exclusion from entry limited to such persons; or ``(B) there is a pattern of violation of this section and it is difficult to identify the persons responsible.''.
Entry Under Bond After Referral to President.--Section 337(j)(3) of such Act is amended by striking ``shall be entitled to entry under bond'' and all that follows through the end period and inserting ``shall, until such determination becomes final, be entitled to entry under bond prescribed by the Secretary in an amount determined by the Commission to be sufficient to protect the complainant from injury.
If the determination becomes final, the bond may be forfeited to the complainant.
The Commission may prescribe the terms and conditions under which bonds may be forfeited under this paragraph.''.
Declaratory Relief.--Section 337 of such Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(o) Complaint for Declaratory Relief by Owner, Importer, or Consignee.--In a case of actual controversy as to the existence of unfair methods of competition and unfair acts described in subsection (a), upon the filing of a complaint for declaratory relief under oath by the owner, importer, or consignee of an imported article (or part thereof), the Commission may declare the rights and other legal relations of the parties, whether or not further relief is or could be sought.
A declaration made under this subsection shall have the force and effect of a final determination of the Commission and shall be reviewable as such.
In the case of unfair acts involving the validity of patents as described in subsection (a)(1)(B), such a declaration shall be only for the purpose of determining whether there is a violation of this section and shall not have the effect of claim or issue preclusion.''.
AMENDMENT OF TITLE 28, UNITED STATES CODE.
In General.--Chapter 111 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
Stay of certain actions pending disposition of related proceedings before the United States International Trade Commission ``(a) Stay.--In a civil action involving parties that are also parties to a proceeding before the United States International Trade Commission pursuant to section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1337), at the request of a party that is a respondent in the proceeding before the Commission (other than a respondent to a counterclaim in a proceeding for declaratory relief), a district court shall stay, until the determination of the Commission becomes final, proceedings in the civil action with respect to any claim that involves the same issues involved in the proceeding before the Commission.
Use of Commission Record.--After dissolution of a stay under subsection (a), portions of the record of the proceeding before the United States International Trade Commission that bear on issues in a civil action shall be admissible in the civil action, subject to such protective order as the district court determines necessary and to the extent permitted under the Federal Rules of Evidence and the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 111 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1659.
Stay of certain actions pending disposition of related proceedings before the United States International Trade Commission.''.
The amendments made by this Act apply to complaints filed and investigations initiated under section 337 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1337) after the date of the enactment of this Act.