This Act may be cited as the ``Child Care and Development Block Grant Amendments Act of 1995''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE CHILD CARE AND DEVELOPMENT BLOCK GRANT ACT OF 1990.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 658B of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subchapter $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1997 through 2000.''.
Lead Agency.--Section 658D(b) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858b(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``State'' and inserting ``governmental or nongovernmental''; and (B) in subparagraph (C), by inserting ``with sufficient time and Statewide distribution of the notice of such hearing,'' after ``hearing in the State''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking the second sentence.
Application and Plan.--Section 658E of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858c) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b), by striking ``implemented--'' and all that follows through ``plans.''
and inserting ``implemented during a 2-year period.
''; (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) in paragraph (2)-- (i) in subparagraph (A)-- (I) in clause (iii) by striking the semicolon and inserting a period; and (II) by striking ``except'' and all that follows through ``1992.
''; and (ii) in subparagraph (E)-- (I) by striking clause (ii) and inserting the following new clause: ``(ii) the State will implement mechanisms to ensure that appropriate payment mechanisms exist so that proper payments under this subchapter will be made to providers within the State and to permit the State to furnish information to such providers.
''; and (II) by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``In lieu of any licensing and regulatory requirements applicable under State and local law, the Secretary, in consultation with Indian tribes and tribal organizations, shall develop minimum child care standards (that appropriately reflect tribal needs and available resources) that shall be applicable to Indian tribes and tribal organization receiving assistance under this subchapter.
''; and (iii) by striking subparagraphs (H) and (I); and (B) in paragraph (3)-- (i) in subparagraph (C)-- (I) in the subparagraph heading, by striking ``and to increase'' and all that follows through ``care services''; (II) by striking ``25 percent'' and inserting ``15 percent''; and (III) by striking ``and to provide before-'' and all that follows through ``658H)''; and (ii) by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Limitation on administrative costs.--Not more than 5 percent of the aggregate amount of payments received under this subchapter by a State in each fiscal year may be expended for administrative costs incurred by such State to carry out all its functions and duties under this subchapter.''.
Sliding Fee Scale.-- (1) In general.--Section 658E(c)(5) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858c(c)(5)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``and that ensures a representative distribution of funding among the working poor and recipients of Federal welfare assistance''.
Eligibility.--Section 658P(4)(B) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858n(4)(B)) is amended by striking ``75 percent'' and inserting ``100 percent''.
Quality.--Section 658G of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858e) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``A State'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--A State''; (B) by striking ``not less than 20 percent of''; and (C) by striking ``one or more of the following'' and inserting ``carrying out the resource and referral activities described in subsection (b), and for one or more of the activities described in subsection (c).
''; (2) in paragraph (1), by inserting before the period the following: ``, including providing comprehensive consumer education to parents and the public, referrals that honor parental choice, and activities designed to improve the quality and availability of child care''; (3) by striking ``(1) Resource and Referral Programs.-- Operating'' and inserting the following: ``(b) Resource and Referral Programs.--The activities described in this subsection are operating''; (4) by redesignating paragraphs (2) through (5) as paragraphs (1) through (4), respectively; (5) by inserting before paragraph (1) (as so redesignated) the following: ``(c) Other Activities.--The activities described in this section are the following:''; and (6) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(5) Before- and after-school activities.--Increasing the availability of before- and after-school care.
Infant care.--Increasing the availability of child care for infants under the age of 18 months.
Nontraditional work hours.--Increasing the availability of child care between the hours of 5:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. ``(d) Nondiscrimination.--With respect to child care providers that comply with applicable State law but which are otherwise not required to be licensed by the State, the State, in carrying out this section, may not discriminate against such a provider if such provider desires to participate in resource and referral activities carried out under subsection (b).''.
Repeal.--Section 658H of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858f) is repealed.
Enforcement.--Section 658I(b)(2) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858g(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) in the matter following clause (ii) of subparagraph (A), by striking ``finding and that'' and all that follows through the period and inserting ``finding and may impose additional program requirements on the State, including a requirement that the State reimburse the Secretary for any funds that were improperly expended for purposes prohibited or not authorized by this subchapter, that the Secretary deduct from the administrative portion of the State allotment for the following fiscal year an amount that is less than or equal to any improperly expended funds, or a combination of such options.
''; and (2) by striking subparagraphs (B) and (C).
Reports.--Section 658K of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858i) is amended-- (1) in the section heading, by striking ``ANNUAL REPORT'' and inserting ``REPORTS''; and (2) in subsection (a)-- (A) in the subsection heading, by striking ``Annual Report'' and inserting ``Reports''; (B) by striking ``December 31, 1992, and annually thereafter'' and inserting ``December 31, 1996, and every 2 years thereafter''; (C) in paragraph (2)-- (i) in subparagraph (A), by inserting before the semicolon ``and the types of child care programs under which such assistance is provided''; (ii) by striking subparagraph (B); and (iii) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) and (D) as subparagraphs (B) and (C), respectively; (D) by striking paragraph (4); (E) by redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively; (F) in paragraph (4), as so redesignated, by striking ``and'' at the end thereof; (G) in paragraph (5), as so redesignated, by adding ``and'' at the end thereof; and (H) by inserting after paragraph (5), as so redesignated, the following new paragraph: ``(6) describing the extent and manner to which the resource and referral activities are being carried out by the State;''.
Report by Secretary.--Section 658L of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858j) is amended-- (1) by striking ``1993'' and inserting ``1997''; (2) by striking ``annually'' and inserting ``bi-annually''; and (3) by striking ``Education and Labor'' and inserting ``Economic and Educational Opportunities''.
Allotments.--Section 658O of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858m) is amended-- (1) in subsection (c), by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) Construction or Renovation of Facilities.-- ``(A) Request for use of funds.--An Indian tribe or tribal organization may submit to the Secretary a request to use amounts provided under this subsection for construction or renovation purposes.
Determination.--With respect to a request submitted under subparagraph (A), and except as provided in subparagraph (C), upon a determination by the Secretary that adequate facilities are not otherwise available to an Indian tribe or tribal organization to enable such tribe or organization to carry out child care programs in accordance with this subchapter, and that the lack of such facilities will inhibit the operation of such programs in the future, the Secretary may permit the tribe or organization to use assistance provided under this subsection to make payments for the construction or renovation of facilities that will be used to carry out such programs.
Limitation.--The Secretary may not permit an Indian tribe or tribal organization to use amounts provided under this subsection for construction or renovation if such use will result in a decrease in the level of child care services provided by the tribe or organization as compared to the level of such services provided by the tribe or organization in the fiscal year preceding the year for which the determination under subparagraph (A) is being made.
Uniform procedures.--The Secretary shall develop and implement uniform procedures for the solicitation and consideration of requests under this paragraph.
''; and (2) in subsection (e)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``Any'' and inserting ``Except as provided in paragraph (4), any''; and (B) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) Indian tribes or tribal organizations.--Any portion of a grant or contract made to an Indian tribe or tribal organization under subsection (c) that the Secretary determines is not being used in a manner consistent with the provision of this subchapter in the period for with the grant or contract is made available, shall be reallocated by the Secretary to other tribes or organization that have submitted applications under subsection (c) in proportion to the original allocations to such tribes or organization.''.
Definitions.--Section 658P of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858n) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2), in the first sentence by inserting ``or as a deposit for child care services if such a deposit is required of other children being cared for by the provider'' after ``child care services''; and (2) in paragraph (5)(B)-- (A) by inserting ``great grandchild, sibling (if the provider lives in a separate residence),'' after ``grandchild,''; (B) by striking ``is registered and''; and (C) by striking ``State'' and inserting ``applicable''.
Application of Subchapter.--The Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
APPLICATION TO OTHER PROGRAMS.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a State that uses funding for child care services under any Federal program shall ensure that activities carried out using such funds meet the requirements, standards, and criteria of this subchapter and the regulations promulgated under this subchapter.
Such sums shall be administered through a uniform State plan.
To the maximum extent practicable, amounts provided to a State under such programs shall be transferred to the lead agency and integrated into the program established under this subchapter by the State.''.
SENSE OF THE SENATE.
Findings.--The Senate finds that-- (1) the availability and accessibility of quality child care will be critical to any welfare reform effort; (2) as parents move from welfare into the workforce or into job preparation and education, child care must be affordable and safe; (3) whether parents are pursuing job training, transitioning off welfare, or are already in the work force and attempting to remain employed, no parent can be expected to leave his or her child in a dangerous situation; (4) affordable and accessible child care is a prerequisite for job training and for entering the workforce; and (5) studies have shown that the lack of quality child care is the most frequently cited barrier to employment and self- sufficiency.
Sense of the Senate.--It is the sense of the Senate that the Federal Government has a responsibility to provide funding and leadership with respect to child care.
REPEALS AND TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
State Dependent Care Development Grants Act.--The State Dependent Care Development Grants Act (42 United States Code 9871 et sequentes) is repealed.
Child Development Associate Scholarship Assistance Act of 1985.--The Child Development Associate Scholarship Assistance Act of 1985 (42 United States Code 10901 et sequentes) is repealed.
Additional Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Recommended legislation.--After consultation with the appropriate committees of the Congress and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall prepare and submit to the Congress a legislative proposal in the form of an implementing bill containing technical and conforming amendments to reflect the amendments and repeals made by this Act.
Submission to congress.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit the implementing bill referred to under paragraph (1).