This Act may be cited as the ``School Construction Act of 1998''.
INCENTIVES FOR PUBLIC SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credits against tax) is amended by inserting after subpart G the following new subpart: ``Subpart H--Credit to Holders of Qualified Public School Construction Bonds.
54. Credit to holders of qualified public school construction bonds.
Qualified public school construction bonds.
54. CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF QUALIFIED PUBLIC SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION BONDS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a taxpayer who holds a qualified public school construction bond on the credit allowance date of such bond which occurs during the taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for such taxable year the amount determined under subsection (b).
Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit determined under this subsection with respect to any qualified public school construction bond is the amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) the credit rate determined by the Secretary under paragraph (2) for the month in which such bond was issued, multiplied by ``(B) the face amount of the bond held by the taxpayer on the credit allowance date.
Determination.--During each calendar month, the Secretary shall determine a credit rate which shall apply to bonds issued during the following calendar month.
The credit rate for any month is the percentage which the Secretary estimates will on average permit the issuance of qualified public school construction bonds without discount and without interest cost to the issuer.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this part (other than subpart C thereof, relating to refundable credits).
Carryover of unused credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subpart-- ``(1) Credit allowance date.--The term `credit allowance date' means, with respect to any issue, the last day of the 1- year period beginning on the date of issuance of such issue and the last day of each successive 1-year period thereafter.
Bond.--The term `bond' includes any obligation.
State.--The term `State' includes the District of Columbia and any possession of the United States.
Public school facility.--The term `public school facility' shall not include any stadium or other facility primarily used for athletic contests or exhibitions or other events for which admission is charged to the general public.
Credit Included in Gross Income.--Gross income includes the amount of the credit allowed to the taxpayer under this section and the amount so included shall be treated as interest income.
Bonds Held By Regulated Investment Companies.--If any qualified public school construction bond is held by a regulated investment company, the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be allowed to shareholders of such company under procedures prescribed by the Secretary.
QUALIFIED PUBLIC SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION BONDS.
Qualified Public School Construction Bond.--For purposes of this subpart-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified public school construction bond' means any bond issued as part of an issue if-- ``(A) 95 percent or more of the proceeds of such issue are to be used for the construction, rehabilitation, or repair of a public school facility, ``(B) the bond is issued by a State or local government within the jurisdiction of which such school is located, ``(C) the issuer designates such bond for purposes of this section, and ``(D) the term of each bond which is part of such issue does not exceed 15 years.
Temporary period exception.--A bond shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirement of paragraph (1)(A) solely by reason of the fact that the proceeds of the issue of which such bond is a part are invested for a reasonable temporary period (but not more than 36 months) until such proceeds are needed for the purpose for which such issue was issued.
Any earnings on such proceeds during such period shall be treated as proceeds of the issue for purposes of applying paragraph (1)(A).
Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.--The maximum aggregate face amount of bonds issued during any calendar year which may be designated under subsection (a) by any issuer shall not exceed the limitation amount allocated under subsection (d) for such calendar year to such issuer.
National Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.--There is a national qualified school construction bond limitation for each calendar year.
Such limitation is-- ``(1) $3,600,000,000 for 1999, ``(2) $3,600,000,000 for 2000, and ``(3) except as provided in subsection (e), zero after 2000.
Allocation of Limitation Among States.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall allocate the national qualified school construction bond limitation for any calendar year among the States with projected enrollment increases.
The amount allocated to a State under the preceding sentence shall be allocated by the State education agency to issuers within such State and such allocations may be made only if there is an approved State application.
Allocation formula.-- ``(A) In general.--The national qualified school construction bond limitation shall be allocated among the States with projected enrollment increases in proportion to their respective shares of the national projected enrollment increase.
Projected enrollment increase.--The amount of projected enrollment increase for the United States or any State is the amount of the increase (as projected by the Secretary of Education using data as of January 1, 1998) in enrollment in public elementary and secondary schools in the United States or in such State (as the case may be) during the 10-year period beginning with 1997.
Approved state application.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `approved State application' means an application which is approved by the Secretary of Education and which includes-- ``(A) the results of a recent publicly-available survey (undertaken by the State with the involvement of local education officials, members of the public, and experts in school construction and management) of such State's needs for public school facilities, including descriptions of-- ``(i) health and safety problems at such facilities, ``(ii) the capacity of public schools in the State to house projected enrollments, and ``(iii) the extent to which the public schools in the State offer the physical infrastructure needed to provide a high-quality education to all students, and ``(B) a description of how the State will allocate to local educational agencies, or otherwise use, its allocation under this subsection to address the needs identified under subparagraph (A), including a description of how it will-- ``(i) give priority to localities experiencing the largest increases in enrollment, ``(ii) use its allocation under this subsection to assist localities that lack the fiscal capacity to issue bonds on their own, and ``(iii) ensure that its allocation under this subsection is used only to supplement, and not supplant, the amount of school construction, rehabilitation, and repair in the State that would have occurred in the absence of such allocation.
Any allocation under paragraph (1) by a State education agency shall be binding if such agency reasonably determined that the allocation was in accordance with the plan approved under this paragraph.
Carryover of Unused Limitation.--If for any calendar year-- ``(1) the amount allocated under subsection (d) to any State, exceeds ``(2) the amount of bonds issued during such year which are designated under subsection (a) pursuant to such allocation, the limitation amount under such subsection for such State for the following calendar year shall be increased by the amount of such excess.
The subsection shall not apply if such following calendar year is after 2002.''
Reporting.--Subsection (d) of section 6049 of such Code (relating to returns regarding payments of interest) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Reporting of credit on qualified public school construction bonds.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `interest' includes amounts includible in gross income under section 54(e) and such amounts shall be treated as paid on the credit allowance date (as defined in section 54(d)(1)).
Reporting to corporations, etc.--Except as otherwise provided in regulations, in the case of any interest described in subparagraph (A) of this paragraph, subsection (b)(4) of this section shall be applied without regard to subparagraphs (A), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (L)(i).
Regulatory authority.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this paragraph, including regulations which require more frequent or more detailed reporting.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subparts for part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Subpart H. Credit to holders of qualified public school construction bonds.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to obligations issued after December 31, 1998.