This Act may be cited as the ``New Economy Tax Fairness Act or NET FAIR Act''.
JURISDICTIONAL STANDARDS FOR THE IMPOSITION OF STATE AND LOCAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY, SALES, AND USE TAX OBLIGATIONS ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
Title I of the Act entitled ``An Act relating to the power of the States to impose net income taxes on income derived from interstate commerce, and authorizing studies by congressional committees of matters pertaining thereto'', approved on September 14, 1959 (15 United States Code 381 et sequentes), is amended to read as follows: ``TITLE I--JURISDICTIONAL STANDARDS ``SEC.
IMPOSITION OF STATE AND LOCAL BUSINESS ACTIVITY, SALES, AND USE TAX OBLIGATIONS ON INTERSTATE COMMERCE.
In General.--No State shall have power to impose, for any taxable year ending after the date of enactment of this title, a business activity tax or a duty to collect and remit a sales or use tax on the income derived within such State by any person from interstate commerce, unless such person has a substantial physical presence in such State.
A substantial physical presence is not established if the only business activities within such State by or on behalf of such person during such taxable year are any or all of the following: ``(1) The solicitation of orders or contracts by such person or such person's representative in such State for sales of tangible or intangible personal property or services, which orders or contracts are approved or rejected outside the State, and, if approved, are fulfilled by shipment or delivery of such property from a point outside the State or the performance of such services outside the State.
The solicitation of orders or contracts by such person or such person's representative in such State in the name of or for the benefit of a prospective customer of such person, if orders or contracts by such customer to such person to enable such customer to fill orders or contracts resulting from such solicitation are orders or contracts described in paragraph (1).
The presence or use of intangible personal property in such State, including patents, copyrights, trademarks, logos, securities, contracts, money, deposits, loans, electronic or digital signals, and web pages, whether or not subject to licenses, franchises, or other agreements.
The use of the Internet to create or maintain a World Wide Web site accessible by persons in such State.
The use of an Internet service provider, on-line service provider, internetwork communication service provider, or other Internet access service provider, or World Wide Web hosting services to maintain or take and process orders via a web page or site on a computer that is physically located in such State.
The use of any service provider for transmission of communications, whether by cable, satellite, radio, telecommunications, or other similar system.
The affiliation with a person located in the State, unless-- ``(A) the person located in the State is the person's agent under the terms and conditions of subsection (d); and ``(B) the activity of the agent in the State constitutes substantial physical presence under this subsection.
The use of an unaffiliated representative or independent contractor in such State for the purpose of performing warranty or repair services with respect to tangible or intangible personal property sold by a person located outside the State.
Domestic Corporations; Persons Domiciled in or Residents of a State.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to the imposition of a business activity tax or a duty to collect and remit a sales or use tax by any State with respect to-- ``(1) any corporation which is incorporated under the laws of such State; or ``(2) any individual who, under the laws of such State, is domiciled in, or a resident of, such State.
Sales or Solicitation of Orders or Contracts for Sales by Independent Contractors.--For purposes of subsection (a), a person shall not be considered to have engaged in business activities within a State during any taxable year merely by reason of sales of tangible or intangible personal property or services in such State, or the solicitation of orders or contracts for such sales in such State, on behalf of such person by one or more independent contractors, or by reason of the maintenance of an office in such State by one or more independent contractors whose activities on behalf of such person in such State consist solely of making such sales, or soliciting orders or contracts for such sales.
Attribution of Activities and Presence.--For purposes of this section, the substantial physical presence of any person shall not be attributed to any other person absent the establishment of an agency relationship between such persons that-- ``(1) results from the consent by both persons that one person act on behalf and subject to the control of the other; and ``(2) relates to the activities of the person within the State.
Definitions.--For purposes of this title-- ``(1) Business activity tax.--The term `business activity tax' means a tax imposed on, or measured by, net income, a business license tax, a business and occupation tax, a franchise tax, a single business tax or a capital stock tax, or any similar tax or fee imposed by a State.
Independent contractor.--The term `independent contractor' means a commission agent, broker, or other independent contractor who is engaged in selling, or soliciting orders or contracts for the sale of, tangible or intangible personal property or services for more than one principal and who holds himself or herself out as such in the regular course of his or her business activities.
Internet.--The term `Internet' means collectively the myriad of computer and telecommunications facilities, including equipment and operating software, which comprise the interconnected world-wide network of networks that employ the Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol, or any predecessor or successor protocols to such Protocol.
Internet access.--The term `Internet access' means a service that enables users to access content, information, electronic mail, or other services offered over the Internet, and may also include access to proprietary content, information, and other services as a part of a package of services offered to users.
Representative.--The term `representative' does not include an independent contractor.
Sales tax.--The term `sales tax' means a tax that is-- ``(A) imposed on or incident to the sale of tangible or intangible personal property or services as may be defined or specified under the laws imposing such tax; and ``(B) measured by the amount of the sales price, cost, charge, or other value of or for such property or services.
Solicitation of orders or contracts.--The term `solicitation of orders or contracts' includes activities normally ancillary to such solicitation.
State.--The term `State' means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, or any territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision thereof.
Use tax.--The term `use tax' means a tax that is-- ``(A) imposed on the purchase, storage, consumption, distribution, or other use of tangible or intangible personal property or services as may be defined or specified under the laws imposing such tax; and ``(B) measured by the purchase price of such property or services.
World wide web.--The term `World Wide Web' means a computer server-based file archive accessible, over the Internet, using a hypertext transfer protocol, file transfer protocol, or other similar protocols.
Application of Section.--This section shall not be construed to limit, in any way, constitutional restrictions otherwise existing on State taxing authority.
ASSESSMENT OF BUSINESS ACTIVITY TAXES.
Limitations.--No State shall have power to assess after the date of enactment of this title any business activity tax which was imposed by such State or political subdivision for any taxable year ending on or before such date, on the income derived for activities within such State that affect interstate commerce, if the imposition of such tax for a taxable year ending after such date is prohibited by section 101.
Collections.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall not be construed-- ``(1) to invalidate the collection on or before the date of enactment of this title of any business activity tax imposed for a taxable year ending on or before such date; or ``(2) to prohibit the collection after such date of any business activity tax which was assessed on or before such date for a taxable year ending on or before such date.
TERMINATION OF SUBSTANTIAL PHYSICAL PRESENCE.
``If a State has imposed a business activity tax or a duty to collect and remit a sales or use tax on a person as described in section 101, and the person so obligated no longer has a substantial physical presence in that State, the obligation to pay a business activity tax or to collect and remit a sales or use tax on behalf of that State applies only for the period in which the person has a substantial physical presence.
``If any provision of this title or the application of such provision to any person or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of this title or the application of such provision to persons or circumstances other than those to which it is held invalid, shall not be affected thereby.