This Act may be cited as the ``SAFE Grant Act of 2001''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Over 300,000 women are sexually assaulted each year in the United States.
Unlike all other violent crimes, rape is not declining in frequency.
Most victims of sexual assault who seek treatment for an attack report to hospital emergency rooms.
Since most sexual assault victims do not require immediate medical attention, many wait hours before receiving treatment from nurses or other medical professionals.
Some sexual assault victims leave the hospital altogether rather than endure extended waits, diminishing the likelihood that the offense will ever be reported, investigated, or prosecuted.
Most emergency room personnel who treat sexual assault victims lack training in collecting critical forensic evidence and providing the physical and psychological care particularly required by sexual assault victims.
Many hospitals lack the best and most recent forensic tools, such as dye capable of revealing microscopic scratches, and colposcopes, which detect and photograph otherwise invisible pelvic injuries.
Some emergency room personnel avoid treating sexual assault victims for fear of having to participate in time- consuming witness preparation and court appearances, or decline to devote time and attention to cooperating with investigators and prosecutors.
By contrast, sexual assault victims treated by Sexual Assault Forensic Examiners (referred to in this Act as ``SAFEs'') under the Sexual Assault Forensic Examiner program (referred to in this Act as the ``SAFE program'')-- (A) rarely wait for treatment; (B) are attended to by a single, specially trained examiner rather than multiple doctors, nurses, lab technicians, and administrative assistants; and (C) receive sensitive care tailored specifically for sexual assault victims and delivered in a private setting.
SAFEs are far better able to document sexual assault than nonspecialized emergency room personnel because they are primarily focused on collecting evidence of sexual assault from victims, have extensive training in the latest forensic techniques, and use the best and most recent equipment.
SAFEs bolster the odds of prosecuting and convicting sexual assailants by gathering invaluable evidence and ensuring its proper preservation, and cooperating extensively with police and prosecutors.
Because of their specialized training and experience, SAFEs make better witnesses than ordinary emergency room personnel and can make the difference between success or failure at trial.
There are approximately 500 SAFE programs in the United States, which treat less than 5 percent of all sexual assault victims.
Financial obstacles have slowed the growth of SAFE programs which struggle to obtain the Federal, State, and private funding necessary to establish and maintain service.
Currently, SAFE programs are forced to compete against a myriad of other law enforcement and victims' programs to obtain limited Federal funding from existing sources.
Establishing a specific and adequate source of Federal funding for SAFE programs will contribute to their proliferation and thereby aid in the successful prosecution of offenders and the improvement of care provided to victims.
Establishment of Grant Program.--The Attorney General shall establish a program to award and disburse annual grants to SAFE programs.
Compliance With National Protocol.--To receive a grant under this section, a proposed or existing SAFE program shall be in compliance with the standards and recommended national protocol developed by the Attorney General pursuant to section 1405 of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (42 United States Code 3796gg note).
Application.-- (1) In general.--Each proposed or existing SAFE program that desires a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Attorney General at such time, and in such manner, as the Attorney General shall reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include information regarding-- (A) the size of the population or estimated population to be served by the proposed or existing SAFE program; and (B) if the SAFE program exists at the time the applicant submits its application, the effectiveness of that SAFE program.
Priority Given to Programs in Underserved Areas.--In awarding grants under this section, the Attorney General shall give priority to proposed or existing SAFE programs that are serving, or will serve, populations currently underserved by existing SAFE programs.
Nonexclusivity.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit or restrict the ability of proposed or existing SAFE programs to apply for and obtain Federal funding from any other agency or department, or under any other Federal grant program.
Audits.--The Attorney General shall audit recipients of grants awarded and disbursed under this section to ensure-- (1) compliance with the standards and recommended national protocol developed by the Attorney General pursuant to section 1405 of the Victims of Trafficking and Violence Protection Act of 2000 (42 United States Code 3796gg note); (2) compliance with other applicable Federal laws; and (3) overall program effectiveness.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Justice $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006 for grants under this section.