This Act may be cited as the ``National Domestic Violence Hotline Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that-- (1) 4,000,000 women are battered by their partners each year, of which 4,000 die as a result of such abuse; (2) victims of domestic violence need access to resources which will refer such victims and their children to safe homes and shelters; and (3) there is a need for a national domestic violence hotline to provide information and assistance to victims of domestic violence because a privately-funded national domestic violence hotline which handled more than 65,000 crisis calls annually no longer exists.
GRANT FOR NATIONAL DOMESTIC VIOLENCE HOTLINE.
The Family Violence Prevention and Services Act (42 United States Code 10401 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
NATIONAL DOMESTIC VIOLENCE HOTLINE GRANT.
In General.--The Secretary shall provide a grant to a nonprofit private organization to establish and operate a national, toll-free telephone hotline to provide information and assistance to victims of domestic violence.
A grant provided under this subsection may extend over a period of not more than 3 fiscal years and the provision of payments under such grant shall be subject to the annual approval by the Secretary and subject to the availability of appropriations for the fiscal year involved to make the payments.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may not provide a grant under subsection (a) unless an application that meets the requirements of paragraph (2) has been approved by the Secretary.
Requirements.--An application meets the requirements of this paragraph if the application-- ``(A) contains such agreements, assurances, and information, and is in such form and submitted in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe through notice in the Federal Register; ``(B) demonstrates that the applicant has nationally recognized expertise in the area of domestic violence and a record of high quality service to victims of domestic violence, including support from advocacy groups, particularly State coalitions and recognized national domestic violence groups; ``(C) demonstrates that the applicant has a commitment to diversity, including the hiring of and provision of services to ethnic, racial, cultural, and non-English speaking minorities, in addition to older individuals and individuals with disabilities; ``(D) demonstrates that the applicant has the ability to integrate the hotline into existing services provided by the applicant to victims of domestic violence; ``(E) includes a complete description of the applicant's plan for the establishment and operation of the hotline, including a description of-- ``(i) the hiring criteria and training program for hotline personnel; ``(ii) the methods for the creation, maintenance, and updating of a resource database for the hotline; ``(iii) a plan for providing service on a 24-hour-a-day basis to non-English speaking callers, including hotline personnel who speak Spanish; ``(iv) a plan for access to the hotline by individuals with hearing impairments; and ``(v) a plan for publicizing the availability of the hotline; and ``(F) contains such other information as the Secretary may require.
Selection.--The Secretary shall select a nonprofit private organization to receive a grant under subsection (a) which has been in existence for at least 5 years from the date of submission of the application by the organization.
Uses.--A grant made under subsection (a) shall be used to establish and operate a national, toll-free telephone hotline to provide information and assistance to victims of domestic violence.
In establishing and operating the hotline, a nonprofit private organization shall-- ``(1) contract with a carrier for the use of a toll-free telephone line; ``(2) employ, train, and supervise personnel to answer incoming calls and provide counseling and referral services to callers on a 24-hour-a-day basis; ``(3) establish, maintain, and update a database of information relating to services for victims of domestic violence, including information on the availability of shelters that serve battered women; and ``(4) publicize the hotline to potential users throughout the United States.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $1,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1996.
Availability.--Funds authorized to be appropriated under paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.