DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO HOMELESS VETERANS ASSISTANCE FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information and returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO HOMELESS VETERANS ASSISTANCE FUND ``Sec.
Designation to Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund.
DESIGNATION TO HOMELESS VETERANS ASSISTANCE FUND.
In General.--Every individual (other than a nonresident alien) whose adjusted income tax liability for the taxable year is $3 or more may designate that $3 shall be paid over to the Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 9511.
In the case of a joint return of husband and wife having an adjusted income tax liability of $6 or more, each spouse may designate that $3 shall be paid to the fund.
Adjusted Income Tax Liability.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `adjusted income tax liability' means, for any individual for any taxable year, the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) the income tax liability (as defined in section 6096(b)) of the individual for the taxable year, over ``(2) any amount designated by the individual (and, in the case of a joint return, any amount designated by the individual's spouse) under section 6096(a) for such taxable year.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year-- ``(1) at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, or ``(2) at any other time (after the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year) specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that, if such designation is made at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.''.
Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code (relating to establishment of trust funds) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
HOMELESS VETERANS ASSISTANCE FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6098.
Expenditures.-- ``(1) In general.--Amounts in the Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, to supplement funds appropriated to the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Labor Veterans Employment and Training Service for the purpose of providing services to homeless veterans.
Allocation of distribution.--Funds made available under paragraph (1) shall be allocated in proportion to the funding for homeless veterans programs administered by the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Labor Veterans Employment and Training Service.
Expenditure of funds.--The Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Labor Veterans Employment and Training Service may obligate funds to support any homeless veteran program authorized under title 38, United States Code.
President's Annual Budget Information.--Beginning with the President's annual budget submission for fiscal year 2011 and every year thereafter, the Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Labor shall include a description of the use of funds from the Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund from the previous fiscal year and the proposed use of such funds for the next fiscal year.''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``PART IX--Designation of Income Tax Payments to Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund''.
The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Homeless Veterans Assistance Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.