This Act may be cited as the ``School Anti-Violence Empowerment Act''.
TITLE I--SCHOOL SAFETY PROGRAMS SEC.
The Secretary of Education is authorized to provide grants to local educational agencies to establish or enhance crisis intervention programs, including the hiring of school counselors and to enhance school safety programs for students, staff, and school facilities.
Local Awards.--The Secretary shall award grants to local educational agencies on a competitive basis.
Grant Programs.--From the amounts appropriated under section 106, the Secretary shall reserve-- (1) 50 percent of such amount to award grants to local educational agencies to hire school counselors; and (2) 50 percent of such amount to award grants to local educational agencies to enhance school safety programs for students, staff, and school facilities.
Priority.--Such awards shall be based on one or more of the following factors: (1) Quality of existing or proposed violence prevention program.
Greatest need for crisis intervention counseling services.
Documented financial need based on number of students served under part A of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Equitable Distribution.--In awarding grants under this title, the Secretary shall ensure, to the extent practicable, an equitable geographic distribution among the regions of the United States and among urban, suburban, and rural areas.
Administrative Costs.--The Secretary may reserve not more than 1 percent from amounts appropriated under section 106 for administrative costs.
Eligibility.--A local educational agency that meets the requirements of this title shall be eligible to receive a grant to hire school counselors and a grant to enhance school safety programs for students, staff, and school facilities.
In General.--Each local educational agency desiring a grant under this title shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--Such application shall include a plan that contains the following: (1) In the case of a local educational agency applying for a grant to enhance school safety programs-- (A) a description of any existing violence prevention, safety, and crisis intervention programs; (B) proposed changes to any such programs and a description of any new programs; and (C) documentation regarding financial need.
In the case of a local educational agency applying for a grant to hire school counselors-- (A) a description of the need for a crisis intervention counseling program; and (B) documentation regarding financial need.
Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this title shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
In the case of a local educational agency that receives a grant to enhance school safety programs, such report shall describe how such agency used funds provided under this title and include a description of new school safety measures and changes implemented to existing violence prevention, safety, and crisis intervention programs.
In the case of a local educational agency that receives a grant to hire school counselors, such report shall describe how such agency used funds provided under this title and include the number of school counselors hired with such funds.
For purposes of this title: (1) The terms ``elementary school'', ``local educational agency'', and ``secondary school'' have the same meanings given the terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
The term ``school counselor'' means an individual who has documented competence in counseling children and adolescents in a school setting and who-- (A) possesses State licensure or certification granted by an independent professional regulatory authority; (B) in the absence of such State licensure or certification, possesses national certification in school counseling or a specialty of counseling granted by an independent professional organization; or (C) holds a minimum of a master's degree in school counseling from a program accredited by the Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs or the equivalent.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
the term ``school safety'' means the safety of students, faculty, and school facilities from acts of violence.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $700,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
TITLE II--INCREASED COPS FUNDING SEC.
INCREASED FUNDING FOR THE COPS PROGRAM.
Section 1001(a)(11) of part J of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793(a)(11)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(C) In addition to amounts made available under subparagraph (A), there are authorized to be appropriated to carry out part Q, to remain available until expended, the total amount of $1,500,000,000 for fiscal years 2000 through 2004, of which 50 percent shall be used for cooperative partnerships between schools and State and local police departments to provide for the use of police officers in schools.''.
Section 1701 of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796dd) is amended-- (1) in subsection (i), by striking the second sentence; and (2) by striking subsection (k).
TITLE III--21ST CENTURY LEARNING SEC.
AFTER-SCHOOL AND LIFE SKILLS PROGRAMS FOR AT-RISK YOUTH.
Section 10907 of part I of title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8247) is amended by striking ``appropriated'' and all that follows before the period and inserting the following: ``appropriated to carry out this part-- ``(1) such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 1999; and ``(2) $250,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004''.
TITLE IV--MODEL PROGRAM AND CLEARINGHOUSE SEC.
Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall develop a model violence prevention program to be made available to local educational agencies.
The Secretary of Education shall establish and maintain a national clearinghouse to provide technical assistance regarding the establishment and operation of alternative violence prevention programs.
The national clearinghouse shall make information regarding alternative violence prevention programs available to local educational agencies.