TITLE I--SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS SEC.
SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Retirement Savings and Security Act''.
Table of Contents.-- TITLE I--SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE II--CONFORMING RAILROAD RETIREMENT BENEFITS WITH SOCIAL SECURITY Sec.
Entitlement to spousal annuities.
Continued payment to survivors of waived lump sum benefits in amounts equivalent to social security survivor benefits.
Lump sum death benefits equivalent to social security benefits.
Payment of benefits equivalent to social security benefits with respect to service for which certain railroad retirement annuities are not payable.
TITLE II--CONFORMING RAILROAD RETIREMENT BENEFITS WITH SOCIAL SECURITY SEC.
Eligibility for Annuity.--Section 2 of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) The child (as defined in section 216(e) and (k) of the Social Security Act) of an individual, if-- ``(i)(I) such child will be less than 18 years of age, ``(II) such child will be less than 19 years of age and a full-time elementary or secondary school student, or ``(III) such child will, without regard to his or her age, be under a disability which began before the child attained age 22 or before the 84th month following the month in which his most recent entitlement to an annuity under this subsection terminated because he or she ceased to be under a disability, and ``(ii) such child is unmarried and dependent upon the employee, shall be entitled to an annuity, if he or she has filed an application therefor, in the amount provided under section 4 of this Act.''
Amount of Annuity.--Section 4 of such Act is amended-- (1) in the heading, by adding at the end ``and child annuities''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) The annuity of a child of an individual under section 2(i) of this Act shall be in the amount that would have been payable to the child under title II of the Social Security Act if all of the individual's service after December 31, 1936, had been included in the term `employment' as defined in that Act reduced by any benefit payable under title II of the Social Security Act.''.
Technical Amendment.--The first sentence of section 3(f)(3) of such Act is amended by striking ``the spouse and divorced wife'' and inserting ``the spouse, child, and divorced wife''.
ENTITLEMENT TO SPOUSAL ANNUITIES.
Entitlement Despite Certain Age Requirements.--Section 2(c)(1) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A spouse who is not entitled to an annuity by reason of paragraph (i)(B) of this subdivision, but who otherwise meets the conditions for entitlement to an annuity under this subsection, shall be entitled to an annuity in such amount as would have been payable under title II of the Social Security Act if all of the individual's service after December 31, 1936, had been included in the term `employment' as defined in that Act reduced by any benefit payable to the spouse under title II of the Social Security Act.''.
Removal of Age Requirement for Divorced Spouses.--Section 2(c)(4) of such Act is amended by striking paragraph (ii), by redesignating paragraph (iii) as paragraph (ii), and by striking paragraph (i) and inserting the following: ``(i) such individual has completed 10 years of service; and''.
Entitlement of Divorced Spouse Where Worker's Annuity Is Not Payable.--Section 2(e)(5) of such Act is amended by striking ``or divorced wife'' in the second sentence.
CONTINUED PAYMENT TO SURVIVORS OF WAIVED LUMP SUM BENEFITS IN AMOUNTS EQUIVALENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY SURVIVOR BENEFITS.
Section 6(c)(1) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 is amended by striking all that follows ``Provided, however,'' and inserting the following: ``That if the employee is survived by a widow, widower, or parent who may upon attaining the age of eligibility be entitled to benefits under this Act, such lump sum shall not be paid unless such widow, widower, or parent makes and files with the Board an irrevocable election, in such form as the Board may prescribe, to have such lump sum be paid in lieu of all benefits, other than the amount of the benefits that the widow, widower, or parent would have received under title II of the Social Security Act if all of the employee's service after December 31, 1936, had been included in the term `employment' as defined in that Act.
After a lump sum with respect to the death of an employee is paid pursuant to an election filed with the Board under the provisions of this subsection, no further benefits, other than benefits in such amounts as would have been payable under title II of the Social Security Act if all of the employee's service after December 31, 1936, had been included in the term `employment' as defined in that Act, shall be paid under this Act on the basis of such employee's compensation and service under this Act.''.
LUMP SUM DEATH BENEFITS EQUIVALENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS.
In General.--Section 6(b)(2) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Upon the death of an individual who (A) will have completed ten years of service at the time of his death, and (B) will have had a current connection with the railroad industry at the time of his death, a lump-sum death payment shall be made in accordance with the provisions of section 202(i) of the Social Security Act in an amount equal to the amount which would have been payable under such section 202(i) if such individual's service as an employee after December 31, 1936, were included in the term `employment' as defined in that Act.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 6(b)(1) of such Act is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the following: ``less any lump-sum benefit payable under subdivision (2) of this subsection''.
PAYMENT OF BENEFITS EQUIVALENT TO SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS WITH RESPECT TO SERVICE FOR WHICH CERTAIN RAILROAD RETIREMENT ANNUITIES ARE NOT PAYABLE.
Section 2(e) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subdivision: ``(6) A person who has filed an application for an annuity under this Act, but whose annuity is not payable for a month by reason of subdivision (1), (3), or (5) of this subsection and who is entitled to a benefit under title II of the Social Security Act for such month shall be entitled to receive an annuity under this Act for such month equal to the difference between the benefit under such title II paid for such month and the benefit under such title II that would have been paid for such month if all of the individual's service after December 31, 1936, had been included in the term `employment' as defined in that Act.''.
The amendments made by this title shall take effect on January 1, 1997.