This Act may be cited as the ``Governors Island National Monument Ratification Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) In August 1776, the fortifications at Governors Island, New York, provided cover allowing George Washington's Continental Army to escape a British onslaught during the Battle of Long Island.
The State of New York, for nominal consideration, ceded control of Governors Island to the Federal Government in 1800 to provide for the defense of the United States.
Between 1800 and 1811, Castle Williams and Fort Jay were constructed on Governors Island to anchor the defense of New York Harbor.
During the War of 1812, the combined firepower of Castle Williams and Fort Jay and the Southwest Battery in Manhattan dissuaded the British from making a direct attack on New York City, which was the largest city in and principal seaport of the United States at the time.
Governors Island, including Castle Williams and Fort Jay, played a significant role in the Civil War, World War I, and World War II, and continued to serve the United States Army through 1966, and thereafter the United States Coast Guard until 1997.
Castle Williams is named after Lieutenant Colonel Jonathan Williams, who built the semicircular ``cheesebox'' fort and later served as the first superintendent of the Military Academy at West Point.
The pentagonal Fort Jay, named after John Jay, is the complement of Fort Wood on nearby Liberty Island, which serves as the base of the Statue of Liberty.
In Presidential Proclamation No.
7402 of January 19, 2001, former President Clinton established the Governors Island National Monument, consisting of Castle Williams and Fort Jay and certain additional lands, as depicted on the map entitled ``Governors Island National Monument'' attached to the proclamation.
The Department of Justice has issued an opinion that notwithstanding the Presidential Proclamation, the National Monument could be sold and cease to exist if the rest of Governors Island is conveyed to a party other than the United States pursuant to the Balanced Budget Act of 1997.
More than 200 years of contributions to the history of the United States, and the important educational and cultural opportunities that Castle Williams and Fort Jay represent, could be lost if the National Monument ceased to exist.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to prevent the deterioration of the historic military buildings on Governors Island in New York Harbor; (2) to ensure that Castle Williams and Fort Jay are-- (A) retained in Federal ownership; (B) available for the benefit and inspiration of the people of the United States; and (C) afforded protection by the National Park Service as a unit of the National Park System; and (3) to provide the general public with-- (A) access to Governors Island; (B) access to open park space to experience the majestic views of New York Harbor; and (C) opportunities that illustrate the significant contributions of Governors Island to the history of the United States.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of General Services.
Island.--The term ``island'' means Governors Island, New York.
Management entity.--The term ``management entity'' means any person, group, entity, corporation, State or local unit of government, or other organization to whom the Administrator sells or transfers portions of Governors Island excluding the Governors Island National Monument.
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan required by section 4(d).
Monument.--The term ``Monument'' means the Governors Island National Monument established by Presidential Proclamation No.
7402 of January 19, 2001 (66 Fed.
7855), including the building, land, and dock described on the map in section 4(b).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
GOVERNORS ISLAND NATIONAL MONUMENT.
Ratification; Transfer of Administrative Jurisdiction and Management.--Notwithstanding section 9101 of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33; 111 United States Statutes at Large 670) or any other provision of law-- (1) the establishment of the Governors Island National Monument by Presidential Proclamation No.
7402 of January 19, 2001 (66 Fed.
7855), is hereby ratified and the Monument shall not be subject to sale under such section 9101 or otherwise; and (2) not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall transfer to the Secretary, for no consideration, administrative jurisdiction over, and management of, the Monument.
Inclusion of Building, Land, and Dock in Boundary.--The boundary of the Governors Island National Monument established by Presidential Proclamation 7402 shall include Building 140, its land, and Dock 102 as depicted on the map entitled ``Governors Island National Monument Boundary Map'', numbered 019/80,001, and dated August 20, 2001.
The map shall be on file and available for inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
Administration.-- (1) In general.--The Monument shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with-- (A) this Act; and (B) laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (i) the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes); and (ii) the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary may consult, and enter into cooperative agreements, with the Administrator or any management entity to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of, and access to, the Monument.
Interpretive services.--Subject to an agreement with the Administrator or any management entity, the Secretary may provide interpretive services and signage in the Governors Island National Historic Landmark District.
Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than January 19, 2004, the Secretary shall prepare a complete management plan for the Monument in consultation with appropriate public and private entities.
Applicable law.--The Secretary shall prepare the management plan in accordance with applicable laws, including section 12(b) of the Act entitled ``An Act to improve the administration of the National Park System by the Secretary of the Interior, and to clarify the authorities applicable to the system, and for other purposes'', approved August 18, 1970 (16 United States Code 1a-7(b)).
Submission.--On completion of the management plan, the Secretary shall submit a copy of the management plan to-- (A) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives; and (B) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Reservations of Rights of Access and Use.--As a condition of the Administrator's conveyance of portions of the island to any management entity, the Administrator shall reserve rights of access and use as follows: (1) For the Secretary to the Monument for the preservation, maintenance, and public enjoyment of the Monument.
For the Secretary of Transportation for the operation and maintenance of aids to navigation located on the island.
For the Secretary to and for use of utilities related to the Monument in accordance with the public service law of the State of New York.
For the Secretary to and for sole use of Dock 102 as depicted on the map described in section 4