IMPROVEMENTS IN IDENTIFICATION-RELATED DOCUMENTS.
Proof of Identity.-- (1) In general.--A Federal agency may not accept for any identification-related purpose a driver's license, or other comparable identification document, issued by a State to any person, unless the application process for the license or document includes the presentation by the applicant of evidence of identity in accordance with this subsection.
General requirements.-- (A) Number of documents.--The applicant shall present-- (i) 2 documents described in this subsection, if at least 1 contains a clear photograph of the applicant and at least 1 is a primary document; or (ii) 3 documents described in this subsection, if at least 1 is a primary document.
Originals or certified copies.--All documents presented shall be originals or copies certified by the issuing agency.
English.--All documents presented shall be in English.
Primary documents.--For purposes of this subsection, the following shall be considered primary documents, if they include the date of birth of the applicant: (A) Birth certificate (or delayed birth certificate) issued in any State, territory, or possession of the United States.
United States Certificate of Birth Abroad.
Foreign passport with a visa valid for admission into the United States, and an admission stamp or Arrival-Departure Record (Department of Homeland Security Form I-94) in the passport.
Arrival-Departure Record (Department of Homeland Security Form I-94) with a photograph.
Alien Registration Receipt Card (Department of Homeland Security Form I-551) (issued after March 1977).
Employment Authorization Card (Department of Homeland Security Form I-688A, I-688B, or I-766).
United States Certificate of Naturalization.
United States Certificate of Citizenship.
Driver's license, instruction permit, or identification card issued by any State, territory, or possession of the United States after the effective date of this Act.
Tribal Certificate of Indian Blood.
Tribal or Bureau of Indian Affairs Affidavit of Birth.
Department of Defense Certificate of Release or Discharge from Active Duty (DD Form 214).
Department of Defense identification card issued to an active duty, reserve, or retired member of the Armed Forces of the United States.
Secondary documents.--For purposes of this subsection, the following shall be considered secondary documents: (A) Department of Defense identification card issued to a dependent.
Department of Defense driver's license.
Motor vehicle record or clearance letter (within 30 days of issue).
Selective Service System Registration Acknowledgement Card.
Department of the Treasury, Internal Revenue Service Form W-2 Wage and Tax Statement.
Department of Veterans Affairs identification card.
Medical insurance identification card.
Employee identification badge (with photograph).
School identification card (with photograph).
Marriage license issued by any State, territory, or possession of the United States.
Any of the following orders or decrees from a court of record: (i) Divorce.
Expiration of Identification Documents Issued to Nonimmigrants.--A Federal agency may not accept for any identification- related purpose a driver's license, or other comparable identification document, issued by a State to any person, unless the State has in effect a policy requiring any such license or document, when issued by the State to a nonimmigrant alien, to bear an expiration date that is not later than-- (1) the last day of the nonimmigrant alien's lawfully authorized period of stay in the United States; or (2) 5 years after the date on which the license or document is issued, in any case in which the nonimmigrant alien's lawfully authorized period of stay-- (A) is modified at any time after the alien's admission into the United States; or (B) does not expire on a date certain.
Grants to States.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall make grants to States to assist them in complying with the requirements described in subsections (a) and (b).
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, but shall apply only to licenses or documents issued to a nonimmigrant alien for the first time after such effective date and to replacement or renewal licenses or documents issued according to State law after such effective date.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' means any of the following: (A) An Executive agency (as defined in section 105 of title 5, United States Code).
An agency in the judicial branch of the Government of the United States.
Nonimmigrant alien.--The term ``nonimmigrant alien'' means an alien who is lawfully admitted to the United States by reason of having presented at the port of entry a valid unexpired nonimmigrant visa issued under section 221 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1201).