This Act may be cited as the ``Commissions on Regulatory Reform Act of 1993''.
Finding.--The Congress finds that Federal regulations have placed an unprecedented burden on all private citizens of the United States, to the extent that economic growth is significantly hampered.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to demonstrate the need to reexamine the policies and procedures of Federal agencies which impose regulatory burden, to determine what changes are necessary and desirable in those policies and procedures.
REVIEW OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
In General.--Each of the commissions established under section 4 by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Director'') shall review in accordance with this section the regulations issued by the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established.
Standards for Review.--In reviewing regulations under this section, a commission shall examine and determine the following: (1) Whether the regulations are-- (A) within the scope of authority of the statutes under which the regulations were issued; and (B) in accordance with the original intent of the Congress in approving those statutes.
Whether administrative decisions made under the regulations were based on adequate information concerning the need for and consequences of proposed Government action.
Whether regulatory action was taken only in instances where potential economic benefits to society of taking an action have exceeded the economic costs to society of taking the action.
Whether the objectives of regulatory actions were selected to minimize net economic costs to society.
Whether in selecting among alternative approaches for achieving objectives of regulatory actions, the alternative selected was the alternative involving the least net economic cost to society.
Whether Federal agencies, in selecting regulatory priorities, have taken into account-- (A) the condition of the particular employers and employees affected by regulatory actions; (B) the condition of the regional and national economy; and (C) other Federal regulatory actions being considered.
Consultation and Comment.--In carrying out reviews under this section, a commission shall-- (1) consult with the Congress; and (2) solicit and consider views and suggestions of persons affected by the regulations reviewed by the commission.
Reports.-- (1) In general.--Each commission established under section 4 shall submit reports in accordance with this subsection to the Director, the head of the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established, and the Congress.
The reports shall consist of-- (A) an interim report submitted by not later than 1 year after the completion of appointments of the members of the commission; (B) an interim report submitted by not later than 2 years after the completion of those appointments; and (C) a final report submitted by not later than 3 years after the completion of those appointments.
Contents.--Each report under this subsection shall describe the determinations made by the commission under each of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), and (6) of subsection (b) for the period covered by the report.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall establish 5 commissions to carry out reviews under section 3.
Of the commissions established under this section-- (1) 1 shall be established with respect to each of-- (A) the Environmental Protection Agency; (B) the Occupational Safety and Health Administration; and (C) the Health Care Financing Administration; and (2) 1 shall be established with respect to each of 2 Federal departments or agencies selected by the Director.
Membership.--Each commission established under this section shall be composed of 14 members as follows: (1) 2 members of the Senate appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, who shall be members of different political parties.
2 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, who shall be members of different political parties.
5 members appointed by the President from among persons affected by regulatory actions of the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established, of whom not more than 3 may be members of the same political party.
5 members appointed by the head of the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established, from among the career employees of the agency.
Compensation.--A member of a commission may not receive any additional compensation by reason of service on the commission.
Expenses.--The head of a Federal department or agency with respect to which a commission is established under this section shall pay the expenses incurred by the commission in carrying out this Act.
Termination.--A commission established by this section shall terminate on the date the commission submits a final report under section 3(d)(1)(C).