This Act may be cited as the ``Glacier National Park Commemorative Coin Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) on May 11, 1910, President William Howard Taft signed a bill establishing Glacier National Park, the Nation's 10th national park; (2) in 1931, members of the Rotary Clubs of Alberta and Montana suggested joining Glacier National Park with its adjacent cross-border Canadian national park, Waterton Lakes National Park, as a symbol of peace and friendship between the 2 nations; (3) in 1932, the United States and Canadian Governments agreed to jointly designate the 2 parks as Waterton-Glacier International Peace Park, the world's first; (4) both parks are Biosphere Reserves, and were named as a World Heritage Site in 1995, highlighting the importance of the parks, not just to the United States and Canada, but to the entire world; (5) Glacier National Park's rugged and soaring mountains, pristine forests, watchable wildlife, alpine meadows, and spectacular lakes have inspired generations of people to explore and experience nature; (6) known as ``The Crown of the Continent'', Glacier National Park, with its awe-inspiring beauty, majesty, and grandeur, is an incredible national treasure; and (7) 2010 will mark the 100th anniversary of the establishment of Glacier National Park.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the 100th anniversary of the establishment of Glacier National Park, the Secretary of the Treasury (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 200,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of sections 5134 and 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of Glacier National Park and its natural features and wildlife.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act, there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year 2010; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the Glacier National Park Fund and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning on January 1, 2010.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 2010.
Sale Price.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge required under section 7(a) for the coins, and the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, and marketing).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders at a Discount.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, the first $2,000,000 of the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be paid by the Secretary to the Glacier National Park Fund of Whitefish, Montana, for use in-- (1) supporting the celebration, preservation, and promotion of Glacier National Park; and (2) maintaining and expanding the infrastructure and facilities of Glacier National Park.
Audits.--The Glacier National Park Fund of Whitefish, Montana shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code.