Establishment as Permanent Major Army Command.--(1) Chapter 307 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Army Reserve Command ``(a) Establishment of Command.--There is in the Army an Army Reserve Command, which shall be a major command of the Army.
The Secretary of the Army shall maintain that command with the advice and assistance of the Chief of Staff of the Army.
Commander.--The Chief of Army Reserve is the commander of the Army Reserve Command.
The commander of the Army Reserve Command reports directly to the Chief of Staff.
Assignment of Forces.--The Secretary of the Army shall assign to the Army Reserve Command all forces of the Army Reserve.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``3082.
Grade of Chief of Army Reserve.--Subsection (c) of section 3038 of such title is amended by striking out ``major general'' in the third sentence and inserting in lieu thereof ``lieutenant general''.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 903 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1991 (10 United States Code 3074 note) is repealed.
Transition Provision.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services and the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the plans of the Secretary for implementation of section 3082 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a).
Such implementation shall begin not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall be completed not later than one year after such date.
Establishment as Permanent Major Naval Command.--(1) Chapter 519 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Naval Reserve Command ``(a) Establishment of Command.--There is in the Navy a Naval Reserve Command, which shall be a major command of the Navy.
The Secretary of the Navy shall maintain that command with the advice and assistance of the Chief of Naval Operations.
Commander.--The Chief of Naval Reserve is the commander of the Naval Reserve Command.
The commander of the Naval Reserve Command reports directly to the Chief of Naval Operations.
Assignment of Forces.--The Secretary of the Navy shall assign to the Naval Reserve Command all forces of the Naval Reserve.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``5253.
Chief of Naval Reserve.--(1) Chapter 513 of such title is amended by inserting after section 5142a the following new section: ``Sec.
Office of Naval Reserve: appointment of Chief ``(a) There is in the executive part of the Department of the Navy an Office of the Naval Reserve which is headed by a chief who is the adviser to the Chief of Naval Operations on Naval Reserve matters.
The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint the Chief of Naval Reserve from officers of the Naval Reserve not on active duty, or on active duty under section 265 of this title, who-- ``(1) have had at least 10 years of commissioned service in the Naval Reserve; ``(2) are in the grade of rear admiral (lower half) and above; and ``(3) have been recommended by the Secretary of the Navy.
The Chief of Naval Reserve holds office for four years but may be removed for cause at any time.
He is eligible to succeed himself.
If he holds a lower reserve grade, he shall be appointed in the grade of vice admiral for service in the Naval Reserve.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5142a the following new item: ``5143.
Office of Naval Reserve: appointment of Chief.''.
MARINE CORPS RESERVE COMMAND.
Establishment as Permanent Major Marine Corps Command.--(1) Chapter 519 of title 10, United States Code (as amended by section 2(a)), is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Marine Corps Reserve Command ``(a) Establishment of Command.--There is in the Marine Corps a Marine Corps Reserve Command, which shall be a major command of the Marine Corps.
The Secretary of the Navy shall maintain that command with the advice and assistance of the Commandant of the Marine Corps.
Commander.--The Chief of Marine Corps Reserve is the commander of the Marine Corps Reserve Command.
The commander of the Marine Corps Reserve Command reports directly to the Commandant of the Marine Corps.
Assignment of Forces.--The Secretary of the Navy shall assign to the Marine Corps Reserve Command all forces of the Marine Corps Reserve.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter (as amended by section 2(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``5254.
United States Marine Corps Reserve Command.''.
Chief of Marine Corps Reserve.--(1) Chapter 513 of such title is amended by inserting after section 5143 (as added by section 2(b)) the following new section: ``Sec.
Office of Marine Corps Reserve: appointment of Chief ``(a) There is in the executive part of the Department of the Navy an Office of the Marine Corps Reserve which is headed by a chief who is the adviser to the Commandant of the Marine Corps on Marine Corps Reserve matters.
The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint the Chief of Marine Corps Reserve from officers of the Marine Corps Reserve not on active duty, or on active duty under section 265 of this title, who-- ``(1) have had at least 10 years of commissioned service in the Marine Corps Reserve; ``(2) are in the grade of major general and above; and ``(3) have been recommended by the Secretary of the Navy.
The Chief of Marine Corps Reserve holds office for four years but may be removed for cause at any time.
He is eligible to succeed himself.
If he holds a lower reserve grade, he shall be appointed in the grade of lieutenant general for service in the Marine Corps Reserve.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5143 (as added by section 2(b)) the following new item: ``5144.
Office of Marine Corps Reserve: appointment of Chief.''.
AIR FORCE RESERVE COMMAND.
Establishment as Permanent Major Air Force Command.--(1) Chapter 807 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Air Force Reserve Command ``(a) Establishment of Command.--There is in the Air Force an Air Force Reserve Command, which shall be a major command of the Air Force.
The Secretary of the Air Force shall maintain that command with the advice and assistance of the Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
Commander.--The Chief of Air Force Reserve is the commander of the Air Force Reserve Command.
The commander of the Air Force Reserve Command reports directly to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
Assignment of Forces.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall assign to the Air Force Reserve Command all forces of the Air Force Reserve.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``8082.
Air Force Reserve Command.''.
Grade of Chief of Air Force Reserve.--Subsection (c) of section 8038 of such title is amended by striking out ``major general'' in the third sentence and inserting in lieu thereof ``lieutenant general''.