This Act may be cited as the ``Nigeria Democracy Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The November 10, 1995, execution by hanging of Ken Saro-Wiwa and eight other Ogoni environmental activists was carried out by the Government of Nigeria after a trial that ignored the fundamental standards of legal process, and despite the pleas for clemency by the African and international community, as well as the United States Administration, the Chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives, and the Chairman of the Congressional Black Caucus and the co- chairs of the Human Rights Caucus of the House of Representatives.
The United Nations recommended in both March and April of 1996 that the Government of Nigeria release the bodies of the Ogoni Nine for proper burial and paid compensation to the families of the deceased.
This heinous action followed an October 1, 1995, ambiguous statement by Nigerian military leader General Sani Abacha, that the country would be returned to civilian democratic rule in three years, and a lifting of the ban on political parties while at the same time not repealing the Treasonable Offenses Decree which allows the arrest of anyone speaking against the government.
General Abacha's announcement was pressured by the outrage of the international community for his March 1995 arrest and conviction to long prison terms by secret trial of some 43 persons for involvement in a so-called coup.
Among those convicted and still incarcerated are former President General Olusegun Obasanjo, the only military leader in Nigeria to return power to democratic civilian rule, General Shehu Musa Yar-Adua, deputy to the President in Abaasanjo's Administration, and later, human rights activist Beko Ransome- Kuti.
The people of Nigeria and the international community had been led to believe that the presidential election held in Nigeria on June 12, 1993, would result in a return to full democratic civilian rule in Nigeria.
General Ibrahim Babangida, the head of Nigeria's military government at the time of the June 12, 1993, election interrupted the release of the election results on June 23, 1993, and later annulled the election, thereby preventing a return to civilian rule.
The election process indicated that voters in Nigeria-- a country with a population of approximately 90,000,000 persons comprising 250 ethnic groups and spread across 357,000 square miles--were expressing a spirit of national unity that transcended ethnic, religious, and regional allegiances.
The reported returns suggested that Chief M.K.O.
Abiola of the Social Democratic Party was receiving a substantial majority of the votes cast, leading the poll in 20 of the 30 States in Nigeria.
The annulment of the presidential elections resulted in various forms of civil unrest, which in turn led to the deaths of more than 100 persons.
An interim government established by General Babangida on August 27, 1993, and headed by Ernest Shonekan, failed to win the support of the Nigerian people.
General Sani Abacha took power on November 17, 1993, appointing an unelected Provisional Ruling Council to govern Nigeria.
Abiola was imprisoned in solitary confinement for over one year for pressing his claim as the elected democratic leader of Nigeria, and still remains incarcerated today.
The political and economic conditions in Nigeria have continued to deteriorate in the months since Abacha took control of the country.
The faith of the Nigerian people in the viability of the nation as a unified whole must be preserved, and the balkanization of Nigeria guarded against.
The people of Nigeria have not accepted the continuation of military rule and have courageously spoken out in favor of the rapid return of democratic and civilian rule.
On May 15, 1994, a broad coalition of Nigerian democrats formed the National Democratic Coalition calling upon the military government to step down in favor of the winner of the June 12, 1993 election.
The confidence of the Nigerian people and the international community in the Provisional Ruling Council's commitment to the restoration of democracy can only be established by a sustained demonstration of a commitment to human rights, due process, and the return of civilian rule.
The United States would prefer to have a relationship with Nigeria based upon cooperation and mutual support but cannot, and will not, condone or overlook the denial of democratic civilian rule, against the clear wishes of the Nigerian people, by the Provisional Ruling Council or any other body in Nigeria.
The lack of support from the Nigerian authorities on drug trafficking issues forced the United States for the last 2 years to place Nigeria on the list of countries penalized for failure to seriously address the narcotics proliferation issue, thus endangering vulnerable youth in our communities.
Continuing credible reports of widespread corruption and questionable business practices in the Nigerian Government and ``scams'' in the United States, and the lack of cooperation in addressing these problems by the Nigerian Government, further undermines Nigeria's credibility in the international community, and is a constant embarrassment to approximately 1,000,000 law-abiding Nigerian Americans.
Nigeria's leadership role on the African continent, especially in the area of peacekeeping, will be severely compromised by its failure to rejoin the world community of democratic nations.
Nigeria was recently suspended from the Commonwealth, a forum linking Britain and former colonies, and African countries like South Africa have already called for diplomatic, economic, and sports sanctions, since the limited sanctions imposed by the United States Administration have had little effect in safeguarding the lives of the people of Nigeria and moving Nigeria toward democracy.
Commitment to Unity and Democracy by the Nigerian People.--The Congress continues to support the Nigerian people in their commitment to unity and democracy as evidenced by their participation in the June 12, 1993, presidential election in Nigeria, and in their subsequent insistence on the return to full civilian and democratic rule.
Actions Taken by the United States.--While the Congress endorses the limited steps taken by the Administration to demonstrate United States opposition to the annulment of the June 12, 1993, presidential election in Nigeria, more needs to be accomplished to encourage the restoration of fully democratic and civilian rule in Nigeria.
Sanctions to be Implemented in Coordination With International Community.--The Congress declares that the sanctions against Nigeria contained in this Act should be taken in concert with the international community and the United Nations to the maximum extent possible.
Increase in Democracy Building and Rule of Law Assistance.--The Congress declares that the finite foreign assistance resources of the United States Government provided to Nigeria should be re-prioritized within present budget levels in order that more funds can be expended for democracy building and the promotion of the rule of law through nongovernmental organizations in Nigeria.
SANCTIONS AGAINST THE GOVERNMENT OF NIGERIA.
United States Measures To Promote Democracy and Human Rights.-- (1) No assistance.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), no assistance may be made available under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or the Arms Export Control Act to the Government of Nigeria.
Exceptions.--The prohibition in subparagraph (A) shall not apply to assistance for democracy building and the promotion of the rule of law through nongovernmental organizations.
International financial institutions.--The President shall instruct the United States Executive Director of each international financial institution to vote against any loan or other utilization of the funds of the respective institution to or from Nigeria.
Air transportation.--Air transportation with Nigeria shall be prohibited in accordance with subsection (b).
Defense articles and services.--No defense article or defense service may be sold or financed with respect to Nigeria, and no license to export to Nigeria a defense article or service may be issued.
Exclusion of nigerians from admission to the united states.--Except as required by United States treaty obligations, any Nigerian national who formulates, implements, or benefits from policies which hinder Nigeria's transition to democracy and members of their immediate families shall be ineligible to receive a visa and shall be excluded from admission into the United States.
Eximbank, opic, and tda.--No funds available to the Export-Import Bank of the United States, the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, or the Trade and Development Agency may be used with respect to Nigeria.
Prohibition of new investment.-- (A) In general.--No national of the United States may, directly or through another person, make any new investment in Nigeria, including new investments in the energy sector.
Effective date.--The prohibition contained in subparagraph (A) shall take effect 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Assets freeze.--The President, acting through the Secretary of the Treasury, shall exercise the authority of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act to block the assets of any Nigerian national who formulates, implements, or benefits from policies which hinder Nigeria's transition to democracy and members of their immediate families.
Prohibition of Air Transportation With Nigeria.-- (1) Prohibition on nigerian air carrier.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 10 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall direct the Secretary of Transportation to revoke the right of any air carrier designated by the Government of Nigeria under any air transport agreement between the United States and Nigeria to service the routes provided in the agreement.
Notification.--The President shall immediately notify the Government of Nigeria of his intention to suspend, in accordance with subparagraph (A), the rights of any air carrier designated by the Government of Nigeria under any such air transport agreement.
Prohibition on united states air carrier.--Not later than 10 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall direct the Secretary of Transportation not to permit or otherwise designate any United States air carrier to provide service between the United States and Nigeria pursuant to any air transport agreement between the United States and Nigeria.
Termination of air transport agreements.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 10 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall terminate any air transport agreement between the Government of the United States and the Government of Nigeria in accordance with the provisions of that agreement.
Prohibition on nigerian aircraft.--Upon termination of such agreement, the Secretary of Transportation shall prohibit any aircraft of a foreign air carrier owned, directly or indirectly, by the Government of Nigeria or by Nigerian nationals from engaging in air transportation with respect to the United States.
Prohibition on united states aircraft.--The Secretary of Transportation shall prohibit the takeoff and landing in Nigeria of any aircraft by an air carrier owned, directly or indirectly, or controlled by a national of the United States or by any corporation or other entity organized under the laws of the United States or of any State.
Waivers.--The President may waive the prohibitions contained in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that the air transportation prohibited under either such paragraph is important to the national interest of the United States, including emergencies in which the safety of an aircraft or its crew or passengers is threatened.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this subsection, the terms ``aircraft'', ``air transportation'', and ``foreign air carrier'' have the meanings given those terms in section 101 of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code 1301).
Multilateral Measures To Promote Democracy and Human Rights.-- The President shall instruct the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations to actively pursue the passage of any resolution by the United Nations Security Council that enhances the cooperation of other nations in the application of the spirit and intent of the sanctions contained in this section.
Waiver of Sanctions.--The President may waive any of the sanctions contained in this section if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that such a waiver is important to the national interest of the United States.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the United States should follow the precedent of the Federation of International Football Associations which withdrew its invitation for Nigeria to host the World Youth Soccer Championships in 1995 by excluding Nigerian sporting teams from participating in any sporting event in the United States; and (2) the President should work with the Government of Australia prior to the opening of the 2000 Olympic Games to be held in Sydney, Australia, to determine the appropriateness of issuing visas for Nigerian participants in those Olympic Games based upon the progress made by Nigeria toward democracy.
Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 6 months thereafter, the President shall prepare and transmit to the Congress a report on the extent to which Nigeria has made progress toward democracy, civilian rule, and respect for internationally recognized human rights.
As used in this Act: (1) International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institutions'' includes the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the Mutual Investment Guarantee Agency, the African Development Bank, the African Development Fund, and the International Monetary Fund.
National of the united states.--The term ``national of the United States'' means-- (A) a natural person who is a citizen of the United States or is an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in the United States, as defined by section 101(a)(20) of the Immigration and Nationality Act; or (B) a corporation, partnership, or other business association which is organized under the law of the United States, any State or territory thereof, or the District of Columbia.
New investment.--The term ``new investment''-- (A) means-- (i) a commitment or contribution of funds or other assets, and (ii) a loan or other extension of credit, and (B) does not include-- (i) the reinvestment of profits generated by a controlled Nigerian entity into that same controlled Nigerian entity or the investment of such profits in a Nigerian entity; and (ii) contributions of money or other assets where such contributions are necessary to enable a controlled Nigerian entity to operate in an economically sound manner, without expanding its operations.
Nigerian entity.--The term ``Nigerian entity'' means-- (A) a corporation, partnership, or other business association or entity organized in Nigeria; or (B) a branch, office, agency, or sole proprietorship in Nigeria of a person that resides or is organized outside Nigeria.