This Act may be cited as the ``Capital Budgeting Act of 1993''.
STATEMENT OF FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
Statement of Finding.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the objective of enhancing long-term economic growth is not well served by a budget process focused on short-term results, (2) long-term economic growth depends not only upon a stable social, political, and economic environment and a higher level of national savings, but also upon a sound public infrastructure, an educated citizenry and workforce, an investment in research and the discovery of knowledge, and the harnessing of inventive genius into the workplace and marketplace, (3) the existing presentation of the Federal Budget obscures the distinctions between long-term capital investments, expenditures of a developmental character, and current operational spending, and (4) the public interest will be served by a Federal Budget presentation which presents information showing long-term effects of expenditures.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to require that the unified budget present-- (1) an operating budget, and (2) an investment budget divided into-- (A) federally-owned capital, and (B) developmental investments, for each of the 3 major components of the budget (general, trust, and enterprise funds) in order to ensure a continued focus on the Government's total financial operations, while providing better and more relevant information upon which to base both overall fiscal policy as well as program priorities within the Federal Budget.
CAPITAL AND OPERATING BUDGETS.
In General.--Title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1105 the following new section: ``SEC.
CAPITAL AND OPERATING BUDGETS.
(1) The budget of the United States submitted by the President under section 1105 of this title shall be a unified budget composed of-- ``(A) an operating budget, and ``(B) an investment budget divided into federally-owned capital and developmental investments.
Operating and investment budgets shall be presented separately for unified funds, general funds, trust funds, and enterprise funds.
(1) Actual, estimated, and proposed amounts shall be presented for unified funds, general funds, trust funds, and enterprise funds, and, at a minimum, shall contain: ``(A) For the operating budget: ``(i) Operating revenues.
Operating surplus/deficit before interfund transfers.
Federal expenditures financing the operating expenses of State and local governments.
For the investment budget: ``(i) For federally-owned capital: the office buildings, equipment, and other assets that are owned by the Government for use in its operations together with a showing how such assets will improve the efficiency and effectiveness with which government agencies carry out their missions.
For developmental investments (including grants and loans to non-Federal entities for improving physical infrastructure, research and development, and investment in human capital through education and training): the amounts to be invested together with a projection of how such investments will improve the prospects for higher rates of economic growth on the future.
For both categories of investment budgets, the following information will be presented: ``(A) Investment funds together with investment revenues.
Financing requirements before interfund transfers.
Projected effects upon economic growth.
The investment budget shall represent only the major activities, projects, and programs which support the acquisition, construction, alteration, and rehabilitation of such investment assets and the major programs and activities which support nonmilitary research and development, education, and job training.
All other activities, projects, and programs shall be represented in the operating budget.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1105 the following new item: ``1105A.
Capital and operating budgets.''