This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Land Acquisition Impact Relief Act of 1993.
Congress finds that-- (1) land that is held by agencies of the Federal Government does not fully contribute to the tax base of overburdened units of local government; (2) further acquisitions of private lands by Federal agencies have the potential to impose severe hardships on units of local government; and (3) when it is clearly in the national interest for the Federal Government to acquire private lands, other than by a contemporaneous exchange involving Federal land, Federal agencies should minimize the impact of Federal acquisition on units of local government.
It is the policy of Congress that-- (1) Federal agencies should not acquire private land, other than by exchange, unless the acquisition is clearly in the national interest; (2) the acquisition of private land by a Federal agency should be based on a careful analysis of the full range of the benefits and costs of Federal acquisition; and (3) the acquisition of private land by a Federal agency should not result in a net loss of local tax revenues to the relevant unit of local government.
As used in this Act: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' has the same meaning as is provided for ``Executive agency'' in section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
Unit of local government.--The term ``unit of local government'' means-- (A) any county, municipality, or other political subdivision of a State, having authority under the laws of the State to levy and collect taxes upon real property; or (B) the District of Columbia.
Real property taxes.--The term ``real property taxes'' means all taxes, whether ad valorem or otherwise, applicable with respect to real property, including special assessments, assessments for benefit, or other charges of general application against land in favor of a State or local governmental unit.
State.--The term ``State'' means any of the several States, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, or any territory and possession of the United States.
In General.--Prior to each acquisition of private land by an agency, the head of the agency shall prepare an economic impact analysis in accordance with this section.
Contents.--In preparing the economic impact analysis, the head of the agency shall, at a minimum, analyze-- (1) the extent to which alternative means to Federal acquisition are available to serve the Federal resource management objectives at issue; (2) any tax payment loss to the relevant unit of local government; (3) the effects of the tax payment loss on the delivery of governmental services by the unit; (4) the effects on local employment and income; and (5) any potential limitations that the Federal acquisition would pose for future community expansion.
Consultation.--The agency shall consult with the relevant unit of local government during the preparation of the economic impact analysis.
Notice and Comment.--The agency shall provide an opportunity for notice and comment in connection with the preparation of the economic impact analysis.
In General.-- (1) In general.--For each parcel of private land acquired by an agency after October 1, 1992, other than by contemporaneous land exchange, the head of the agency shall pay annually to the unit of local government in which the parcel is located an amount equal to the real property taxes computed on the current market value of the parcel, as determined in accordance with paragraph (2).
Current market value.-- (A) Initial value.--The initial current market value of a parcel shall be equal to the purchase price per acre multiplied by the number of acres acquired by the Federal Government.
Adjustments.--The unit of local government may adjust the current market value of a parcel to reflect adjustments in the current market value of other lands within the jurisdiction.
Special formulas.--In computing a tax equivalency payment under this subsection, special farm or forest use formulas, which may vary from State to State, shall not be applied to the value of the parcel.
Failure to Pay.--If for any reason the head of an agency fails to make a payment required under subsection (a), the unit of local government may file a civil action against the agency, and a district court of the United States shall have jurisdiction to enforce this section.
EFFECT OF OTHER LAWS.
If for any fiscal year a payment described in section 6(a) is made to a State or unit of local government with respect to a parcel of land described in section 6(a)(1), such payment shall be reduced in proportion to the payment in lieu of real property taxes, if any, which is made with respect to the same parcel of land under any other Federal law.
In each fiscal year, there are authorized to be appropriated to each agency such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
This Act shall become effective on October 1, 1994.