This Act may be cited as the ``Patent Application Publication Act of 1995''.
Section 122 of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Confidential status of applications; publication of patent applications ``(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), applications for patents shall be kept in confidence by the Patent and Trademark Office and no information concerning the same given without authority of the applicant or owner unless necessary to carry out the provisions of any Act of Congress or in such special circumstances as may be determined by the Commissioner.
(1) Subject to paragraph (2), each application for patent, except applications for design patents under chapter 16 of this title and provisional applications filed under section 111(b) of this title, shall be published, in accordance with procedures as determined by the Commissioner, as soon as possible after the expiration of a period of 18 months from the earliest filing date for which a benefit is sought under this title, except that an application that is no longer pending shall not be published and an application that is subject to a secrecy order pursuant to section 181 of this title shall not be published.
An application may be published earlier than the above date at the request of the applicant.
No information concerning published patent applications shall be made available to the public except as the Commissioner shall determine.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a determination by the Commissioner to release or not to release information concerning a published patent application shall be final and nonreviewable.
Upon request, an application will not be published in accordance with paragraph (1) until 3 months after the Commissioner makes a notification to the applicant under section 132 of this title.
Applications filed pursuant to section 363 of this title, applications asserting priority under section 119 or 365(a) of this title, and applications asserting the benefit of an earlier application under section 120, 121, or 365(c) of this title shall not be eligible for a request pursuant to this paragraph.
Furthermore, the applicant shall certify that the invention disclosed in the application was not or will not be the subject of an application filed in a foreign country.
A request under this paragraph shall only be available to an independent inventor who has been accorded status under section 41(h) of this title.
The Commissioner may establish appropriate procedures and fees for a request in accordance with this paragraph.''.
TIME FOR CLAIMING BENEFIT OF EARLIER FILING DATE.
In a Foreign Country.--Section 119(b) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b) No application for patent shall be entitled to this right of priority unless a claim therefor and a certified copy of the original foreign application, specification and drawings upon which it is based are filed in the Patent and Trademark Office at such time during the pendency of the application as required by the Commissioner.
The Commissioner may consider the failure of the applicant to file a timely claim for priority as a waiver of any such claim.
The certification of the original foreign application, specification and drawings shall be made by the patent office of the foreign country in which filed and show the date of the application and of the filing of the specification and other papers.
The Commissioner may require a translation of the papers filed if not in the English language and such other information as he deems necessary.''.
In the United States.--Section 120 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The Commissioner may determine the time period during the pendency of the application within which an amendment containing the specific reference to the earlier filed application shall be submitted.
The Commissioner may consider the failure to timely submit such an amendment as a waiver of any benefit under this section.''.
Section 154 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding the following new subsection: ``(d) Provisional Rights.--In addition to other rights provided by this section, a patent shall include the right to obtain a reasonable royalty from any person who, during the period from publication of the application for such patent pursuant to section 122(b) of this title or from international publication of an international application designating the United States until issue of that patent-- ``(1)(A) makes, uses, offers for sale, or sells in the United States the invention as claimed in the published patent application or imports such an invention into the United States; or ``(B) if the invention as claimed in the published patent application is a process, uses, offers for sale, or sells in the United States or imports into the United States products made by that process as claimed in the published patent application; and ``(2) had actual notice or knowledge of the published patent application.
The right to obtain a reasonable royalty shall not be available under this subsection unless the invention claimed in the patent is identical to the invention as claimed in the published patent application.
The right to obtain a reasonable royalty based upon the international publication of an international application designating the United States shall commence from the date that the Patent and Trademark Office receives a copy of the international publication of the international application, unless already communicated by the International Bureau, or, if the international publication of the international application is in a language other than English, from the date that the Patent and Trademark Office makes a translation thereof available to the public.
The Commissioner may require the applicant to provide a copy of the international publication of the international application and a translation thereof.''.
PRIOR ART EFFECT OF PUBLISHED APPLICATIONS.
Section 102(e) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(e) the invention was described in-- ``(1)(A) an application for patent, published pursuant to section 122(b) of this title, by another filed in the United States before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent, or ``(B) an international application, published pursuant to section 122(b) of this title, by another who has fulfilled the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of section 371(c) of this title before the invention thereof by applicant for patent, or ``(2) a patent granted on an application for patent by another filed in the United States before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent, or on an international application by another who has fulfilled the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of section 371(c) of this title before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent, or''.
COST RECOVERY FOR PUBLICATION.
The Commissioner shall recover the cost of early publication required by the amendment made by section 2 by adjusting the filing, issue, and maintenance fees, by charging a separate publication fee, or by any combination of these methods.
The following provisions of title 35, United States Code, are amended: (1) Section 11 is amended in subsection (a)(1) by inserting ``and published applications'' after ``Patents''.
Section 12 is amended by inserting ``published applications and'' before ``patents''.
Section 13 is amended by inserting ``published applications and'' before ``patents''.
The item relating to section 122 in the table of sections for chapter 11 is amended by inserting ``; publication of patent applications'' after ``applications''.
The item relating to section 154 in the table of sections for chapter 14 is amended by inserting ``; provisional rights'' after ``patent''.
Section 181 is amended-- (A) in the first paragraph by inserting ``by the publication of an application or'' after ``disclosure'', and ``the publication of an application or'' after ``withhold''; (B) in the second paragraph by inserting ``by the publication of an application or'' after ``disclosure of an invention''; (C) in the third paragraph by inserting ``by the publication of the application or'' after ``disclosure of the invention'', and ``the publication of the application or'' after ``withhold''; and (D) in the fourth paragraph by inserting ``the publication of an application or'' after ``and'' in the first sentence.
PATENT TERM EXTENSION AUTHORITY.
Section 154(b) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Term Extension.-- ``(1) Basis for patent term extension.--Subject to the limitations of paragraph (2) of this subsection, if the issue of an original patent is delayed due to-- ``(A) a proceeding under section 135(a) of this title, ``(B) the imposition of an order pursuant to section 181 of this title, ``(C) appellate review by the Board of Patent Appeals and Interferences or by a Federal court where the patent was issued pursuant to a decision in the review reversing an adverse determination of patentability, or ``(D) an unusual administrative delay by the Office in issuing the patent, the term of the patent shall be extended for the period of delay.
The Commissioner shall prescribe regulations to govern the determination of the period of delay and the particular circumstances deemed to be an unusual administrative delay.
Limitations.-- ``(A) Maximum period of extension.--The total duration of all extensions of a patent under this subsection shall not exceed 10 years.
To the extent that periods of delay attributable to grounds specified in paragraph (1) overlap, the period of any extension granted under this subsection shall not exceed the actual number of days the issuance of the patent was delayed.
Minimum pendency before extension available.--No patent shall be extended under this section that has been issued before the expiration of 3 years after the filing date of the application leading to the patent or the commencement of the national stage under section 371 of this title, whichever is later, not taking into account the benefit of any earlier filed application or applications under section 120, 121, or 365(c) of this title.
Reasonable efforts.--The period of extension of the term of a patent under this subsection shall be reduced by a period equal to the time during the processing or examination of the application leading to the patent in which the applicant failed to engage in reasonable efforts to conclude processing or examination of the application.
The Commissioner shall prescribe regulations establishing the circumstances that constitute a failure of an applicant to engage in reasonable efforts to conclude processing or examination of an application.
Terminal disclaimer.--No patent whose term has been disclaimed beyond a specified date may be extended under this section beyond the expiration date specified in the disclaimer.''.
LAST DAY OF PENDENCY OF PROVISIONAL APPLICATION.
Section 119(e) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding the following at the end: ``If the day that is 12 months after the filing date of a provisional application falls on a Saturday, Sunday, or Federal holiday within the District of Columbia, the period of pendency of the provisional application shall be extended to the next succeeding secular or business day.''.
Sections 2 Through 7.--Sections 2 through 7, and the amendments made by such sections, shall take effect on January 1, 1996, and shall apply to all applications filed under section 111 of title 35, United States Code, on or after that date, and all applications complying with section 371 of title 35, United States Code, that resulted from international applications filed on or after that date.
The amendment made by section 4 shall also apply to international applications designating the United States that are filed on or after January 1, 1996.
Sections 8 and 9.--The amendments made by sections 8 and 9 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to any application filed on or after June 8, 1995.