The Congress finds that-- (1) the right to public trials and other court proceedings is protected by the First and Sixth Amendments to the Constitution; (2) while members of the public once commonly attended trials in person, today they must rely on the print and electronic media to learn about court proceedings; (3) Americans' understanding of the courts and their important work, as well as respect for the judicial system, is enhanced when photographic and electronic media coverage is permitted; (4) while 47 States now allow photographic and electronic media coverage of some or all of their courts, Federal courts have been entirely closed to such coverage, aside from a limited experimental program; (5) the presence of cameras and microphones in the courtroom does not deny litigants due process of law, or interfere with the fundamental fairness of the trial, as the Supreme Court recognized more than a decade ago in Chandler v. Florida; and (6) photographic and electronic media coverage of the courts does not, when appropriately regulated, either disrupt the proceedings or undermine the fair administration of justice.
MEDIA COVERAGE OF COURT PROCEEDINGS.
Chapter 111 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Media coverage of court proceedings ``(a) Media Coverage.-- ``(1) In criminal proceedings.--The Judicial Conference shall, within 1 year after the effective date of this section, authorize an experimental program in which the presiding judge of a court of the United States may, in his or her discretion, and subject to the provisions of this section, permit photographic or electronic media coverage of criminal court proceedings, including trials.
At least 15 Federal judicial districts shall participate in the experimental program.
In civil proceedings.--Any presiding judge of a court of the United States may, in his or her discretion, and subject to the provisions of this section, permit photographic or electronic media coverage of civil court proceedings, including trials.
General limitations.--The court may in any case refuse, limit, or terminate photographic or electronic media coverage in the interests of justice to protect the rights of the parties and the dignity of the court, or to assure the fair administration of justice.
No changes in the scheduling, form, or procedure of any court proceeding may be made, by virtue of this section, for the benefit of the media in providing photographic or electronic media coverage under this section.
Permission To Use Media Coverage.-- ``(1) Requests for permission.--A request for permission to use photographic or electronic media coverage of a court proceeding under this section shall be made on a form approved by the Judicial Conference that is filed within a reasonable time before the portion of the proceeding for which media coverage is requested.
The clerk of the court shall promptly notify the parties to the proceeding of the request.
Action of the court on requests.--A decision of the court granting or denying a request for photographic or electronic media coverage shall be in writing and shall be included in the record of the court proceedings.
A decision to permit such coverage shall contain any restrictions imposed by the judge on the photographic or electronic media coverage and shall contain a statement advising the parties that any violation of the rules of the court with respect to such permission may be punished by the court as a contempt thereof.
A decision of the court under this paragraph to grant or deny a request for photographic or electronic media coverage may be set aside on review only if it is found to be an abuse of discretion.
Pretrial conference.--A pretrial conference shall be held in each case in which photographic or electronic media coverage of a proceeding has been approved.
At such conference, the presiding judge shall review with counsel and the media who will participate in the photographic or electronic media coverage the restrictions to be imposed on such coverage.
Counsel shall convey to the court any concerns of prospective witnesses with respect to the photographic or electronic media coverage.
Prohibited Coverage.-- ``(1) Prohibitions.--Proceedings held in chambers, proceedings closed to the public, and jury selection shall not be photographed, recorded, or broadcast under this section.
The testimony of police informants, minors, undercover agents, and in cases involving sex offenses, the victim and family of the victim, shall not be photographed, recorded, or broadcast under this section.
Conferences between an attorney and a client, witness, or aide, between attorneys, or between counsel and the court at the bench shall not be recorded or received by sound equipment.
Closeup photography of jurors is prohibited.
Arraignments and suppression hearings.--Photographic or electronic media coverage of arraignments and suppression hearings shall not be permitted unless the proceedings are open to the public.
Witnesses at criminal trials.--Upon the request of a witness in any criminal proceeding for which photographic or electronic media coverage is permitted under this section, the presiding judge may, for good cause shown based on the circumstances of that witness, order that the visual image of the witness be obscured.
Equipment and Personnel.--The court may require media personnel to demonstrate that equipment proposed to be used for photographic or electronic media coverage under this section complies with this section.
The court may specify the placement of media personnel and equipment to permit reasonable coverage without disruption of the proceedings.
Unless the court in its discretion orders otherwise, the following applies: ``(1) Only 2 television cameras and 2 still photographers, with not more than 4 cameras and 6 lenses, are permitted.
Equipment shall not produce distracting sound or light.
Signal lights or devices indicating when equipment is operating shall not be visible.
If the court permits existing courtroom sound and lighting systems to be modified, the modifications shall be installed, maintained, and removed without cost to the Federal Government.
Microphones and wiring shall be unobtrusively located in places approved by the court and shall be operated by 1 person.
Operators shall not move equipment or enter or leave the courtroom while the court is in session, or otherwise cause a distraction.
Equipment or clothing shall not bear the insignia or marking of a media agency.
Pooling.--If media agencies are unable to agree on arrangements for pooled coverage of a proceeding, the court shall deny photographic and electronic media coverage of the proceeding under this section.
Other Photographing, Recording, or Broadcasting.--Any photographing, recording, or broadcasting of court proceedings, other than that permitted under this section, is prohibited unless specifically authorized by the court, except that the court may not waive any provision of subsection (c).
Review Committee.-- ``(1) Creation.--There shall be created a committee to evaluate whether photographic or electronic media coverage of criminal court proceedings should be permitted after June 30, 1998, or whether such coverage so disrupts or interferes with the fairness of criminal court proceedings as to justify its prohibition.
Membership.--The committee shall consist of 16 members, 4 to be appointed by the Judicial Conference, 4 to be appointed by the Attorney General of the United States, 2 to be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 2 to be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives, 2 to be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate, and 2 to be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
The chair of the committee shall be appointed by the Judicial Conference.
At least 1 member of the committee appointed by the Attorney General shall be a representative of the electronic news media, and at least 1 member of the committee appointed by the Judicial Conference shall be a trial judge who has had experience with photographic or electronic media coverage of court proceedings.
Duties.--The committee shall evaluate, analyze, and monitor the effect of media coverage of criminal court proceedings on the administration of justice.
The Federal Judicial Center shall cooperate with the committee in connection with the review of the impact of photographic or electronic media coverage on criminal court proceedings.
The committee may request participation and assistance from bar associations in carrying out its functions.
Compensation.--The members of the committee shall serve without compensation for their services as members of the committee, except that each member of the committee who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government may be allowed necessary and actual expenses incurred in the performance of his or her duties under this subsection.
Such expenses shall be paid by the Administrative Office of the United States Courts.
Recommendations.--The committee shall make recommendations to the Congress and to the Judicial Conference with respect to the efficacy of the experimental program authorized by subsection (a)(1), the effects of the program on the administration of justice, and whether the program should be continued.
Such recommendations shall be submitted not later than January 31, 1998.
Rules and Regulations.--The Judicial Conference shall promulgate appropriate rules to carry out this section after affording all interested persons, agencies, and institutions an opportunity to review and comment thereon.
Such rules shall include provisions to ensure that the photographic or electronic media coverage of court proceedings does not interfere with the decorum and dignity of courtrooms and court facilities.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `photographic or electronic media coverage' means any recording or broadcasting of court proceedings by the media using television, radio, photographic, or recording equipment; and ``(2) the term `media' or `media agency' means any person or organization engaging in news gathering or reporting and includes any newspaper, radio or television station or network, news service, magazine, trade paper, in-house publication, professional journal, or other news reporting or news gathering agency.
Termination or Extension of Program.-- ``(1) Termination.--Subject to paragraph (2), the experimental program authorized by subsection (a)(1) shall terminate on June 30, 1998.
Extension by judicial conference.--Paragraph (1) does not apply if the Judicial Conference extends the program authorized by subsection (a)(1) and so notifies the Congress in writing before June 30, 1998.
Such extension may apply to criminal proceedings in all judicial districts (subject to subsection (c)) and may apply until such time as the Judicial Conference provides otherwise.
Inapplicability of Rule 53 of the Rules of Criminal Procedure.--Rule 53 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure does not apply during the period the program authorized by subsection (a)(1) (including any extension under subsection (j)(2)) is in effect.
Independent Action by Judicial Conference.--Nothing in this section precludes the Judicial Conference from authorizing photographic and electronic media coverage of criminal proceedings before the program authorized by subsection (a)(1) terminates.''.
The table of sections for chapter III of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``1659.
Media coverage of court proceedings.''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.