This Act may be cited as the ``Domestic Violence Community Response Team Act of 1995''.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) establish and strengthen the partnership between law enforcement and community groups in order to assist victims of domestic violence; (2) provide early intervention and followup services in order to prevent future incidents of domestic violence; and (3) establish a central technical assistance center for the collection and provision of programmatic information and technical assistance.
GRANTS AUTHORIZED FOR COMMUNITY RESPONSE TEAMS.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary''), is authorized to award grants to encourage eligible entities to serve as community response teams to assist in the prevention of domestic violence.
Grants awarded under this section shall be awarded in a manner that ensures geographic and demographic diversity.
Maximum Amount.--The Secretary shall not award a grant under this section in an amount that exceeds $500,000.
Duration.--The Secretary shall award grants under this section for periods of not to exceed 3 years.
Eligible Entity.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a nonprofit, community-based organization whose primary purpose involves domestic violence prevention, and who has demonstrated expertise in providing services to victims of domestic violence and collaborating with service providers and support agencies in the community.
Additional requirements.--In order to be considered an eligible entity for purposes of this section, an entity shall-- (A) have an understanding of the racial, ethnic, and lingual diversity of the community in which such entity serves as a community response team; (B) be able to respond adequately to such community; and (C) to the extent practicable, include personnel that reflect the racial, ethnic, and lingual diversity of such community.
Role of Community Response Teams.--Community response teams established pursuant to this section shall-- (1) provide community advocates to work (in conjunction with local police) with victims, immediately after incidents of domestic violence; (2) educate victims of domestic violence about the legal process with respect to restraining orders and civil and criminal charges; (3) discuss with such victims immediate safety arrangements and child care needs, and educate victims about resources provided by local agencies; (4) provide for followup services and counseling with local support agencies; (5) educate victims regarding abuse tactics, including increased incidence of violence that occurs after repeated episodes of violence; and (6) act in partnership with local law enforcement agencies to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--Applications for grants under this section shall be submitted to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include a complete description of the eligible entity's plan for operating a community-based partnership between law enforcement officials and community organizations; (B) demonstrate effective community leadership, commitment to community action, and commitment to working with affected populations; (C) provide for periodic project evaluation through written reports and analysis in order to assist in applying successful programs to other communities; and (D) demonstrate an understanding of the population to be served, including an understanding of the racial, ethnic, and socio-economic characteristics that influence the roles of women and affect treatment.
Administrative Expenses.--Of the amount made available under section 5 for a grant under this section for a community response team, not more than 5 percent of such amount may be expended to cover the administrative expenses of the community response team.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award a contract to an eligible entity to serve as a technical assistance center under this Act.
The technical assistance center shall-- (1) serve as a national information, training, and material development source for the development and support of community response teams nationwide; and (2) provide technical support and input to community programs, including assisting local groups in the establishment of programs and providing training to community volunteer staff persons.
Eligible Entity.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a nonprofit organization with a primary focus on domestic violence prevention and demonstrated expertise in providing technical assistance, information, training, and resource development on some aspect of domestic violence service provision or prevention.
An eligible entity shall be selected by the Secretary under this section based on competence, experience, and a proven ability to conduct national-level organization and program development.
In order to be considered an eligible entity for purposes of this section, an entity shall provide the Secretary with evidence of support from community- based domestic violence organizations for the designation of the entity as the technical assistance center.
Administrative Expenses.--Of the amount made available under section 5 for a contract under this section for a technical assistance center, not more than 5 percent of such amount may be expended to cover the administrative expenses of the technical assistance center.
There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998 to carry out the provisions of this Act, of which $300,000 shall be made available for a contract under section 4.