Congress finds that-- (1) Dr. Dorothy Irene Height was born on March 24, 1912, to James Edward Height and Fannie (Borroughs) Height in Richmond, Virginia, and was raised in Rankin, Pennsylvania; (2) Dr.
Height is recognized as one of the preeminent social and civil rights activists of her time, particularly in the struggle for equality, social justice, and human rights for all peoples; (3) beginning as a civil rights advocate in the 1930s, she soon gained prominence through her tireless efforts to promote interracial schooling, to register and educate voters, and to increase the visibility and status of women in our society; (4) Dr.
Height has labored to provide hope for inner-city children and their families, and she is responsible for many of the advances made by women and African Americans over the course of the last century; (5) her public career spans over 65 years; (6) Dr.
Height was a valued consultant on human and civil rights issues to First Lady Eleanor Roosevelt and she encouraged President Eisenhower to desegregate the Nation's schools and President Johnson to appoint African-American women to subCabinet posts; (7) Dr.
Height has been President of the National Council of Negro Women (NCNW) since 1957, a position to which she was appointed upon the retirement of Dr. Mary McLeod Bethune, one of the most influential African-American women in United States history; (8) the National Council of Negro Women is currently the umbrella organization for 250 local groups and 38 national groups engaged in economic development and women's issues; (9) under Dr.
Height's leadership, the National Council of Negro Women implemented a number of new and innovative programs and initiatives, including-- (A) Operation Woman Power, a project to expand business ownership by women and to provide funds for vocational training; (B) leadership training for African-American women in the rural South; (C) the Black Family Reunion, a nationwide annual gathering to encourage, renew, and celebrate the concept of not only the Black family, but of all families; (D) the Women's Center for Education and Career Advancement, established to empower minority women in nontraditional careers; and (E) the Bethune Museum and Archives, a museum devoted to the history of African-American women; (10) Dr.
Height has been at the forefront of AIDS education, both nationally and internationally, and under her direction, the National Council of Negro Women established offices in West Africa and South Africa and worked to improve the conditions of women in the developing world; (11) Dr.
Height has been central in the success of 2 other influential women's organizations, specifically-- (A) as president and executive board member of Delta Sigma Theta Sorority, Inc., Dr.
Height left the sorority more efficient and globally focused with a centralized headquarters; and (B) her work with the Young Women's Christian Association (YWCA) led to its integration and more active participation in the civil rights movement; (12) Dr.
Height was the only female member of the ``Big Six'' civil rights leaders, which included Whitney Young, A. Phillip Randolph, the Reverend Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., James Farmer, and Roy Wilkins, while strategies were developed for the civil rights movement; (13) Dr.
Height is the recipient of many awards and accolades for her efforts on behalf of women's rights, including-- (A) the Spingarn Award, the highest honor bestowed by the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP) for civil rights contributions; (B) the Presidential Medal of Freedom, awarded by President Clinton; (C) the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Memorial Award, from the National Council of Jewish Women; (D) the Ministerial Interfaith Association Award, for her contributions to interfaith, interracial, and ecumenical movements for over 30 years; (E) the Lovejoy Award, the highest recognition by the Grand Lodge of the Benevolent and Protective Order of Elks of the World, for outstanding contributions to human relations; (F) the Ladies Home Journal Woman of the Year Award, in recognition for her work for human rights; (G) the William L. Dawson Award, presented by the Congressional Black Caucus for decades of public service to people of color and particularly women; (H) the Citizens Medal Award for distinguished service, presented by President Reagan; and (I) the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Freedom Medal, awarded by the Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt Institute; and (14) Dr. Dorothy Height has established a lasting legacy of public service that has been an invaluable contribution to the progress of the Nation.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of Congress, to Dr. Dorothy Irene Height, a gold medal of appropriate design in recognition of her many contributions to the Nation.
Design and Striking.--For purpose of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary.
Under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck under section 2 at a price sufficient to cover the costs of the medals, including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses.
STATUS AS NATIONAL MEDALS.
The medals struck under this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be charged against the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund an amount not to exceed $30,000 to pay for the cost of the medal authorized under section 2.
Proceeds of Sale.--Amounts received from the sale of duplicate bronze medals under section 3 shall be deposited in the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund.