This Act may be cited as the ``International Development and Debt Relief Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION SEC.
The International Development Association Act (22 United States Code 284-284s) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Authority to Agree to Replenishment Resolution.--The United States Governor may, on behalf of the United States, agree to the resolution of the Association entitled `Additions to IDA Resources: Tenth Replenishment'.
Contribution Authority.--The United States Governor may, on behalf of the United States, contribute funds to the Association to pay 2 annual installments of the subscription and contribution of the United States in accordance with the resolution specified in subsection (a), subject to obtaining the necessary appropriations.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--In order to pay for the United States contribution authorized by subsection (b), there are authorized to be appropriated for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury $2,500,000,000, without fiscal year limitation.''.
ADVOCACY OF CERTAIN POLICIES.
In General.--Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262p-262p-5) is amended by redesignating section 1620 as section 1621 and by inserting after section 1619 the following: ``SEC.
ADVOCACY OF CERTAIN POLICIES.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development and the International Development Association to use the voices and votes of the Executive Directors to encourage vigorously their respective institutions to-- ``(1) develop new methodologies and indicators to evaluate adequately the effectiveness of the projects and programs of the respective institution in improving, on a sustainable basis, the standard of living of the poorest segments of the populations of the borrowing countries, including methodologies and indicators to evaluate the impact of the Program of Targeted Interventions (PTI); ``(2) increase the amount of resources of the respective institution devoted to the projects and programs identified as most effective by the methodologies and indicators referred to in paragraph (1), and as part of this effort, expand significantly the percentage of International Development Association investment lending included in the Program of Targeted Interventions; ``(3) include affected populations, local governments, and nongovernmental organizations in all phases of the project cycle, from project identification to post-project evaluation; ``(4) include the economic empowerment of women as a factor in evaluating the projects and programs of the respective institution; ``(5) encourage borrowing countries to redirect military expenditures to fund investments in human capital, including measures that promote education, training, and health; ``(6) evaluate adequately, through environmental impact assessments, the effect on the environment and nonrenewable resource base of recipients' economic growth strategies and the structural adjustment and sector lending programs of the respective institution; ``(7) maintain or expand debt relief programs; and ``(8) promote good governance and the rule of law in borrowing countries, by promoting fair and workable laws that are-- ``(A) necessary for economic development, private sector development, and human rights; ``(B) fully communicated to the public; and ``(C) administered by an independent and well- trained judiciary.''.
Reports to the Congress.--Not later than September 30, 1994, and not later than September 30, 1995, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate reports on the efforts made pursuant to section 1620 of the International Financial Institutions Act, and the results of such efforts.
USE OF LOANS FOR MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION.
Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262p-262p-5), as amended by section 102 of this Act, is amended by redesignating section 1621 as section 1622 and by inserting after section 1620 the following: ``SEC.
USE OF LOANS FOR MILITARY DEMOBILIZATION.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director of the International Development Association to use the voice and vote of the Executive Director to encourage the Association to emphasize the importance of facilitating the demobilization of military forces.''.
TITLE II--ASIAN DEVELOPMENT FUND SEC.
The Asian Development Bank Act (22 United States Code 285-285aa) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Authority to Agree to Replenishment Resolution.--The United States Governor may, on behalf of the United States, agree to the resolution of the Bank entitled `Fifth Replenishment of the Asian Development Fund and Second Regularized Replenishment of the Technical Assistance Special Fund'.
Contribution Authority.--The United States Governor may, on behalf of the United States, contribute funds to the Asian Development Fund, a special fund of the Bank, for the subscription and contribution of the United States in accordance with the resolution specified in subsection (a), subject to obtaining the necessary appropriations.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--In order to pay for the United States contribution authorized by subsection (b), there are authorized to be appropriated for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury $680,000,000 without fiscal year limitation.''.
TITLE III--GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT FACILITY SEC.
The Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286-286mm) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authorized.--The Secretary of the Treasury may contribute to the Global Environment Facility $30,810,000, subject to obtaining the necessary appropriations.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--In order to pay for the United States contribution provided for in subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury, $30,810,000 without fiscal year limitation, if, not later than September 30, 1994, the Secretary of the Treasury has certified that-- ``(1) the Facility has established clear procedures ensuring public availability of documentary information on all Facility projects and associated projects of the Facility implementing agencies; ``(2) the Facility has established clear procedures ensuring that affected peoples in recipient countries are consulted on all aspects of identification, preparation, and implementation of Facility projects; and ``(3) the Facility governance process will provide for contributor country oversight of individual projects in the work program, and specific provisions will be established for the participation of nongovernmental organizations in all phases of the project cycle, including identification, appraisal, implementation, and evaluation.''.
TITLE IV--REGIONAL MULTILATERAL DEVELOPMENT BANKS SEC.
ADVOCACY OF CERTAIN POLICIES.
In General.--Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262p-262p-5), as amended by sections 102 and 103 of this Act, is amended by redesignating section 1622 as section 1623 and by inserting after section 1621 the following: ``SEC.
ADVOCACY OF CERTAIN POLICIES.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors of each regional multilateral development bank and of the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development to use their voices and votes to encourage vigorously their respective institutions to-- ``(1) develop new methodologies to evaluate adequately the effectiveness of projects and programs of the respective institution in improving, on a sustainable basis, the standard of living of the poorest segments of the populations of the borrowing countries, and increase the amount of resources of the respective institution devoted to the projects and programs identified as most effective; ``(2) include affected populations, local governments, and nongovernmental organizations in all phases of the project cycle, from project identification to post-project evaluation; ``(3) include the economic empowerment of women as a factor in evaluating projects and programs of the respective institution; ``(4) encourage borrowing countries to redirect military expenditures to fund investments in human capital, including measures that promote education, training, and health; ``(5) evaluate adequately, through environmental impact assessments, the effect on the environment and nonrenewable resource base of recipients' economic growth strategies and structural adjustment and sector lending programs of the respective institution; and ``(6) support the development of the private sector of borrowing countries.''.
Reports to the Congress.--Not later than September 30, 1994, and not later than September 30, 1995, the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate reports on the efforts made pursuant to section 1622 of the International Financial Institutions Act, and the results of such efforts.
OPPOSITION TO LOANS FOR VIETNAM.
Title XVI of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262p-262p-5), as amended by sections 102, 103, and 401 of this Act, is amended by redesignating section 1623 as section 1624 and by inserting after section 1622 the following: ``SEC.
OPPOSITION TO LOANS FOR VIETNAM.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors of the International Development Association, the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the Asian Development Bank, and the Asian Development Fund to use the voices and votes of the Executive Directors, respectively, to oppose any loan to Vietnam except for basic human needs, until the President certifies to the Congress that acceptable progress has been made toward the fullest possible accounting of all Americans still prisoner, missing, and unaccounted for in Southeast Asia, through, inter alia, access to-- ``(1) all pertinent records of Group 875 of the General Political Directorate; ``(2) all pertinent records of Group 559; ``(3) all photographs and negatives relating to such Americans; ``(4) all grave registrations relating to such Americans; ``(5) all documents indicating that Vietnam knew of any American remains; ``(6) any supporting documents that confirm or deny the 1205 Russian document; and ``(7) any other remaining archival information relating to such Americans.''.
TITLE V--SPECIAL DEBT RELIEF SEC.
SPECIAL DEBT RELIEF FOR THE POOREST, MOST HEAVILY INDEBTED COUNTRIES.
Debt Reduction Authority.--The President may reduce amounts of principal and interest owed by any eligible country to the Export- Import Bank of the United States as a result of loans or guarantees made under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945.
Limitations.-- (1) Types of debt reduction.--The authority provided by subsection (a) may be exercised only to implement multilateral agreements to reduce the burden of official bilateral debt as set forth in the minutes of the so-called ``Paris Club'' (also known as ``Paris Club Agreed Minutes'').
Eligible countries.-- (A) Definition.--As used in subsection (a), the term ``eligible country'' means any country that-- (i) has excessively burdensome external debt; (ii) is eligible to borrow from the International Development Association; and (iii) is not eligible to borrow from the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development.
Determinations.--Subject to subparagraph (A), the President may determine whether a country is an eligible country for purposes of subsection (a).
Authority to exclude countries with unacceptable human rights records or excessive military expenditures.--Notwithstanding subparagraphs (A) and (B), a country shall not be an eligible country for purposes of subsection (a) if, in the sole discretion of the President, the President determines that-- (i) the human rights record of the country is unacceptable; or (ii) the level of military expenditures by the country is excessive.
Appropriations.--The authority provided by subsection (a) may be exercised only in such amounts or to such extent as is provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For debt reduction pursuant to this section, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $48,300,000, without fiscal year limitation, except that not more than $11,500,000 may be so appropriated for fiscal year 1994.
The Congress encourages the President to use the amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (c) to reduce the bilateral debt of any eligible country in accordance with the so-called ``Trinidad Terms''.
TITLE VI--MEASURES OF MILITARY SPENDING SEC.
JOINT DEVELOPMENT OF MEASURES OF MILITARY SPENDING.
Section 60 of the Bretton Woods Agreements Act (22 United States Code 286mm) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in the heading, by striking ``by the Fund''; (B) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by striking ``Director of the Fund'' and inserting ``Directors of the Fund and of the Bank''; (ii) by striking ``urge the Fund, in consultation with the Bank, to continue to develop'' and inserting ``urge the Fund and the Bank to cooperate and coordinate in the continued development of''; and (iii) by inserting ``, and in the reporting of such levels'' before the period; and (C) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``and the Bank'' after ``Fund''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking ``by Fund''; (B) by striking ``Director of the Fund'' and inserting ``Directors of the Fund and of the Bank''; (C) by striking ``urge the Fund'' and inserting ``urge the Fund and the Bank''; (D) by striking ``Board of the Fund'' and inserting ``Boards of the Fund and of the Bank, respectively,''; and (E) by striking ``estimate by the Fund'' and inserting ``joint estimate of the Fund and the Bank''.