This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Prosecutors Retirement Benefit Equity Act of 2001''.
INCLUSION OF FEDERAL PROSECUTORS IN THE DEFINITION OF A LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICER.
Civil Service Retirement System.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (20) of section 8331 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``position.''
and inserting ``position and a Federal prosecutor.''.
Federal prosecutor defined.--Section 8331 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (27), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (28), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(29) `Federal prosecutor' means-- ``(A) an assistant United States attorney under section 542 of title 28; or ``(B) an attorney employed by the Department of Justice and designated by the Attorney General of the United States.''.
Federal Employees' Retirement System.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (17) of section 8401 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (D), by adding ``and'' after the semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(E) a Federal prosecutor;''.
Federal prosecutor defined.--Section 8401 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (33), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (34), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(35) `Federal prosecutor' means-- ``(A) an assistant United States attorney under section 542 of title 28; or ``(B) an attorney employed by the Department of Justice and designated by the Attorney General of the United States.''.
Treatment Under Certain Provisions of Law (Unrelated to Retirement) To Remain Unchanged.-- (1) Original appointments.--Subsections (d) and (e) of section 3307 of title 5, United States Code, are amended by adding at the end of each the following: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply in the case of an original appointment of a Federal prosecutor as defined under section 8331(29) or 8401(35).''.
Mandatory separation.--Sections 8335(b) and 8425(b) of title 5, United States Code, are amended by adding at the end of each the following: ``The preceding provisions of this subsection shall not apply in the case of a Federal prosecutor as defined under section 8331(29) or 8401(35).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first applicable pay period beginning on or after 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO INCUMBENTS.
Definitions.--In this section, the term-- (1) ``Federal prosecutor'' means-- (A) an assistant United States attorney under section 542 of title 28, United States Code; or (B) an attorney employed by the Department of Justice and designated by the Attorney General of the United States; and (2) ``incumbent'' means an individual who is serving as a Federal prosecutor on the effective date of this section.
Designated Attorneys.--If the Attorney General of the United States makes any designation of an attorney to meet the definition under subsection (a)(1)(B) for purposes of being an incumbent under this section,-- (1) such designation shall be made before the effective date of this section; and (2) the Attorney General shall submit to the Office of Personnel Management before that effective date-- (A) the name of the individual designated; and (B) the period of service performed by that individual as a Federal prosecutor before that effective date.
Notice Requirement.--Not later than 9 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Department of Justice shall take measures reasonably designed to provide notice to incumbents on-- (1) their election rights under this Act; and (2) the effects of making or not making a timely election under this Act.
Election Available to Incumbents.-- (1) In general.--An incumbent may elect, for all purposes, to be treated-- (A) in accordance with the amendments made by this Act; or (B) as if this Act had never been enacted.
Failure to elect.--Failure to make a timely election under this subsection shall be treated in the same way as an election under paragraph (1)(A), made on the last day allowable under paragraph (3).
Time limitation.--An election under this subsection shall not be effective unless the election is made not later than the earlier of-- (A) 120 days after the date on which the notice under subsection (c) is provided; or (B) the date on which the incumbent involved separates from service.
Limited Retroactive Effect.-- (1) Effect on retirement.--In the case of an incumbent who elects (or is deemed to have elected) the option under subsection (d)(1)(A), all service performed by that individual as a Federal prosecutor shall-- (A) to the extent performed on or after the effective date of that election, be treated in accordance with applicable provisions of subchapter III of chapter 83 or chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code, as amended by this Act; and (B) to the extent performed before the effective date of that election, be treated in accordance with applicable provisions of subchapter III of chapter 83 or chapter 84 of such title, as if the amendments made by this Act had then been in effect.
No other retroactive effect.--Nothing in this Act (including the amendments made by this Act) shall affect any of the terms or conditions of an individual's employment (apart from those governed by subchapter III of chapter 83 or chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code) with respect to any period of service preceding the date on which such individual's election under subsection (d) is made (or is deemed to have been made).
Individual Contributions for Prior Service.-- (1) In general.--An individual who makes an election under subsection (d)(1)(A) may, with respect to prior service performed by such individual, contribute to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund the difference between the individual contributions that were actually made for such service and the individual contributions that should have been made for such service if the amendments made by section 2 had then been in effect.
Effect of not contributing.--If no part of or less than the full amount required under paragraph (1) is paid, all prior service of the incumbent shall remain fully creditable as law enforcement officer service, but the resulting annuity shall be reduced in a manner similar to that described in section 8334(d)(2) of title 5, United States Code, to the extent necessary to make up the amount unpaid.
Prior service defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``prior service'' means, with respect to any individual who makes an election under subsection (d)(1)(A), service performed by such individual before the date as of which appropriate retirement deductions begin to be made in accordance with such election.
Government Contributions for Prior Service.-- (1) In general.--If an incumbent makes an election under subsection (d)(1)(A), the Department of Justice shall remit to the Office of Personnel Management, for deposit in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund, the amount required under paragraph (2) with respect to such service.
Amount required.--The amount the Department of Justice is required to remit is, with respect to any prior service, the total amount of additional Government contributions to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund (over and above those actually paid) that would have been required if the amendments made by section 2 had then been in effect.
Contributions to be made ratably.--Government contributions under this subsection on behalf of an incumbent shall be made by the Department of Justice ratably (on at least an annual basis) over the 10-year period beginning on the date referred to in subsection (f)(3).
Regulations.--Except as provided under section 4, the Office of Personnel Management shall prescribe regulations necessary to carry out this Act, including provisions under which any interest due on the amount described under subsection (f) shall be determined.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE ADMINISTRATIVE ACTIONS.
Definition.--In this section the term ``Federal prosecutor'' has the meaning given under section 3(a)(1).
Regulations.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General of the United States shall-- (A) consult with the Office of Personnel Management on this Act (including the amendments made by this Act); and (B) promulgate regulations for making designations of Federal prosecutors who are not assistant United States attorneys.
Contents.--Any regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) shall ensure that attorneys designated as Federal prosecutors who are not assistant United States attorneys have routine employee responsibilities that are substantially similar to those of assistant United States attorneys assigned to the litigation of criminal cases, such as the representation of the United States before grand juries and in trials, appeals, and related court proceedings.
Designations.--The designation of any Federal prosecutor who is not an assistant United States attorney for purposes of this Act (including the amendments made by this Act) shall be at the discretion of the Attorney General of the United States.