This Act may be cited as the ``Women and HIV Outreach and Prevention Act''.
PREVENTIVE HEALTH PROGRAMS REGARDING WOMEN AND HUMAN IMMUNODEFICIENCY VIRUS.
Title XXV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300ee et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following part: ``Part C--Programs for Women ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants for the following purposes: ``(1) Providing to women preventive health services that are related to acquired immune deficiency syndrome, including-- ``(A) counseling on the prevention of infection with, and the transmission of, the etiologic agent for such syndrome; and ``(B) screening women for infection with such agent.
Providing appropriate referrals regarding the provision of other services to women who are receiving services pursuant to paragraph (1), including, as appropriate, referrals for treatment for such infection, referrals for treatment for substance abuse, mental health services, referrals regarding pregnancy, childbirth, and pediatric care, and referrals for housing services.
Providing follow-up services regarding such referrals, to the extent practicable.
Improving referral arrangements for purposes of paragraph (2).
In the case of a woman receiving services pursuant to any of paragraphs (1) through (3), providing to the partner of the woman the services described in such paragraphs, as appropriate.
With respect to the services specified in paragraphs (1) through (5)-- ``(A) providing outreach services to inform women of the availability of such services; and ``(B) providing training regarding the effective provision of such services.
Minimum Qualifications of Grantees.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant is a grantee under section 329, section 330, or section 1001, or is another public or nonprofit private entity that provides health or voluntary family planning services to a significant number of low-income women in a culturally sensitive and language appropriate manner.
Confidentiality.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to maintain the confidentiality of information on individuals regarding screenings pursuant to subsection (a), subject to complying with applicable law.
Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
Evaluations and Reports.-- ``(1) Evaluations.--The Secretary shall, directly or through contracts with public or private entities, provide for evaluations of projects carried out pursuant to subsection (a).
Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which amounts are first appropriated under subsection (f), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report summarizing evaluations carried out under paragraph (1) during the preceding fiscal year.
Authorizations of Appropriations.-- ``(1) Title x clinics.--For the purpose of making grants under subsection (a) to entities that are grantees under section 1001, and for the purpose of otherwise carrying out this section with respect to such grants, there are authorized to be appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.
Community and migrant health centers; other providers.--For the purpose of making grants under subsection (a) to entities that are grantees under section 329 or 330, and to other entities described in subsection (b) that are not grantees under section 1001, and for the purpose of otherwise carrying out this section with respect to such grants, there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants for the purpose of developing and carrying out programs to educate women on the prevention of infection with, and the transmission of, the etiologic agent for acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
Minimum Qualifications of Grantees.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved is a public or nonprofit private entity that is experienced in carrying out health- related activities for women, with a priority given to such entities that have successfully targeted women of color.
Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out such subsection.
Evaluations and Reports.-- ``(1) Evaluations.--The Secretary shall, directly or through contracts with public or private entities, provide for evaluations of projects carried out pursuant to subsection (a).
Reports.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which amounts are first appropriated under subsection (e), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report summarizing evaluations carried out under paragraph (1) during the preceding fiscal year.
Authorizations of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.''.
TREATMENT OF WOMEN FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE.
Subpart 1 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb et sequentes), as amended by section 108 of Public Law 102-321 (106 United States Statutes at Large 336), is amended by inserting after section 509 the following section: ``treatment of women for substance abuse ``Sec.
In General.--The Director of the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment may make awards of grants, cooperative agreements, and contracts for the purpose of carrying out programs-- ``(1) to provide treatment for substance abuse to women, including women with dependent children; ``(2) to provide to such women counseling on the prevention of infection with, and the transmission of, the etiologic agent for acquired immune deficiency syndrome; and ``(3) to provide such counseling to women who are the partners of individuals who engage in such abuse.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.''.
EARLY INTERVENTION SERVICES FOR WOMEN.
Section 2655 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300ff-55) is amended-- (1) by striking ``For the purpose of'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--For the purpose of''; and (2) by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(b) Programs for Women.--For the purpose of making grants under section 2651 to provide to women early intervention services described in such section, and for the purpose of providing technical assistance under section 2654(b) with respect to such grants, there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.