This Act may be cited as the ``Terrorism Victim Compensation Equity Act''.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, wherever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered a reference to the September 11th Victim Compensation Fund of 2001 (Public Law 107-42; 49 United States Code 40101 note).
COMPENSATION FOR VICTIMS OF TERRORIST ACTS.
Definitions.--Section 402(4) is amended by inserting ``, related to the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, related to the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or related to the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993'' before the period.
Purpose.--Section 403 is amended by inserting `` or killed as a result of the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993'' before the period.
Determination of Eligibility for Compensation.-- (1) Claim form contents.--Section 405(a)(2)(B) is amended-- (A) in clause (i), by inserting ``, the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993'' before the semicolon; (B) in clause (ii), by inserting ``or bombings'' before the semicolon; and (C) in clause (iii), by inserting ``or bombings'' before the period.
Limitation.--Section 405(a)(3) is amended by striking ``2 years'' and inserting ``3 years''.
Collateral compensation.--Section 405(b)(6) is amended by inserting ``, the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993'' before the period.
Eligibility.-- (A) Individuals.--Section 405(c)(2)(A) is amended-- (i) in clause (i), by inserting ``, was present at the United States Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya, or the United States Embassy in Dar es Salaam, Tanzania, at the time, or in the immediate aftermath, of the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, was on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or was present at the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993 at the time of the bombings of that building'' before the semicolon; and (ii) by striking clause (ii) and inserting the following: ``(ii) suffered death as a result of such an air crash or suffered death as a result of such a bombing;''.
Requirements.--Section 405(c)(3) is amended-- (i) in the heading for subparagraph (B) by inserting ``relating to september 11th terrorist acts'' before the period; and (ii) by adding at the end the following: ``(C) Limitation on civil action relating to other terrorist acts.-- ``(i) In general.--Upon the submission of a claim under this title, the claimant involved waives the right to file a civil action (or to be a party to an action) in any Federal or State court for damages sustained by the claimant as a result of the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993.
The preceding sentence does not apply to a civil action to recover any collateral source obligation based on contract, or to a civil action against any person who is a knowing participant in any conspiracy to commit any terrorist act.
Pending actions.--In the case of an individual who is a party to a civil action described in clause (i), such individual may not submit a claim under this title unless such individual withdraws from such action by the date that is 90 days after the date on which regulations are promulgated under section 4 of the Terrorism Victim Compensation Equity Act.
Individuals with prior compensation.-- ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), an individual is not an eligible individual for purposes of this subsection if the individual, or the estate of that individual, has received any compensation from a civil action or settlement based on tort related to the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993.
Exception.--Clause (i) shall not apply to compensation received from a civil action against any person who is a knowing participant in any conspiracy to commit any terrorist act.
Victims of bombings of united states embassies in east africa.--An individual who suffered death as a result of a bombing or attack described in subparagraph (C)(i) shall not be an eligible individual by reason of that bombing or attack, unless that individual is or was a United States citizen.''.
Ineligibility of participants and conspirators.--Section 405(c) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Ineligibility of participants and conspirators.--An individual, or a representative of that individual, shall not be eligible to receive compensation under this title if that individual is identified by the Attorney General to have been a participant or conspirator in the bombings of United States embassies in East Africa on August 7, 1998, the attack on the U.S.S.
Cole on October 12, 2000, or the attack on the World Trade Center on February 26, 1993.''.
Eligibility of members of the uniformed services.--Section 405(c) (as amended by subparagraph (C)) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Eligibility of members of the uniformed services.--An individual who is a member of the uniformed services shall not be excluded from being an eligible individual by reason of being such a member.''.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Special Master, shall promulgate regulations to carry out the amendments made by this Act, including regulations with respect to-- (1) forms to be used in submitting claims under this Act; (2) the information to be included in such forms; (3) procedures for hearing and the presentation of evidence; (4) procedures to assist an individual in filing and pursuing claims under this Act; and (5) other matters determined appropriate by the Attorney General.