LAND EXCHANGE WITH CITY OF GREELEY, COLORADO, AND THE WATER SUPPLY AND STORAGE COMPANY.
In General.--If the city of Greeley, Colorado, and The Water Supply and Storage Company, a Colorado mutual ditch company, offer to transfer all their right, title, and interest in and to lands described in subsection (b), the Secretary of Agriculture shall, not later than 1 year after the date of the city's and company's offer, in exchange for the property, transfer to the city and to the company, as the city and the company, respectively, shall designate, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the Federal land described in subsection (c).
City and Company Lands.-- (1) In general.--The city and company lands to be exchanged under this section are the lands described in paragraph (2) that are depicted on maps entitled ``Rockwell Ranch Property Land Exchange'', ``Timberline Lake Property'', and ``Cameron Pass Lands'' dated February 7, 1997.
Acreage.-- (A) Rockwell ranch property.--The Rockwell Ranch property is comprised of 4 parcels containing approximately 520 acres of land.
Timberline lake property.--The Timberline Lake Property is a parcel of approximately 10 acres located in the Comanche Peak Wilderness.
Cameron pass lands.--The Cameron Pass Lands consist of 2 parcels totaling approximately 178 acres owned by The Water Supply and Storage Company.
Quit claim deed.--The land described in paragraph (2)(B) shall be conveyed by quit claim deed for the purposes of eliminating any title conflict between the city of Greeley and the United States in regard to the land.
Availability of maps.--The maps described in paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Supervisor of the Arapaho National Forest and Roosevelt National Forest in Fort Collins, Colorado.
Federal Lands.-- (1) In general.--The Federal lands to be exchanged under this section are the lands depicted on the maps described in subsection (b) as ``Federal Exchange Lands''.
Acreage.--The total area of Federal land to be exchanged is approximately 1,176 acres, including approximately 447 acres occupied by the city and the company under perpetual easements of the United States Department of the Interior, Nos.
Land included.--The Federal land to be exchanged includes the following: (A) All Federal land within the high water contour lines (that is, the elevation of the dam crest) of the following reservoirs: Barnes Meadow, Chambers Lake, Comanche, Hourglass, Long Draw, Milton Seaman, Peterson Lake, and Twin Lakes, together with their dams and structures.
A surcharge and operational access area around each reservoir consisting of an average 50-foot horizontal projection from the high water line and an average 100-foot horizontal projection from the outer perimeter of all dams, and appurtenant structures (including outlets, measuring devices, spillways, wasteways, toe drains, canals, abutments, and the Peterson Lake operations cabin), as generally depicted on the maps described in subsection (b), the access area to the east of Long Draw Reservoir being limited to the extent necessary to convey only the land within the boundary of a national forest.
The Federal land that would be occupied by an enlargement of Seaman Reservoir to an approximate capacity of 43,000 acre feet (but not to exceed 50,000 acre feet), including an average 50-foot horizontally projected buffer zone around the enlarged water line and structures and an 80-acre parcel of Federal land south of Seaman Reservoir potentially required for a downstream damsite on the North Fork of the Cache la Poudre River, as generally depicted on the maps described in subsection (b).
PROCESSING OF AND TERMS AND CONDITIONS RELATING TO LAND EXCHANGE.
Processing.--The land exchange under section 1 shall be processed in accordance with Forest Service Land Exchange Regulations in subpart A of part 254 of title 36, Code of Federal Regulations, subject to section 1 and the terms and conditions stated in subsection (b).
Terms and Conditions.-- (1) Easements.--The United States shall-- (A) grant perpetual access easements to the city of Greeley, Colorado, and to The Water Supply and Storage Company to the land conveyed by the United States under section 1; and (B) reserve easements for all designated roads and trails crossing any Federal land to be conveyed that are necessary to ensure public access to adjoining national forest land.
Accessibility.--The city of Greeley, Colorado, and The Water Supply and Storage Company shall continue to make accessible to visitors to the Roosevelt National Forest, under rules and restrictions determined by the city and the company, Chambers Reservoir, Long Draw Reservoir, Peterson Reservoir, Barnes Meadow Reservoir, Comanche Reservoir, Seaman Reservoir, and Twin Lakes Reservoir.
Special use permits and easements.--All special use permits and easements and other instruments authorizing occupancy of the Federal land described in section 1(c) are rescinded on completion of the exchange.
Instream flow requirements.-- (A) Joint operations plan.--The conditions specified in the easements granted on December 28, 1994, and January 4, 1995, for Long Draw Reservoir, Peterson Lake Reservoir, and Barnes Meadow Reservoir requiring a joint operations plan providing instream winter flows to the mainstream of the Cache la Poudre River from Chambers Lake and Barnes Meadow Reservoir shall continue to be fulfilled regardless of land ownership unless the grantor and grantee of an easement agree otherwise.
Rockwell ranch property.-- (i) In general.--On completion of the land exchange, the city of Greeley's \1/2\ interest in the rights associated with the Rockwell Ranch property described in clause (ii) shall be dedicated to the Colorado Water Conservation Board in perpetuity for the instream flow program of the State of Colorado.
Rights.--The rights described in this subparagraph are the rights in Rockwell Ditches No.
1 in the volume of 1.2 c.f.s., No.
2 in the volume of 1.7 c.f.s., No.
3 in the volume of 2.68 c.f.s., No.
4 in the volume of 1.87 c.f.s., No.
5 in the volume of 1.95 c.f.s.
6 in the volume of 2.5 c.f.s., diverting from the South Fork of the Cache la Poudre River, and its tributaries, Little Beaver Creek, and the North Fork of Little Beaver Creek, all with the appropriation date of December 31, 1888.
No additional conditions, consultations, or mitigation.--No conditions, consultations, or mitigation (including instream or bypass flow requirements) in addition to those described in this Act shall be required as a condition of the land exchange.
Water rights.--Except as provided in paragraph (4)(B), the land exchange does not include any water right owned by the city of Greeley, Colorado, or The Water Supply and Storage Company.
Conveyance of federal land.-- (A) In general.--The Federal land to be exchanged shall be conveyed to the city of Greeley, Colorado, and to The Water Supply and Storage Company by means of a land exchange deed issued by an authorized officer of the Forest Service.
Surveys.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Agriculture may conduct and approve all cadastral surveys that are necessary for completion of the exchange.
Equal value.--The values of the lands exchanged between the United States and the city of Greeley, Colorado, and The Water Supply and Storage Company are deemed to be of approximately equal value, without need for a cash equalization payment.
New holdings.-- (A) In general.--It is recognized that the conveyance of certain portions of Federal land to the city of Greeley, Colorado, and The Water Supply and Storage Company will create new holdings in otherwise consolidated areas of Federal ownership.
Notification.--If the city of Greeley, Colorado, or The Water Supply and Storage Company decides to permanently discontinue reservoir operations on any of the properties acquired through the exchange, the Forest Supervisor of the Arapaho National Forest and Roosevelt National Forest shall be advised of the intent to perform nonreconstructive breaching of the dam for purposes of permanently terminating reservoir operations.
Opportunity to reacquire.--On notification under subparagraph (B), the Forest Service shall be afforded the opportunity, for a period not to exceed 1 year, to reacquire property at fair market value or exchange or on such other terms and conditions as may be agreed to by the parties concerned.
Development.-- (A) Finding.--Congress finds that the Federal land to be exchanged, with the exception of the Seaman Reservoir enlargement area and potential new damsite below Seaman Reservoir on the North Fork of the Cache la Poudre River, are fully developed and authorized for occupancy by the city of Greeley, Colorado, and The Water Supply and Storage Company.
No further inventory or consultation.--The land exchange may be completed without further inventory or consultation under the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes).
Enlargement.--If the city of Greeley, Colorado, seeks enlargement of Seaman Reservoir or construction of a new dam on the North Fork of the Poudre River below Seaman Reservoir for a Seaman Reservoir Enlargement, the site shall be subject to all Federal laws (including regulations) applicable at the time of proposed construction.
Easement for use of cabin.-- (A) In general.--The Chief of the Forest Service shall grant a 20-year easement to the city of Greeley, Colorado, for use of the cabin, in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, in the north half of the southwest quarter of Section 30, Township 8 North, Range 72 West.
Allowed uses.--The easement shall allow the use of the cabin and other improvements and access to the forest land nearby.
Access road.--The access road shall be available for city employees to have access to the cabin for recreational purposes and to the Forest Service for administrative purposes.
Easement for use of land.-- (A) In general.--The Chief of the Forest Service shall grant a 20-year easement to the city of Greeley, Colorado, for use of approximately 1 acre of land under the cabin, in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, in the vicinity of Jacks Gulch Campground on Pingree Road.
Allowed uses.--The easement shall include the administrative use of the access road to the cabin and the reservation of the use of the cabin to persons permitted under the special use permit in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
ADMINISTRATION OF LAND ACQUIRED BY THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--The land acquired by the United States under section 1 shall be added to and administered as part of the Roosevelt National Forest.
Wilderness.--The portions of the land located within a wilderness area shall be added to and administered as part of the wilderness area.
BOUNDARY MODIFICATION OF THE ARAPAHO NATIONAL FOREST AND ROOSEVELT NATIONAL FOREST.
Modification.-- (1) In general.--In order to provide for more efficient administration of certain Federal lands adjoining the Arapaho National Forest and Roosevelt National Forest-- (A) the exterior boundary of the Arapaho National Forest is modified as shown on the map entitled ``Boundary Modification, Arapaho National Forest''; and (B) the exterior boundary of the Roosevelt National Forest is modified as shown on the map entitled ``Boundary Modification, Roosevelt National Forest''.
Public availability.--The maps described in paragraph (1) and a legal description of the boundary changes shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Chief of the Forest Service and appropriate field offices of the Forest Service.
Administration.--All Federal land brought within the boundary of the Arapaho National Forest and the Roosevelt National Forest by this Act as a result of the land exchange under section 1 shall be added to the Arapaho National Forest and the Roosevelt National Forest, respectively, and administered in accordance with the laws (including regulations) and other rules applicable to the National Forest System.
Availability of Certain Lands.--For the purpose of section 7 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-9), the boundary of each of the Arapaho National Forest and the Roosevelt National Forest, as modified by this section, shall be treated as if it were the boundary of each forest, respectively, as of January 1, 1965.