SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Public Health Emergency Planning and Information Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Public health crisis education, information, and grant program.
Health disaster mitigation grant program for medicare hospitals.
Post-disaster compensation funding for medicare hospitals.
The Senate finds that, during a public health crisis, such as a deliberate act of bioterrorism or a natural epidemic, qualified professionals should be able to deliver accurate and timely information to the public in order to prevent panic and to promote public health.
In this Act: (1) Medicare hospital.--The term ``medicare hospital'' means a hospital (as defined in section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(e))) that has entered into an agreement under section 1866 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395cc) or a critical access hospital (as defined in section 1861(mm)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(mm)(1))).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
PUBLIC HEALTH CRISIS EDUCATION, INFORMATION, AND GRANT PROGRAM.
Establishment of Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Office of Emergency Preparedness of the Public Health Service, shall carry out a public health crisis education, information, and grant program in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Consultation.--In carrying out the public health crisis education, information, and grant program under this section, the Secretary shall consult with the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Publication of Educational Materials.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall publish public health crisis educational materials for use by medicare hospitals and the general public.
Contents.--The educational materials published under paragraph (1) shall contain-- (A) in the case of materials for medicare hospitals, information regarding-- (i) basic personal safety of the staff of the hospital during an epidemic resulting from natural causes or bioterrorism; and (ii) planning a response to such an epidemic; and (B) in the case of materials for the general public, information that-- (i) addresses-- (I) basic personal safety, planning, and emergency preparedness for families; and (II) essential facts about the symptoms and best responses to suspected exposures to the biological agents that the Secretary determines to be the highest risk for bioterrorist use; and (ii) is designed to prepare the public for the most likely foreseeable bioterrorism events in order to avert panic and misinformation.
Exclusion of medical advice.--The educational materials published under paragraph (1) shall not include advice on how to treat victims of an epidemic resulting from natural causes or bioterrorism.
Distribution.-- (A) In general.--Not later than January 31, 2002, the Secretary shall distribute the public health crisis educational materials published under paragraph (1) to the public through the Health Alert Network of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Internet availability.--In addition to distributing the educational materials under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall make such materials available on the Internet.
Information Regarding Community and Media Communications.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall publish information regarding community and media communications for medicare hospitals.
Contents.--The information under paragraph (1) shall contain basic information regarding-- (A) the materials available through the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention relating to communications between medicare hospitals and the media; and (B) the identification of likely biological agents that may cause an epidemic.
Distribution.--Not later than January 31, 2002, the Secretary shall distribute the information published under paragraph (1) to medicare hospitals.
Authority to award grants.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary may award grants to medicare hospitals that have submitted applications in accordance with paragraph (6).
Maximum amount of grant.--The aggregate amount of grants awarded to a hospital under this paragraph during a year may not exceed $5,000.
Use of funds.--Grants awarded under paragraph (4) may be used for activities such as-- (A) to adapt the educational materials distributed under subsection (b) for local use; and (B) to assist hospitals in applying the information regarding community and media relations distributed under subsection (c) and in developing ties with the local and regional media.
Application.--A medicare hospital seeking a grant under paragraph (4) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form and manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Program for Communication to Press and Public.--The Secretary, acting through the Office of Communication of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall establish a program to provide the necessary staff and resources to communicate with the public and the press during a public health crisis, to maintain updated media resources, and to promote public health awareness in the course of the regular activities of the Centers for Disease Contol and Prevention.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 to carry out this section (other than subsection (d)).
Communication program.--There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 to carry out subsection (d)).
Availability.--Any amounts appropriated under the authority contained in this subsection shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, through September 30, 2011.
HEALTH DISASTER MITIGATION GRANT PROGRAM FOR MEDICARE HOSPITALS.
Epidemic Training, Recognition, and Response Standards Defined.--In this section, the term ``epidemic training, recognition, and response standards'' means standards identified by the Secretary as being designed to educate the staff of medicare hospitals regarding epidemics resulting from natural causes or bioterrorism and to enable such staff to effectively recognize and respond to such epidemics.
Standards that the Secretary may identify include the following: (1) Emergency management guidelines developed by the Joint Commission of Accreditation of Healthcare Organizations.
Curricula for emergency medicine developed by the American College of Emergency Physicians.
Standards developed by a Federal agency responsible for homeland security.
Any other standards that the Secretary determines appropriate.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary may award grants to medicare hospitals that have submitted applications in accordance with subsection (d) for the purpose of assisting such hospitals in meeting the epidemic training, recognition, and response standards.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), grants awarded under subsection (b) may be used for activities such as-- (A) training the staffs of medicare hospitals in emergency medicine in accordance with the epidemic training, recognition, and response standards; (B) increasing communication between medicare hospitals, health care systems, prehospital emergency responders, and law enforcement personnel in accordance with such standards; (C) purchasing pharmaceuticals and supplies required by such standards intended for use only in public health emergencies; and (D) purchasing decontamination or safety equipment required by such standards.
Supplement and not supplant.--Funds made available under a grant awarded under subsection (b) shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local funds expended for the activities described in paragraph (1).
Application.--A medicare hospital (or a consortium of medicare hospitals) seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form and manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Approval.--In approving applications submitted under subsection (d), the Secretary shall give priority to those applications that are submitted by a consortium of medicare hospitals.
Maximum Amount of Grant.--A grant awarded under this section may not exceed $5,000,000.
Medicare Hospital Required To Furnish Secretary With Information.--A medicare hospital receiving a grant under this section shall furnish the Secretary with such information as the Secretary may require-- (1) to evaluate the activity for which the grant is made; and (2) to ensure that funding provided under the grant is expended for the purposes for which it is made.
Reports.-- (1) Interim reports.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall submit, at least annually, a report on the grant program established under this section to the appropriate committees of Congress.
Contents.--A report submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include information on-- (i) the number of grants made; (ii) the nature of the activities for which funding is provided under the grant program; (iii) the geographic distribution of grant recipients; and (iv) such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Final report.--Not later than 6 months after the completion of all of the activities for which a grant is made under this section, the Secretary shall submit a final report to the committees referred to in paragraph (1)(A) on the grant program established under this section, together with such recommendations for legislation and administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated $250,000,000, for fiscal year 2002, to carry out this section.
Availability.--Any amounts appropriated under the authority contained in paragraph (1) shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, through September 30, 2011.
POST-DISASTER COMPENSATION FUNDING FOR MEDICARE HOSPITALS.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary may award grants to medicare hospitals that serve an area that the President has determined warrants assistance by the Federal Government under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act due to the direct effects of an epidemic that have submitted applications in accordance with subsection (c) for the purpose of reimbursing the costs described in subsection (b).
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), grants awarded under subsection (a) may be used to reimburse the following costs: (A) The cost of replacing decontamination or safety equipment that was used during the period for which the President has determined assistance is warranted under subsection (a) to restore emergency preparedness.
The cost of providing health care to uninsured individuals during such a period.
The cost of paying unexpected overtime compensation to primary and secondary health care providers who were needed to create temporary surge capacity during such a period.
Supplement and not supplant.--Funds made available under a grant awarded under subsection (a) shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, and local funds expended to reimburse the costs described in paragraph (1).
Application.--A medicare hospital seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form and manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Maximum Amount of Grant.--A grant awarded under this section may not exceed $1,000,000.
Medicare Hospital Required To Furnish Secretary With Information.--A medicare hospital receiving a grant under this section shall furnish the Secretary with such information as the Secretary may require to ensure that funding provided under the grant is expended for the purposes for which it is made.
Reports.-- (1) Interim reports.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall submit, at least annually, a report on the grant program established under this section to the appropriate committees of Congress.
Contents.--A report submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include information on-- (i) the number of grants made; (ii) the nature of the costs reimbursed under the grant program; (iii) the geographic distribution of grant recipients; and (iv) such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Final report.--Not later than March 30, 2011, the Secretary shall submit a final report to the committees referred to in paragraph (1)(A) on the grant program established under this section, together with such recommendations for legislation and administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000, for fiscal year 2002, to carry out this section.
Availability.--Any amounts appropriated under the authority contained in paragraph (1) shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, through September 30, 2011.