This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Reasonable Energy Price Protection Act of 2005''.
In General.--Subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alcohol, tobacco, and certain other excise taxes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 56--WINDFALL PROFIT ON CRUDE OIL, NATURAL GAS, AND PRODUCTS THEREOF ``Sec.
In General.--In addition to any other tax imposed under this title, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale in the United States of any crude oil, natural gas, or other taxable product a tax equal to the applicable percentage of the windfall profit on such sale.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Taxable product.--The term `taxable product' means any fuel which is a product of crude oil or natural gas.
Windfall profit.--The term `windfall profit' means, with respect to any sale, so much of the profit on such sale as exceeds a reasonable profit.
Applicable percentage.--The term `applicable percentage' means-- ``(A) 50 percent to the extent that the profit on the sale exceeds 100 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale but does not exceed 102 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale, ``(B) 75 percent to the extent that the profit on the sale exceeds 102 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale but does not exceed 105 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale, and ``(C) 100 percent to the extent that the profit on the sale exceeds 105 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale.
Reasonable profit.--The term `reasonable profit' means the amount determined by the Reasonable Profits Board to be a reasonable profit on the sale.
Liability for Payment of Tax.--The taxes imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid by the seller.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle E of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Chapter 56.
Windfall profit on crude oil and refined petroleum products''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Establishment.--There is established an independent board to be known as the ``Reasonable Profits Board'' (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Board'').
Duties.--The Board shall make reasonable profit determinations for purposes of applying section 5896 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to windfall profit on crude oil, natural gas, and products thereof).
Advisory Committee.--The Board shall be considered an advisory committee within the meaning of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Appointment.-- (1) Members.--The Board shall be composed of 3 members appointed by the President of the United States.
Term.--Members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of 3 years.
Background.--The members shall have no financial interests in any of the businesses for which reasonable profits are determined by the Board.
Pay and Travel Expenses.-- (1) Pay.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), members of the Board shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Board.
Travel expenses.--Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with section 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director of Staff.-- (1) Qualifications.--The Board shall appoint a Director who has no financial interests in any of the businesses for which reasonable profits are determined by the Board.
Pay.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), the Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (1) Additional personnel.--The Director, with the approval of the Board, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
Appointments.--The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Detailees.--Upon the request of the Director, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Board to assist the Board in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Board.
Assistance.--The Comptroller General of the United States may provide assistance, including the detailing of employees, to the Board in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Board.
Other Authority.-- (1) Experts and consultants.--The Board may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
Leasing.--The Board may lease space and acquire personal property to the extent that funds are available.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated such funds as are necessary to carry out this section.
LOW-INCOME HOME ENERGY ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
In addition to amounts appropriated pursuant to section 2602 of the Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Act of 1981 (42 United States Code 8621), there are hereby appropriated to the Secretary of Health and Human Services amounts equivalent to the taxes received in the Treasury under section 5896 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Amounts appropriated under the preceding sentence shall be available for allocation under section 2604(a)(1)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 8623(a)(1)(A)).