SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Advantage and Prescription Drug Accountability Act of 2005''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Requirement for reasonable return of benefits.
Auditing of actuarial equivalency.
Report comparing costs and benefits under Medicare Advantage plans, medicare supplemental policies, and fee-for-service medicare.
Annual report on drug claim denials.
Medicare Prescription Drug Ombudsman.
REQUIREMENT FOR REASONABLE RETURN OF BENEFITS.
Medicare Advantage Plans.--Section 1857(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-27(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Negotiation for loss and administrative cost ratios.-- ``(A) In general.--The contract with an MA organization under this part shall provide for the following: ``(i) Minimum loss ratio.--Aggregate average benefits that are at least a minimum ratio of the aggregate average revenues collected under the contract.
Maximum administrative cost ratio.-- Aggregate average administrative costs that do not exceed a maximum ratio of the aggregate average revenues collected under the contract.
Establishment of ratios.--The ratios under clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A) shall be established by the Secretary.
In establishing such ratios, the Secretary shall take into account, at a minimum, ratios typical of those-- ``(i) under private health insurance plans; ``(ii) under parts A and B of this title; and ``(ii) under health benefits plans offered under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code (relating to the Federal Employees Health Benefits Program).''.
Audit of Administrative Costs and Compliance With the Federal Acquisition Regulation.--Section 1857(d)(2)(B) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395w-27(d)(2)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or (ii)'' and inserting ``(ii)''; and (2) by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, or (iii) to compliance with the requirements of subsection (e)(4)(A) and the extent to which administrative costs comply with the applicable requirements for such costs under the Federal Acquisition Regulation''.
Application to Prescription Drug Plans.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) apply, pursuant to section 1860D-12(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-112(b)(3)), to contracts with prescription drug sponsors under part D of title XVIII of such Act.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply for contract years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Medicare Advantage Plans.--Section 1851(d) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-21(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Financial transparency.-- ``(A) In general.--Each MA organization shall provide annually to the Secretary (in a form and manner specified by the Secretary), with respect to each MA plan it offers and not later than 3 months after the end of each contract year, information describing the organization's compliance with the requirements of section 1857(e)(4) and a functional listing of the organization's administrative costs (by category of such costs, including, at a minimum, marketing costs and claims processing costs), profits, and investment income (as defined by the Secretary), as a ratio of aggregate average revenues collected under the contract for that year.
Publication.--The Secretary shall publish the information provided under subparagraph (A) for each MA plan.''.
Conforming Application to Prescription Drug Plans.--Section 1860D-11(b)(2) of the Social Security Act 1395w-111(b)(2)) is amended by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G) and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Periodic auditing.--Information with respect to the prescription drug plan of the type described in section 1851(d)(8) with respect to an MA plan.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to reporting of information for contract years to which the amendments made by section 2 apply.
Medicare Advantage Plans.--Section 1851(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-21(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Beneficiary sign-off in election process.--An election to enroll with an MA plan shall not be effective unless the election form is signed by the individual and specifically acknowledges each of the following: ``(i) The premiums, cost-sharing requirements, and benefits under the plan may change at the beginning of each 12-month contract period.
The individual may lose coverage of the individual's physician or other provider at the beginning of each such period.
The plan may be terminated at the beginning of any such period.
Premiums and benefits under the plan may vary based on the county or other MA area in which the plan is offered.''.
Application to Prescription Drug Plans.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies, pursuant to section 1860D-1(b)(1)(B)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-101(b)(1)(B)(ii)), to prescription drug plans under part D of title XVIII of such Act.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to elections made on or after the date specified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, but in no case later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Medicare Advantage Accountability Report.--Section 1856 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-26) is amended-- (1) by amending the heading to read as follows: ``establishment of standards; annual accountability report''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Annual Accountability Report.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall compile, and transmit to Congress, at the end of each year (beginning with 2005), an annual Medicare Advantage accountability report.
Contents.--Each annual accountability report shall include the following: ``(A) A detailed analysis of geographic variation in cost-sharing and premiums among MA plans.
A comparison of the use of amounts paid to MA plans for benefit payments, administrative costs, and profits with the amounts expended under the fee-for- service programs under parts A and B for benefit payments and administrative expenses.
Recommendations for legislative changes to the Medicare Advantage program, or the fee-for-service programs under parts A and B, to assure that medicare beneficiaries under both programs have access to comparable benefits at comparable cost and that Government subsidies under the two programs are equivalent.
The results of audits conducted under section 1857(d) and enforcement actions taken in response to findings of inappropriate expenditures of funds under this part.''.
Prescription Drug Accountability Report.--Section 1860D-12 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395w-112) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Annual Accountability Report.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall compile, and transmit to Congress, at the end of each year (beginning with 2006), an annual prescription drug accountability report.
Contents.--Each annual accountability report shall include the same types of information (as specified by the Secretary) with respect to prescription drug plans as are provided under subparagraphs (A), (B), and (D) of section 1856(c)(2) with respect to MA plans.''.
AUDITING OF ACTUARIAL EQUIVALENCY.
Medicare Advantage Plans.--Section 1854(a)(5) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-24(a)(5)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(B) Periodic audits of actuarial equivalency determinations.--In the case of MA plans that provide for an actuarially equivalent level of benefits under this part, the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services shall periodically audit a representative sample of the determinations made by the Secretary regarding such actuarial equivalency to ensure that the Secretary is only approving plans with benefits that are actuarially equivalent.''.
Application to Prescription Drug Plans.--Section 1860D-11(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-111(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Periodic auditing of actuarial equivalency determinations.--The provisions of section 1854(a)(5)(B) shall apply with respect to determinations of actuarial equivalence of benefits under prescription drug plans in the same manner as they apply to determinations of actuarial equivalence of benefits under MA plans.''.
REPORT COMPARING COSTS AND BENEFITS UNDER MEDICARE ADVANTAGE PLANS, MEDICARE SUPPLEMENTAL POLICIES, AND FEE-FOR- SERVICE MEDICARE.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress a report that compares the average benefit payments, administrative costs, profits, and investment income (expressed as a percentage of revenues collected) for MA plans with such average for the fee-for- service programs under parts A and B and for group and individual medicare supplemental policies.
ANNUAL REPORT ON DRUG CLAIM DENIALS.
Section 1860D-4(h) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w- 104(h)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Annual report on drug claims rejections and reversals on appeal.--Each PDP sponsor with respect to a prescription drug plan, and each MA organization with respect to an MA-PD plan, shall annually report to the Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services on the following: ``(A)(i) The percentage of claims for prescription drugs under the plan that are initially denied.
The percentage of such claim denials that are appealed.
The percentage of such appealed claim denials that are reversed upon appeal.
The volume of such claims denials that are based on-- ``(i) a medical necessity determination; ``(ii) the drug not being on a formulary; and ``(iii) other reasons.''.
MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG OMBUDSMAN.
Section 1808 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395b-9) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Medicare Prescription Drug Ombudsman.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall appoint within the Department of Health and Human Services a Medicare Prescription Drug Ombudsman who shall have expertise and experience in the fields of health care and education of (and assistance to) individuals entitled to benefits under this title with respect to prescription drug coverage under part D of this title.
Duties.--The Medicare Prescription Drug Ombudsman shall-- ``(A) receive complaints, grievances, and requests for information submitted by individuals entitled to benefits under part D; ``(B) provide assistance with respect to complaints, grievances, and requests referred to in subparagraph (A), including-- ``(i) assistance in collecting relevant information for such individuals, to seek an appeal of a decision or determination made by a PDP sponsor or MA organization; ``(ii) assistance to such individuals with any problems arising from disenrollment from a PDP under part C or an MA-PD plan under part D; ``(C) provide assistance to beneficiaries in relation to State medicaid programs under title XIX and drug manufacturers in accessing medically necessary drugs that are excluded from coverage under part D; and ``(D) submit annual reports to Congress and the Secretary that describe the activities of the Office and that include such recommendations for improvement in the administration of part D of this title as the Ombudsman determines appropriate.
The annual report under subparagraph (D) in 2007 and 2009 shall include information on the number of cases described in subparagraph (C) that are handled and the success rates in finding alternative sources of coverage.