This Act may be cited as the ``Chemical Facility Anti-Terrorism Security Authorization Act of 2011''.
CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM SECURITY REGULATIONS.
In General.--The Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE XXI--CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM SECURITY REGULATIONS ``SEC.
CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM SECURITY REGULATIONS.
In General.--The Secretary shall maintain, and revise as necessary, regulations to protect chemical facilities against terrorism and potential terrorist attacks.
Such regulations shall include-- ``(1) risk-based performance standards for chemical facility security; ``(2) requirements for chemical facility security vulnerability assessments; and ``(3) requirements for the development and implementation of chemical facility site security plans.
Facilities Regulated.--The regulations required by subsection (a) shall apply to any chemical facility that the Secretary determines presents a high level of security risk with respect to acts of terrorism, except that the Secretary may not apply such regulations to any of the following: ``(1) Any facility owned or operated by the Department of Defense.
Any facility owned or operated by the Department of Energy.
Any facility subject to regulation by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
Any facility regulated under chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code.
A public water system, as such term is defined by section 1401(4) of the Safe Drinking Water Act (42 United States Code 300f(4)).
A treatment works, as such term is defined by section 212(2) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1292(2)).
Security Measures.--The regulations required by subsection (a) shall provide that each such facility, in developing and implementing site security plans, be permitted to select layered security measures that, in combination, appropriately address the vulnerability assessment and the risk-based performance standards for security for the facility.
Review.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall review and approve or disapprove each vulnerability assessment and site security plan required under this title or by the regulations required by subsection (a).
Standards for disapproval.--The Secretary may not disapprove such a site security plan based on the presence or absence of a particular security measure, but the Secretary may disapprove such a site security plan if the plan fails to satisfy the risk-based performance standards established by the Secretary.
Deadline for notification.--Beginning after the Secretary publishes final regulations to implement this section, not later than 180 days, to the greatest extent practicable, after the date on which the Secretary receives a security vulnerability assessment or site security plan under this title, the Secretary shall review and approve or disapprove such assessment or plan and notify the covered chemical facility of such approval or disapproval.
Notification of disapproval.--If the Secretary disapproves the security vulnerability assessment or site security plan submitted by a covered chemical facility under this title or the implementation of a site security plan by such a chemical facility, the Secretary shall provide the owner or operator of the covered chemical facility a written notification of the disapproval not later than 14 days after the date on which the Secretary disapproves such assessment or plan, that-- ``(A) includes a clear explanation of deficiencies in the assessment, plan, or implementation of the plan; and ``(B) requires the owner or operator of the covered chemical facility to revise the assessment or plan to address any deficiencies and, by such date as the Secretary determines is appropriate, to submit to the Secretary the revised assessment or plan.
Reporting.--The Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Government Affairs of the Senate, on an annual basis, information on the number of instances during the year covered by the report where the Secretary determined that the 180 day notification requirement under paragraph (3) was impracticable.
Alternative Security Programs.--The Secretary may approve any alternative security program established by a private sector entity or Federal, State, or local authority, or under another applicable law, if the Secretary determines that the requirements of such program meets the requirements of this title and any regulations issued or maintained pursuant to this title.
Security Background Checks.--In any personnel surety regulation issued by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall include provisions on how an owner or operator of a covered chemical facility can meet, in whole or in part, the requirements set forth in such regulations by submitting-- ``(1) information on an employee or individual holding a valid transportation security card issued under section 70105 of title 46, United States Code; ``(2) an alternate security background check conducted by a private sector entity, including the owner and operator of a covered chemical facility and a non-profit personnel surety accrediting organization; and ``(3) an alternate security background check conducted under another applicable law.
Technical Assistance to Small Businesses.--The Secretary shall provide technical assistance to any owner or operator of a covered chemical facility who requests such assistance to prepare a security vulnerability assessment or site security plan required under this title or by the regulations required by subsection (a), if the covered chemical facility is a small business concern, under the meaning given that term in section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632).
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, information developed pursuant to this title, or pursuant to the regulations required by section 2101(a), including vulnerability assessments, site security plans, and other security related information, records, and documents shall be given protections from public disclosure consistent with similar information developed by chemical facilities subject to regulation under section 70103 of title 46, United States Code.
Sharing of Information.-- ``(1) State and local governments.--This section does not prohibit the sharing of such information, as the Secretary determines appropriate, with State and local government officials possessing the appropriate security clearances, including emergency response providers, for the purpose of carrying out this title, as long as such information may not be disclosed pursuant to any State or local law.
Congress.--Nothing in this title shall permit or authorize the withholding of information from Congress or any committee or subcommittee thereof.
Administrative and Judicial Proceedings.--In any proceeding to enforce this title, vulnerability assessments, site security plans, and other information submitted to or obtained by the Secretary under this title, and related vulnerability or security information, shall be treated as if the information were classified material.
In General.--The Secretary shall audit and inspect chemical facilities subject to regulation under this title for the purposes of determining compliance with this title and the regulations required by section 2101(a).
Orders for Compliance.--If the Secretary determines that a chemical facility is not in compliance with this title or the regulations required by section 2101(a), the Secretary shall provide the owner or operator of the facility with written notification (including a clear explanation of deficiencies in the vulnerability assessment and site security plan) and an opportunity for consultation, and issue an order to comply by such date as the Secretary determines to be appropriate under the circumstances.
Civil Penalties.--Any person who violates an order issued under this title shall be liable for a civil penalty under section 70119(a) of title 46, United States Code.
Order To Cease Operation.--If the owner or operator of a chemical facility subject to regulation under this title continues to be in noncompliance, the Secretary may issue an order for the facility to cease operation until the owner or operator complies with the order.
Exception.--Nothing in this title confers upon any person except the Secretary a right of action against an owner or operator of a chemical facility to enforce any provision of this title.
``Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this title, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate a report that, at a minimum, includes-- ``(1) an estimate of the potential jobs created or lost within the private sector as a result of the regulations required under section 2101 of this title; and ``(2) information on feedback received from owners and operators of covered chemical facilities about how the regulations required under section 2101 of this title could be revised to spur potential job creation or stem job losses.
``Nothing in this title shall be construed to supersede, amend, alter, or affect any Federal law that regulates the manufacture, distribution in commerce, use, sale, other treatment, or disposal of chemical substances or mixtures.
``This title shall not preclude or deny any right of any State or political subdivision thereof to adopt or enforce any regulation, requirement, or standard of performance with respect to chemical facility security that is more stringent than a regulation, requirement, or standard of performance required under this title, or otherwise impair any right or jurisdiction of any State with respect to chemical facilities within that State, unless there is an actual conflict between this title and the law of that State.
``The authority provided by this title shall terminate on September 30, 2018.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this title $89,928,000 for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2018.''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 101 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``TITLE XXI--CHEMICAL FACILITY ANTI-TERRORISM SECURITY REGULATIONS ``Sec.
Chemical facility anti-terrorism security regulations.
Repeal.--The Department of Homeland Security Appropriations Act, 2007 (Public Law 109-295) is amended by striking section 550.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the extent to which the security requirements under title XXI of the Homeland Security Act of 2002, as added by this Act, have been harmonized with the security requirements for facilities regulated under chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code.