SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF TITLE 49, UNITED STATES CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Railroad Competition Act of 2001''.
Amendment of Title 49, United States Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or a repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 49, United States Code.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To clarify the rail transportation policy of the United States by requiring the Surface Transportation Board to accord greater weight to the need for increased competition between and among rail carriers and consistent and efficient rail service in its decisionmaking.
To eliminate unreasonable barriers to competition among rail carriers serving the same geographic areas.
To ensure reasonable rail rates for captive rail shippers by removing unnecessary regulatory burdens from the rate reasonableness procedures of the Surface Transportation Board.
TITLE I--INCREASED RAIL-TO-RAIL COMPETITION SEC.
FOSTERING OF RAIL-TO-RAIL COMPETITION.
Section 11101(a) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by striking ``A rail carrier'' at the beginning of the second sentence and inserting the following: ``(2) Upon the request of a shipper, a rail carrier shall establish a rate for transportation and provide service requested by the shipper between any two points on the system of that carrier where traffic originates, terminates, or may reasonably be interchanged.
A carrier shall establish a rate and provide service upon such request without regard to-- ``(A) the location of the movement on the rail system, including terminal areas; ``(B) whether the rate established is for only part of a movement between a point of origin and a destination; ``(C) whether the shipper has made arrangements for transportation for any other part of that movement; or ``(D) whether the shipper has a contract with any rail carrier for part or all of its transportation needs over the route of movement, in which case the rate established by the carrier shall not apply to transportation covered by the contract.
PROMOTION OF COMPETITIVE RAIL SERVICE OPTIONS.
Approvals of Combinations.--Section 11324 is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(6) means and methods to encourage and expand competition between and among rail carriers in the region affected by the transaction or in the national rail system.
''; and (2) in subsection (c), by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``The Board shall impose any conditions that the Board considers appropriate to encourage and expand competition between and among rail carriers in the region affected by the transaction or in the national rail system.''.
Applicability.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to proceedings of the Surface Transportation Board that are initiated on or after the effective date specified in section 401.
COMPETITIVE RAIL SERVICE IN TERMINAL AREAS.
Use of Terminal Areas.--Section 11102(a) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; (2) by striking ``may'' in the first sentence and inserting ``shall''; (3) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``In making any determination for the purposes of the preceding sentence, the Board may not require evidence of anticompetitive conduct by a rail carrier from which access is sought.
''; (4) by striking ``The rail carriers'' at the beginning of the sentence following the sentence inserted by paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(2) The rail carriers''; and (5) by striking ``may establish conditions'' in the penultimate sentence and inserting ``shall establish conditions''.
Reciprocal Switching.--Section 11102(c) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``may require'' in the first sentence and inserting ``shall require''; and (B) by striking ``may establish'' in the last sentence and inserting ``shall establish''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) In making any determination for the purposes of the first sentence of paragraph (1), the Board may not require evidence of anticompetitive conduct by a rail carrier from which access is sought.''.
TITLE II--IMPROVEMENTS IN THE RATE REASONABLENESS PROCESS OF THE SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD SEC.
Section 721 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Limitation on Fees.--The Board may not charge a fee for the filing of a complaint, protest, or other request for relief in an amount greater than fees charged by district courts of the United States for a comparable filing.''.
SIMPLIFIED STANDARDS FOR MARKET DOMINANCE DETERMINATIONS.
Section 10707 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) The Board may not consider evidence of product or geographic competition in making a market dominance determination under this section.''.
203. REVIEW OF RATES.
Reasonableness.--Section 10701(d) is amended by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(3) Upon a challenge made by a shipper to the reasonableness of any rate established by a rail carrier in accordance with subsection (c) or section 11101(a) of this title, the Board shall determine the reasonableness of the rate without regard to whether-- ``(A) the rate is for only part of a movement between a point of origin and a destination; ``(B) the shipper has made arrangements for transportation for any other part of that movement; or ``(C) the shipper currently has a contract with a rail carrier for any part of the rail traffic involved, except that any rate prescribed by the Board shall not apply to transportation covered by such a contract.''.
Burden of Proof.-- (1) Proving reasonableness.--Section 10701(d), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(4) In the determining of whether a rate established by a rail carrier is reasonable for the purposes of this subsection, the rail carrier shall have the burden of proving that the maximum rate set forth in the complainant's evidence does not exceed the reasonable maximum rate.
The sequence for the presentation of evidence by the complainant and the defendant that is provided under the rules of the Board governing the procedural schedule for cases under this subsection, as in effect on the date of the enactment of the Railroad Competition Act of 2001, shall apply in such cases.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by this section shall apply with respect to proceedings of the Surface Transportation Board that are initiated on or after the effective date specified in section 401.
TITLE III--IMPROVEMENTS IN THE OVERSIGHT OF THE RAIL INDUSTRY AND IN THE OPERATION OF THE SURFACE TRANSPORTATION BOARD SEC.
CLARIFICATION OF RAIL TRANSPORTATION POLICY.
Section 10101 is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' before ``In regulating''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Primary Objectives.--The primary objectives of the rail transportation policy of the United States are as follows: ``(1) To ensure effective competition among rail carriers at origins and destinations.
To maintain reasonable rates in the absence of effective competition.
To maintain consistent and efficient rail transportation service for shippers, including the timely provision of rail cars requested by shippers.
To ensure that smaller carload and intermodal shippers are not precluded from accessing rail systems due to volume requirements.''.
Repeal of Authority To Establish Revenue Standards and Procedures.--Section 10704(a) is amended by striking paragraphs (2) and (3).
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Rail transportation policy.--Section 10101 is amended by striking ``, as determined by the Board'' in paragraph (3) of subsection (a), as designated by section 3(1).
Reasonableness of rates.--Section 10701(d)(2) is amended by striking ``, as established by the Board under section 10704(a)(2) of this title''.
Clerical amendment.--Section 10704(a), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended by striking ``(1)'' after ``(a)''.
Authority.--Chapter 105 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Arbitration of qualifying controversies ``(a) Authority.--(1) Subject to subsection (b), disputes subject to the statutory jurisdiction of the Board that involve the reasonableness of rates or other charges or the provision of service may be resolved under the alternative dispute resolution process prescribed by the Board for the arbitration of such disputes upon the election of a party filing with the Board a written complaint regarding the rates, charges, or service, as the case may be.
Discovery shall be authorized in a case submitted to arbitration under this section if requested by a party to the arbitration.
Disputes Involving Rates and Other Charges.--In an arbitration of a dispute on a rate or other financial charge under the process applied under subsection (a), each party to the dispute shall submit to the arbitrator the party's final proposal regarding what level of rate or charge is appropriate.
All such proposals shall be submitted simultaneously.
The arbitrator shall select one of the submitted proposals, without modification, to be the arbitrator's final decision on the disputed rate or charge.
Judicial Review.--(1) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to review the final decision of an arbitrator in a proceeding conducted under subsection (a).
An action for review of a final decision of an arbitrator referred to in paragraph (1) may be brought only in the district court of the United States for the district in which the party electing the arbitration under subsection (a) has its principal place of business.
An action for review of the final decision of an arbitrator may not be commenced under this subsection more than 30 days after the date on which the arbitrator issues the decision.
In an action brought under this subsection for review of the decision of an arbitrator, the district court may-- ``(A) vacate the decision on any ground set forth in section 10 of title 9; or ``(B) modify or correct the decision on any ground set forth in section 11 of title 9.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``10503.
Arbitration of qualifying controversies.''.
RAIL CARRIER SERVICE QUALITY PERFORMANCE REPORTS.
In General.--Chapter 111 is amended by adding at the end of subchapter III the following new section: ``Sec.
Service quality reports ``(a) Monthly Report of Carriers.--(1) Regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Transportation shall require each rail carrier to submit to the Secretary a monthly report on the quality of the service provided by the rail carrier.
The report shall contain, for the month covered by the report, information about-- ``(A) the carrier's on-time performance; ``(B) the carrier's car availability deadline performance; ``(C) the average speed at which the carrier's trains were operated; ``(D) the average time that the carrier's trains dwelled in terminals; ``(E) the number of the carrier's cars that were loaded (expressed separately for each major commodity group); and ``(F) any other aspects of the carrier's performance (as a rail carrier) that the Secretary may require.
The information shall be set forth in the monthly report in a uniform format prescribed by the Secretary.
Availability of Monthly Report to Board and Public.--(1) The Secretary shall furnish a copy of the monthly reports of rail carriers to the Surface Transportation Board not later than the next business day following receipt by the Secretary.
The Secretary shall make the monthly reports of rail carriers available to the public.
Annual Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall transmit to Congress an annual report containing a summary and discussion of the information in the reports submitted under this section to the Secretary for the months of the year covered by the annual report.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 11145 the following: ``11146.
PERIODIC STUDY OF COMPETITION AMONG RAIL CARRIERS.
Requirement for Study.-- (1) Triennial study.--Chapter 101 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Periodic study of rail carrier competition and processes of the Surface Transportation Board ``(a) Requirement for Study.--Every three years, the Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a comprehensive study of rail carrier competition and the processes of the Board.
The study shall include an assessment of the following: ``(1) The availability of effective competitive options among and between rail carriers.
The effectiveness of the processes of the Surface Transportation Board, including the process used for determining the reasonableness of rates of rail carriers.
The availability to rail users of effective regulatory dispute resolution options.
Study To Include Assessment of Rail-to-Rail Competition.--In carrying out the study, the Board shall assess the overall level of rail-to-rail competition in the rail carrier industry in the United States.
In making the assessment, the Board shall consider the views of users of the services of rail carriers.
Report to Congress.--Not later than November 15 of each year in which a study is conducted under subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit a report on the results of the study to Congress.
The report shall include the following: ``(1) The Board's assessment of the overall level of rail- to-rail competition in the rail carrier industry in the United States.
The markets that have limited rail-to-rail competition.
Any recommendations for enhancing rail-to-rail competition, particularly in markets identified as having limited rail-to-rail competition.
An assessment of the Board's performance of its purpose to promote and enhance competition among and between railroads by-- ``(A) addressing complaints regarding rates and service; and ``(B) promulgating regulations of general applicability or taking other actions.
Any recommendations for modification of any of the decisions of the Surface Transportation Board (or decisions of the former Interstate Commerce Commission continuing in effect) or for modification of the general authority or jurisdiction of the Board.
Any other findings, analyses, assessments, and recommendations that result from the study.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``10103.
Periodic study of rail carrier competition and processes of the Surface Transportation Board.''.
Time for First Study.--The first study under section 10103 of title 49, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), shall be carried out not later than two years after the effective date specified in section 401.
TITLE IV--EFFECTIVE DATES SEC.
Except as provided in section 402, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on October 1, 2001.
The following provisions shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act: (1) Section 303 and the amendments made in that section.