This Act may be cited as the ``United States Merchant Marine Utilization and Preference Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that, for national defense, it is in the interest of the United States that a clear understanding exists among the Department of Transportation and the Department of Defense, in particular, and all other Federal departments and agencies, that all Federal departments and agencies have complementary interests in the control and utilization of ocean-going merchant vessels that are registered or documented under the laws of the United States.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States that-- (1) the Federal Maritime Administration and its wartime counterpart have broad powers of control over ocean-going United States-flag merchant vessels; and (2) the Secretary of Defense, operating under the national policy promulgated in section 101 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1936 (46 App.
United States Code 1101), ensure that military drafts of United States-flag merchant vessels (including breakbulk, roll- on-roll-off, lift-on lift-off (cellularized and containerized), multipurpose carriers, tankers, and various auxiliaries), are operated in conformity with the requirements and plans of the Department of Defense and military exigencies.
The purpose of this Act is to-- (1) clarify the Department of Defense cargoes transported by water that are required to be transported on privately owned United States-flag vessels; (2) clarify the Department of Defense cargoes transported by water that may be transported on vessels that are owned, controlled, or chartered by the Government of the United States; and (3) reduce to a minimum the number of cargo transport vessels maintained and operated by the Military Sealift Command in order to give preference to privately owned United States- flag vessels for transportation by water of Department of Defense cargoes.
TRANSPORTATION BY WATER OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE CARGOES.
Section 2631 of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Transportation by water of Department of Defense cargoes ``(a) Except as otherwise provided in this section, under conditions other than full or partial mobilization declared by the President, transportation by water for Department of Defense cargoes shall be obtained, consistent with military requirements and prudent management, in the following order of priority: ``(1) To the maximum extent practicable, use of privately owned United States-flag vessels that are-- ``(A) operating in United States liner or tramp trades, and ``(B) not chartered to the Government.
(A) Time charter or voyage charter of suitable privately owned United States-flag vessels-- ``(i) operating in liner service providing partial or total space available, or ``(ii) operating in tramp service, to the extent those vessels are voluntarily made available to the Department of Defense.
Time charters and voyage charters pursuant to this paragraph shall be kept to the minimum necessary to meet requirements which, barring reasonable foresight, cannot be met by United States-flag liner or tramp operators.
(A) In the event suitable United States-flag vessels are not available in accordance with paragraphs (1) and (2), and upon the written approval of the Secretary of Transportation, use of-- ``(i) vessels in the nucleus fleet established under section 2631a; and ``(ii) to the extent vessels in the nucleus fleet are not available, as determined by the Secretary of Defense, foreign-flag vessels to the extent necessary to meet urgent military requirements.
Any use of a foreign-flag vessel pursuant to this paragraph shall be limited to a single voyage.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), any appropriate tariff that a person has filed with the Federal Maritime Commission under either the Shipping Act of 1916 or the Shipping Act of 1984 shall apply to transportation of Department of Defense cargo on any United States-flag vessel that is operated by that person.
(A) This section does not prohibit an agency that is responsible for procuring transportation of Department of Defense cargo from procuring that transportation from a person at a negotiated rate that is more favorable to the United States Government than a tariff filed by that person that is otherwise applicable under paragraph (1).
Any rate that is negotiated under this subparagraph shall be filed with the Federal Maritime Commission in the manner prescribed by the Commission.
(1) The Office of the Chief of Naval Operations shall be solely responsible in the Department of Defense for obtaining, providing, operating, and controlling Government-owned or Government- chartered vessels-- ``(A) to transport Department of Defense cargoes in areas that are not served by privately owned United States-flag merchant vessels; and ``(B) for purposes of any partial or full mobilization conducted for any reason declared by the President.
(A) The Military Sealift Command is the sole manager for ocean transportation of Department of Defense cargoes.
The purpose of any ocean transportation provided by the Department of Defense is to support and augment persons who provide transportation by water in commercial service to the extent those persons cannot provide the vessels or services required by the Department of Defense.
Except as provided in this section and section 2631a, the Department of Defense shall not engage in competition with private persons in the provision of transportation by water in commercial service.''.
Chapter 157 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2631 the following: ``Sec.
Nucleus fleet ``(a)(1) The Secretary of Defense shall establish and maintain at all times under the exclusive custody, jurisdiction, and control of the Department of Defense, a fleet of vessels, of a size and composition appropriate to meet military requirements.
Such fleet shall be known as the `nucleus fleet'.
The nucleus fleet may be comprised of-- ``(A) Government-owned vessels, operated by either-- ``(i) the Military Sealift Command or other Department of Defense agency with civil service employees, or ``(ii) companies that are citizens of the United States under section 2 of the Shipping Act, 1916, with commercial crews; or ``(B) privately owned United States-flag vessels that are chartered by the Department of Defense.
(1) Under conditions other than full mobilization, the nucleus fleet-- ``(A) shall consist of such number and types of vessels as is appropriate to respond to changes in the military situation, as determined by the Secretary of Defense; and ``(B) may include transport, cargo, tanker, roll-on roll- off, lift-on lift-off, geared, and nongeared vessels and auxiliaries in appropriate numbers-- ``(i) to carry out logistic needs of the military departments which cannot be met by private United States commercial interests; ``(ii) to provide immediate capability in an emergency; and ``(iii) to provide an adequate base for necessary expansion to meet emergency or mobilization requirements in support of approved plans for national defense, national emergency, national mobilization, or national interest.
(A) Under conditions other than full mobilization, that portion of the nucleus fleet maintained for purposes of transportation by water shall remain within close tolerance to the following numbers of vessels by types: ``(i) 10 dry cargo vessels.
The numbers set forth in subparagraph (A)(i) and (ii)-- ``(i) shall be reduced by one for each vessel deactivated under subsection (c)(2)(A) or for which a contract of charter is terminated under subsection (c)(2)(B); and ``(ii) are subject to review and redetermination by the Secretary of Defense in accordance with military operation requirements.
Any change in the composition of the nucleus fleet from the numbers and types of vessels specified in subparagraph (A)(i) and (ii) shall not be effective unless-- ``(i) a request for that change is submitted by the Secretary of the Navy to the Secretary of Defense; ``(ii) the change is approved by the Secretary of Defense; and ``(iii) the change is reported to the Congress with supporting rationale.
In addition to the numbers of vessels specified under paragraph (2), the nucleus fleet may include such miscellaneous service support vessels and naval fleet auxiliary vessels as the Military Sealift Command determines to be necessary to retain and operate for purposes of providing indirect support of other vessels of the Department of the Navy.
(1) If a vessel in the nucleus fleet is inactive for a period of 30 days, it shall be placed in reduced operating status.
If vessel in the nucleus fleet is inactive for 120 days-- ``(A) in the case of a vessel that is owned by the United States, it shall be deactivated and placed in reserve or disposed of, as considered appropriate by the Secretary of Defense; and ``(B) in the case of a privately owned vessel, the contract under which it is chartered shall be terminated on the earliest possible date.
(1) Under conditions of full mobilization, in addition to the numbers and types of vessels authorized under subsections (a), (b), and (c)-- ``(A) the nucleus fleet may be augmented by those types and numbers of vessels determined to be appropriate by the Secretary of Defense, in accordance with the priority established under section 2631(a); ``(B) the specific types of vessels to be added to the nucleus fleet, and an appropriate schedule for their transfer to or acquisition for the nucleus fleet, shall be determined only by the Chief of Naval Operations.
(A) Any vessels to be added to the nucleus fleet pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be provided by the Secretary of Transportation in accordance with mobilization procedures approved by the Secretary of Defense.
In addition to additional vessels provided under subparagraph (A) for the nucleus fleet, the Secretary of Transportation shall provide to the Secretary of Defense such additional miscellaneous service support vessels and naval fleet auxiliary vessels as the Secretary of Defense determines to be necessary for purposes of providing indirect support of other vessels of the Department of the Navy for purposes of a full mobilization.
During periods of full or partial mobilization, the Secretary of Defense shall-- ``(A) continuously review the number of merchant vessels under the control of the Department of Defense; ``(B) determine any of those vessels that are excess to the needs of the department; and ``(C) transfer to the Secretary of Transportation such excess vessels.
(A) Upon the termination of hostilities or in the event of a partial demobilization prior to the termination of hostilities, the nucleus fleet shall be reduced to the numbers and types of vessels in the fleet before full mobilization, as determined by the Secretary of Defense.
In the event of a reduction in the nucleus fleet under this paragraph, any vessels in the fleet that are retained as part of either the active or laid-up permanent operating forces of the Department of the Navy shall be released from control by the Department of Defense in the following order of priority: ``(i) Foreign-flag vessels that are under charter.
United States-flag vessels that are under charter from private owners.
United States Government-owned merchant vessels that are desired for sale or charter by United States citizens for United States-flag operation in commercial service.
Vessels that are sold or chartered pursuant to subparagraph (B)(iii) are deemed to be war-built vessels for purposes of the Merchant Ship Sales Act of 1946 (50 App.
United States Code 1735 et sequentes).''.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 157 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to section 2631 and inserting the following: ``2631.
Transportation by water of Department of Defense cargoes.
Section 11 of the Merchant Ship Sales Act of 1946 (50 App.
United States Code 1744) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Use of Vessels in Ready Reserve Force.-- ``(1) Use in peacetime.--Vessels in the Ready Reserve Force component of the National Defense Reserve Fleet may be used in peacetime for routine movements of cargo as part of military exercises only if that use does not compete with United States- flag commercial vessel operators.
Deactivation following national emergency.--A vessel in the Ready Reserve Force component of the National Defense Reserve Fleet that is activated to meet military sealift requirements associated with a national emergency shall be deactivated in an expeditious manner if those requirements no longer exist.