This Act may be cited as the ``Limpopo River Debt Relief and Reconstruction Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Beginning on February 9, 2000, the southern African countries of Botswana, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe began to experience severe flooding caused by days of heavy rain and cyclones, and the Republic of Mozambique bore the brunt of these torrential rains and experienced the worst flooding in 50 years.
Flooding along the Limpopo River in Mozambique is particularly severe.
The extent of the death and destruction caused by these floods is still unknown.
Because of the floods, there are hundreds of thousands of homeless people living in camps in these countries.
These displaced people are in desperate need of food, clean water, medicine, blankets and tents.
Many of these countries' roads and bridges have been completely washed out, and their infrastructure has been severely damaged.
These countries need long-term economic and technical assistance for the repair and reconstruction of roads and bridges, schools and hospitals, energy infrastructure, telecommunications facilities and other essential infrastructure.
The governments of these countries cannot adequately address the immediate needs of displaced people or invest in long-term development while continuing to make debt payments to foreign governments.
Debt cancellation and reconstruction assistance are essential to allow these countries to provide for the needs of their people, repair their damaged infrastructure and rebuild their economies.
TITLE I--DEBT RELIEF SEC.
Cancellation of Debt.--Subject to amounts provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the President shall cancel all amounts owed to the United States (or any agency of the United States) by eligible countries (as defined in section 301) as a result of concessional and nonconcessional loans made, guarantees or insurance issued, or credits extended under any provision of law.
Special Provisions.-- (1) Cancellation of debt not considered to be assistance.-- Except as the President may otherwise determine for reasons of national security, a cancellation of debt under subsection (a) shall not be considered to be assistance for purposes of any provision of law limiting assistance to a country.
Inapplicability of certain prohibitions relating to cancellation of debt.--The authority to provide for cancellation of debt under subsection (a) may be exercised notwithstanding section 620(r) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 or any similar provision of law.
Other debt cancellation authorities.--The authority to cancel debt under subsection (a) is in addition to the authority to cancel debt under any other provision of law and does not in any way limit or otherwise affect such other authority.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the cost (as defined in section 502(5) of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990) of the cancellation of any debt under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to the President such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 and 2002.
DEBT FORGIVENESS BY PARIS CLUB MEMBERS.
The Congress urges the President to use the influence of the United States within the Paris Club of Official Creditors to urge each nation that is a member of the Paris Club of Official Creditors to cancel all debt owed to the nation by the government of any eligible country.
DEBT FORGIVENESS BY INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors at the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the African Development Bank, and the African Development Fund to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to urge their respective institutions to cancel all debt owed to the institution by the government of any eligible country.
TITLE II--RECONSTRUCTION AID SEC.
Chapter 9 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2292 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Southern Africa Relief and Reconstruction Assistance.-- ``(a) Authorization of Assistance.--The President is authorized to provide assistance for relief, reconstruction, and related recovery activities in southern Africa as a result of the severe flooding that began on February 9, 2000, in the southern African nations of Botswana, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
Assistance under this subsection shall be provided on a grant basis.
Policies and Authorities To Be Applied.--Assistance under subsection (a) shall be furnished in accordance with the policies and general authorities contained in section 491.
Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to amounts otherwise available for carrying out subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 and 2002.''.
AID BY PARIS CLUB MEMBERS.
The Congress urges the President to use the influence of the United States within the Paris Club of Official Creditors to urge each country that is a member of the Paris Club of Official Creditors to provide grants to the government of each eligible country for the repair and reconstruction of the infrastructure of the country that has been damaged or destroyed by the flooding in southern Africa that began on February 9, 2000.
AID BY INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Directors at the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Monetary Fund, the African Development Bank, and the African Development Fund to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to urge their respective institutions to provide grants to the government of each eligible country for the repair and reconstruction of the infrastructure of the country that has been damaged or destroyed by the flooding in southern Africa that began on February 9, 2000.
TITLE III--ELIGIBLE COUNTRIES SEC.
DEFINITION OF ELIGIBLE COUNTRY.
In this Act, the term ``eligible country'' means Botswana, Lesotho, Madagascar, Mozambique, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.