This Act may be cited as the ``Treaty of Greene Ville 200th Anniversary Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The rapid westward expansion of the United States led to warfare between white settlers and the Native Americans.
During the early 1790s, British traders in the Northwest Territory encouraged Native Americans to attack frontier settlements.
After twice defeating United States Army expeditions, the Native Americans in the Northwest Territory were finally defeated in 1794 by General Anthony Wayne at the Battle of Fallen Timbers.
On August 3, 1795, 1 year after General Wayne's defeat of the Native Americans at Fallen Timbers, Ohio, General Wayne and the chiefs of the Delaware, Shawnee, Wyandot, Miami Confederacy, and other tribes negotiated the Treaty of Greene Ville.
In the Treaty, a definite boundary was established between Indian lands and the lands open to settlement, and the defeated tribes surrendered the southern two-thirds of what is now the State of Ohio and the southern part of what is now the State of Indiana and agreed to move west into the northern part of what is now the State of Indiana.
Because of the Treaty, the British were forced into what is now Canada and their influence over the Native Americans in the region was eliminated.
The Treaty of Greene Ville provided for the start of westward expansion in the United States.
In historical importance, the events at Fort Greene Ville rank next to the events at Bunker Hill, Yorktown, Appomattox, and Gettysburg.
$1 Silver Coins.--To commemorate the 200th anniversary of signing of the Treaty of Greene Ville at Fort Greene Ville in Greenville, Ohio, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 1,000,000 $1 coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the Treaty of Greene Ville.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``1995''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Treaty of Greene Ville Bicentennial Commission, Incorporated, and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 1995, and ending on December 31, 1995.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $5 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Treaty of Greene Ville Bicentennial Commission, Incorporated, for the purpose of building a monument to commemorate the 200th Anniversary of the Treaty of Greene Ville.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Treaty of Greene Ville Bicentennial Commission, Incorporated, as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under subsection (a).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.