The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to provide renewed impetus in improving the United States Government's ability to manage the complex process of negotiating and implementing arms control treaties; (2) to provide central leadership and coordination to United States nonproliferation policy; and (3) to improve congressional oversight of the operating budget of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
Director.--Section 22 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22 United States Code 2562) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Appointment.--The Agency shall be headed by a Director, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
No person serving on active duty as a commissioned officer of the Armed Forces of the United States may be appointed Director.
Duties.--The Director shall serve as the principal adviser to the President and other executive branch officials on matters relating to arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation.
In carrying out his or her duties under this Act, the Director, under the guidance of the Secretary of State, shall have primary responsibility for matters relating to arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation, as defined by this Act.''.
Permanent Membership on National Security Council.--Section 101(a) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 402(a)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (5) through (7) as paragraphs (6) through (8), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph (5): ``(5) the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency;''.
In General.--Section 27 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22 United States Code 2567) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Appointment.--The President may appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, Special Representatives of the President for Arms Control and Nonproliferation.
Each Presidential Special Representative shall hold the personal rank of ambassador.
Duties.--Presidential Special Representatives shall perform their duties and exercise their powers under direction of the President, acting through the Director.
One such Special Representative shall serve as the United States Governor to the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency.
Administrative Support.--The Agency shall be the Government agency responsible for providing administrative support, including funding, staff, and office space, to all Presidential Special Representatives appointed under this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Special Representatives for Arms Control and Disarmament Negotiations, United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency (2).''
and inserting ``Special Representatives of the President for Arms Control and Nonproliferation.''.
Section 34 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (22 United States Code 2574) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
NEGOTIATIONS AND RELATED FUNCTIONS.
``The Director shall have primary responsibility for the preparation and management of United States participation in all international negotiations and implementation forums in the fields of arms control, disarmament, and nonproliferation.
To this end-- ``(1) the Director shall have primary responsibility for the preparation, formulation, support, and transmission of instructions and guidance for all such negotiations and forums, and shall manage interagency groups established within the executive branch to support such negotiations and forums; and ``(2) all United States Government representatives conducting negotiations or acting pursuant to agreements in the fields of arms control, disarmament, or nonproliferation shall perform their duties and exercise their powers, under the direction of the President, acting through the Director.''.
PARTICIPATION OF ACDA DIRECTOR IN CERTAIN DELIBERATIONS.
Arms Export Control Act.--(1) Section 38(a)(2) of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2778(a)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Decisions on issuing export licenses under this section shall be made in coordination with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, taking into account the Director's assessment as to whether the export of an article will contribute to an arms race, aid in the development of weapons of mass destruction, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other bilateral arrangements.''.
Section 42(a) of such Act (22 United States Code 2791(a)) is amended by striking out all that follows ``(3)'' in the last sentence and inserting the following: ``the assessment of the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency as to the extent to which such sale might contribute to an arms race, aid in the development of weapons of mass destruction, support international terrorism, increase the possibility of outbreak or escalation of conflict, or prejudice the development of bilateral or multilateral arms control or nonproliferation agreements or other arrangements.
No decision shall be made over the objection of the Director unless the Director has been informed in writing of the reasons why the Director's opinion was not deemed sufficient to deny the proposed sale, and afforded a reasonable opportunity to appeal the proposed decision.''.
Section 71 of such Act (22 United States Code 2797) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a) by inserting ``, the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency,'' after ``Secretary of Defense''; (B) in subsection 7(b)(1) inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``Secretary of Defense''; and (C) in subsection (b)(2)-- (i) by striking out ``and the Secretary of Commerce'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency''; and (ii) by striking the comma after ``applicant'' and all that follows through ``documents''.
Atomic Energy Act.--(1) Section 131 b. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2160(b)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``Secretary of State''; and (B) in paragraph (3) by inserting ``and the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency'' after ``Secretary of State''.
Section 142 of such Act (42 United States Code 2162) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(f) All determinations under this section to remove data from the Restricted Data category shall be made only after consultation with the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency.
If the Commission, the Department of Defense, and the Director do not agree, the determination shall be made by the President.''.
Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act.--Section 309(c) of the Nuclear Non-Proliferation Act of 1978 (42 United States Code 2139a) is amended to read as follows: ``(c)(1) The Department of Commerce shall maintain controls over all export items, other than those licensed by the Commission, which could be, if used for purposes other than those for which the export is intended, of significance for nuclear explosive purposes.
The Commission shall not grant any individual, distribution, or project license for the export of items controlled pursuant to paragraph (1) without prior consultation with the Department of State, the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, the Commission, the Department of Energy, and the Department of Defense.
(A) The Secretary of Commerce shall, within 90 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, establish orderly and expeditious procedures which are mutually agreeable to the Secretary of State, the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Director of the United States Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, and the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
These procedures shall include provision for establishing the list of export items required by paragraph (1), for permitting automated access to all license applications for such items to all agencies listed in paragraph (2), and for formal interagency referral of license applications for the export of items on the list.
The procedures in effect under this subsection on the date of enactment of this paragraph shall cease to apply 90 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph or upon the effective date of the new procedures required by this paragraph, whichever occurs first.