Congress makes the following findings: (1) Since 1988, three cost-sharing payment programs that provide certain low-income elderly and disabled individuals with financial assistance in covering Medicare beneficiary costs have been established by law.
While eligibility for Medicare cost-sharing assistance has expanded, and while the Social Security Administration, the Health Care Financing Administration, and State agencies are working cooperatively to identify and implement reforms to cure the chronic deficiencies associated with the programs described in paragraph (1), reports have shown that gaps in beneficiary knowledge and deficiencies in program administration by Federal and State agencies present persistent barriers to enrolling eligible beneficiaries in such programs.
The financial plight of Social Security and Medicare beneficiaries who experience critical income shifts due to the death of a spouse is of particular concern.
Statistics furnished by the Social Security Administration show that 40 percent of nonmarried women (a category that includes widows) rely on Social Security benefits for 90 percent of their income in comparison to only 18 percent of married couples.
Further, nearly \1/4\ of nonmarried women rely on Social Security retirement benefits as their sole source of income.
While current reform proposals concentrate on reaching potential eligible beneficiaries upon initial enrollment in Social Security or Medicare, the financial vulnerability of widowed spouses can arise at any time after a senior has begun to receive retirement benefits.
Establishment.-- (1) Outreach.--The Commissioner shall establish a demonstration project to conduct outreach efforts to-- (A) identify individuals entitled to benefits under the medicare program who may be eligible for medical assistance for payment of the cost of medicare cost- sharing under the medicaid program pursuant to sections 1902(a)(10)(E) and 1933 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(a)(10)(E); 1396u-3); and (B) notify such individuals of the availability of such medical assistance under such sections.
Content of notice.--Any notice furnished under paragraph (1) shall state that eligibility for medicare cost- sharing assistance under such sections is conditioned upon the individual providing an accurate statement as to whether or not the individual has tax-exempt income, and, if so, the amount of such income and, in the case of an individual residing in a State that imposes an asset test for such eligibility, the amount of countable assets the individual has.
Coordination With States and Other Federal Agencies.-- (1) Furnishing information to states.--In conducting the demonstration project established under subsection (a), the Commissioner shall furnish the appropriate agency of each State with information consisting of the identity of individuals residing in the State that the Commissioner determines are or may be eligible for medical assistance for payment of the cost of medicare cost-sharing under the medicaid program under sections 1902(a)(10)(E) and 1933 of the Social Security Act, and shall periodically update any such information as appropriate.
Coordination with irs and hcfa.--Except as otherwise prohibited by law, in conducting such demonstration project the Commissioner, in cooperation with the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service and the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration, shall furnish the appropriate agency of each State with available income and asset information of individuals residing in the State who are or may be eligible for the medical assistance described in paragraph (1).
Duration.--The Commissioner shall conduct the demonstration project during the 1-year period beginning on October 1, 1998.
Report.--Not later than 6 months after the completion of the demonstration project, the Commissioner, after consultation with the Commissioner of the Internal Revenue Service and the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration, shall submit to Congress a report on the outreach efforts and results of such efforts under the project.
The report may include any recommendations for legislative or administrative actions to further carry out the purpose of the project.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Commissioner.--The term ``Commissioner'' means the Commissioner of Social Security.
Medicaid program.--The term ``medicaid program'' means the program of medical assistance established under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes).
Medicare program.--The term ``medicare program'' means the health insurance program established under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes).
Authorization of Appropriations.--From sums made available to the Social Security Administration for fiscal year 1999 to carry out research and demonstrations activities, not more than $5,000,000 may be obligated to carry out the demonstration project under this Act.