This Act may be cited as the ``Intermodal Safe Container Transportation Act Amendments of 1996''.
REFERENCES TO TITLE 49.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 49, United States Code.
Section 5901 is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (1) and inserting the following: ``(1) except as otherwise provided in this chapter, the definitions in sections 10102 and 13102 of this title apply.
''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (7) and (8), respectively; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) `gross cargo weight' means the weight of the cargo, packaging materials (including ice), pallets, and dunnage.''.
Section 5902 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Notifications and certifications ``(a) Prior Notification.-- ``(1) In general.--If the first carrier to which any loaded container or trailer having a projected gross cargo weight of more than 29,000 pounds is tendered for intermodal transportation is a motor carrier, the person tendering the container or trailer shall give the motor carrier a notification of the projected gross cargo weight and a reasonable description of the contents of the container or trailer before the tendering of the container or trailer.
The notification may be transmitted electronically or by telephone.
Applicability.--This subsection applies to any person within the United States who tenders a container or trailer subject to this chapter for intermodal transportation if the first carrier is a motor carrier.
Certification.-- ``(1) In general.--A person who tenders a loaded container or trailer with an actual gross cargo weight of more than 29,000 pounds, to a first carrier for intermodal transportation shall provide a certification of the contents of the container or trailer in writing, or electronically, before or when the container or trailer is so tendered.
Contents of certification.--The certification required by paragraph (1) shall include the following: ``(A) The actual gross cargo weight.
A reasonable description of the contents of the container or trailer.
The identity of the certifying party.
The container or trailer number.
The date of certification or transfer of data to another document, as provided for in paragraph (3).
Transfer of certification data.--A carrier who receives a certification may transfer the information contained in the certification to another document or to electronic format for forwarding to a subsequent carrier.
The person transferring the information shall state on the forwarded document the date on which the data was transferred and the identity of the party who performed the transfer.
Shipping documents.--For purposes of this chapter, a shipping document, prepared by the person tendering a container or trailer to a first carrier, that contains the information required by paragraph (2) meets the requirements of paragraph (1).
Use of `freight all kinds' term.--The term `Freight All Kinds' or `FAK' may not be used for the purpose of certification under this subsection after December 31, 2000, as a description required under paragraph (2)(B) for a trailer or container if the weight of any commodity in the trailer or container equals or exceeds 20 percent of the total weight of the contents of the trailer or container.
This subsection does not prohibit the use of such term after December 31, 2000, for rating purposes.
Separate document marking.--If a separate document is used to meet the requirements of paragraph (1), it shall be conspicuously marked `INTERMODAL CERTIFICATION'.
Applicability.--This subsection applies to any person, domestic or foreign, who first tenders a container or trailer subject to this chapter for intermodal transportation within the United States.
Forwarding Certifications to Subsequent Carriers.-- ``(1) General rule.--A carrier, agent of a carrier, broker, customs broker, freight forwarder, warehouser, or terminal operator shall forward the certification provided under subsection (b) to a subsequent carrier transporting the container or trailer in intermodal transportation before or when the container or trailer is tendered to the subsequent carrier.
Presumption of no certification required.--If no certification is received by the subsequent carrier before or when the container or trailer is being tendered to it, the subsequent carrier may presume that no certification is required.
Limitation on construction of forwarding.--The act of forwarding the certification may not be construed as a verification or affirmation of the accuracy or completeness of the information in the certification.
Liability.-- ``(A) In general.--If a person inaccurately transfers the information on the certification or fails to forward the certification to a subsequent carrier, then that person is liable to any person who incurs any bond, fine, penalty, cost (including storage), or interest charge incurred as a result of the inaccurate transfer of information or failure to forward the certification.
Lien.--A subsequent carrier incurring a bond, fine, penalty, or cost (including storage), or interest charge as a result of the inaccurate transfer of the information or the failure to forward the certification shall have a lien against the contents of the container or trailer under section 5905 in the amount of the bond, fine, penalty, or cost (including storage), or interest charge and all court costs and legal fees incurred by the carrier as a result of such inaccurate transfer or failure.
Notice to leased operators.--If a motor carrier knows that the gross cargo weight of an intermodal container or trailer subject to the certification requirements of subsection (b) would result in a violation of applicable State gross vehicle weight laws-- ``(A) a motor carrier must inform the operator of a vehicle which is leased by the vehicle operator to a motor carrier which transports an intermodal container or trailer of the gross cargo weight of the container or trailer as certified to the motor carrier pursuant to subsection (b); ``(B) the notice must be provided to the operator prior to the operator being tendered the container or trailer; ``(C) the notice required by this subsection must be in writing, but may be transmitted electronically; ``(D) the motor carrier shall bear the burden of proof to establish that it tendered the required notice to the operator; and ``(E) if the operator of a leased vehicle transporting a container or trailer subject to this chapter should receive a fine because of a violation of a State's gross vehicle weight laws or regulations and lessee motor carrier cannot establish that it tendered to the operator the notice required by this section, the operator shall be entitled to reimbursement from the motor carrier of the amount of any fine and court costs resulting from the failure of the motor carrier to tender the notice to the operator.
Liability to Owner or Beneficial Owner.--If-- ``(1) a person inaccurately transfers information on a certification required by subsection (b)(1) or fails to forward a certification to the subsequent carrier; ``(2) as a result of the inaccurate transfer of such information or a failure to forward a certification, the subsequent carrier incurs a bond, fine, penalty, or cost (including storage), or interest charge; and ``(3) a subsequent carrier exercises its rights to a lien under section 5905, then that person is liable to the owner or beneficial owner or to any other person paying the amount of the lien to the subsequent carrier for the amount of the lien and all costs related to the imposition of the lien, including court costs and legal fees incurred in connection with imposition of the lien.
Nonapplicability.-- ``(1) Consolidated shipments.--The notification and certification requirements of subsections (a) and (b) do not apply to any intermodal container or trailer containing consolidated shipments loaded by a motor carrier if that motor carrier-- ``(A) performs the highway portion of the intermodal movement; or ``(B) assumes the responsibility for any weight- related fine or penalty incurred by any other motor carrier that performs a part of the highway transportation.
Intermodal transportation of loaded containers.-- ``(A) In general.--Subsections (a) and (b) and section 5903(c) do not apply to a carrier when the carrier is transferring a loaded container or trailer to another carrier during intermodal transportation, unless the carrier is also the person tendering the loaded container or trailer to the first carrier.
Special rule.--A carrier, agent of a carrier, broker, customs broker, freight forwarder, warehouser, or terminal operator is deemed not to be a person tendering a loaded container or trailer to a first carrier under this section, unless the carrier, agent, broker, customs broker, freight forwarder, warehouser, or terminal operator assumes legal responsibility for loading property into the container or trailer.''.
Providing Erroneous Information.--Section 5903(a) is amended by inserting ``, to whom section 5902(b) applies,'' after ``A person''.
Transporting Prior To Receiving Certification.--Section 5903(b) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Transporting Prior To Receiving Certification.-- ``(1) Presumption.--If no certification is received by a motor carrier before or when a loaded intermodal container or trailer is tendered to it, the motor carrier may presume that the gross cargo weight of the container or trailer is less than 29,001 pounds.
Copy of certification not required to accompany container or trailer.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, if a certification is required by section 5902(b), a copy of the certification is not required to accompany the intermodal container or trailer.''.
Unlawful Coercion.--Section 5903(c)(1) is amended by striking ``10,000 pounds (including packing materials and pallets)'' and inserting ``29,000 pounds''.
General Rule.--Section 5905(a) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) General Rule.--If a person involved in the intermodal transportation of a loaded container or trailer for which a certification is required by section 5902(b) of this title is required, because of a violation of a State's gross vehicle weight laws or regulations, to post a bond or pay a fine, penalty, cost (including storage), or interest charge resulting from-- ``(1) erroneous information provided by the certifying party in the certification to the first carrier in violation of section 5903(a), ``(2) the failure of the party required to provide the certification to the first carrier to provide it, ``(3) the failure of a person required under section 5902(c) to forward the certification to forward it, or ``(4) an error occurring in the transfer of information on the certification to another document under section 5902(b)(3) or 5902(c), then the person posting the bond, or paying any fine, penalty, cost (including storage), or interest charge has a lien against the contents equal to the amount of the bond, fine, penalty, cost (including storage), or interest charge incurred, until the person receives a payment of that amount from the owner or beneficial owner of the contents or from the person responsible for making or forwarding the certification or transferring the information from the certification to another document.''.
Limitations.--Section 5905(b)(1) is amended-- (1) by inserting after ``the first carrier'' the following: ``or the owner or beneficial owner of the contents''; and (2) by striking ``cost, or interest.''
and inserting ``cost (including storage), or interest charge.
The lien shall remain in effect until the lien holder has received payment for all costs and expenses as described in subsection (a).''.
Section 5906 is amended by striking ``Sections 5904(a)(2) and 5905 of this title do'' and insert ``Section 5905 does''.
Section 5907 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Effective date ``This chapter, as amended by the Intermodal Safe Container Transportation Act Amendments of 1996, is effective on the date of the enactment of such Act.
The provisions of this chapter shall be implemented 180 days after such date of enactment.''.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
In General.--Chapter 59 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Relationship to other laws ``Nothing in this chapter affects-- ``(1) chapter 51 (relating to transportation of hazardous material) or the regulations issued under that chapter; or ``(2) any State highway weight or size law or regulation applicable to tractor-trailer combinations.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by striking the item relating to section 5907 and inserting the following: ``5907.
Relationship to other laws.''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 18, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.