SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR PRODUCING FUEL FROM LANDFILL GAS.
In General.--Section 29 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for producing fuel from a nonconventional source) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Extension and Modification for Facilities Producing Qualified Fuels From Landfill Gas.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a facility for producing qualified fuel from landfill gas which is placed in service after June 30, 1998, and before January 1, 2008, this section shall apply to fuel produced at such facility during the 5-year period beginning on the later of-- ``(A) the date such facility was placed in service, or ``(B) the date of the enactment of this subsection.
Reduction of credit for production from certain landfill gas facilities.--In the case of a facility to which paragraph (1) applies which is located at a landfill which is required pursuant to 40 CFR 60.752(b)(2) or 40 CFR 60.33c to install and operate a collection and control system which captures gas generated within the landfill, subsection (a)(1) shall be applied to gas so captured by substituting `$2' for `$3' for the taxable year during which such system is required to be installed and operated.
Special rules.--In determining the amount of credit allowable under this section solely by reason of this subsection-- ``(A) Daily limit.--The amount of qualified fuels sold during any taxable year which may be taken into account by reason of this subsection with respect to any facility shall not exceed an average barrel-of-oil equivalent of 200,000 cubic feet of natural gas per day.
Days before the date the facility is placed in service shall not be taken into account in determining such average.
Extension period to commence with unadjusted credit amount.--In the case of fuels sold after 2003, subparagraph (B) of subsection (d)(2) shall be applied by substituting `2003' for `1979'.''.
Additional Definition.--Section 29(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Landfill gas facility.-- ``(A) In general.--A facility for producing qualified fuel from landfill gas, placed in service before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this paragraph, includes all wells, pipes, and other gas collection equipment installed as part of the facility over the life of the landfill, including any modifications or expansions thereof, after the facility is first placed in service.
Landfill gas.--The term `landfill gas' means gas derived from the biodegradation of municipal solid waste.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to fuel sold after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION AND EXPANSION OF CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION OF ELECTRICITY TO PRODUCTION FROM LANDFILL GAS.
In General.--Section 45(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining qualified energy resources) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) landfill gas.''.
Qualified Facility.--Section 45(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to qualified facility) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Landfill gas facility.--In the case of a facility using landfill gas to produce electricity, the term `qualified facility' means any such facility owned by the taxpayer which is originally placed in service before January 1, 2008.''.
Special Rules and Definitions.-- (1) Reduced credit for certain preeffective date facilities.--Section 45(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Reduced credit for certain preeffective date facilities.--In the case of any facility described in subparagraph (D) of paragraph (3) which is placed in service before the date of the enactment of this subparagraph-- ``(A) subsection (a)(1) shall be applied by substituting `1.0 cents' for `1.5 cents', and ``(B) the 5-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this paragraph shall be substituted in lieu of the 10-year period in subsection (a)(2)(A)(ii).''.
Coordination with section 29.--Section 45(c)(3) of such Code (relating to qualified facility), as amended by subsection (b), is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Coordination with section 29.--The term `qualified facility' shall not include any facility the production from which is taken into account in determining any credit under section 29 for the taxable year or any prior taxable year.''.
Landfill gas.--Section 45(c) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Landfill gas.--The term `landfill gas' means gas derived from the biodegradation of municipal solid waste.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to electricity sold after the date of the enactment of this Act.