Credit for Biodiesel Used as a Fuel.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by inserting after section 40 the following new section: ``SEC.
BIODIESEL USED AS FUEL.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the biodiesel fuels credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an amount equal to the biodiesel mixture credit.
Definition of Biodiesel Mixture Credit.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Biodiesel mixture credit.-- ``(A) In general.--The biodiesel mixture credit of any taxpayer for any taxable year is the sum of the products of the biodiesel mixture rate for each qualified biodiesel mixture and the number of gallons of such mixture of the taxpayer for the taxable year.
Biodiesel mixture rate.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the biodiesel mixture rate for each qualified biodiesel mixture shall be-- ``(i) in the case of a mixture with only biodiesel V, 1 cent for each whole percentage point (not exceeding 10 percentage points) of biodiesel V in such mixture, and ``(ii) in the case of a mixture with biodiesel NV, or a combination of biodiesel V and biodiesel NV, 0.5 cent for each whole percentage point (not exceeding 10 percentage points) of such biodiesel in such mixture.
Qualified biodiesel mixture.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified biodiesel mixture' means a mixture of diesel and biodiesel V or biodiesel NV which-- ``(i) is sold by the taxpayer producing such mixture to any person for use as a fuel, or ``(ii) is used as a fuel by the taxpayer producing such mixture.
Sale or use must be in trade or business, in off-highway use, etc.-- ``(i) In general.--Biodiesel V or biodiesel NV used in the production of a qualified biodiesel mixture shall be taken into account-- ``(I) only if the sale or use described in subparagraph (A) is in a trade or business of the taxpayer, ``(II) for the taxable year in which such sale or use occurs, and ``(III) only if the sale or use described in subparagraph (A) is ultimately for use in a vehicle which at the time of use will not be registered and is not required to be registered for highway use under the laws of any State or foreign country.
Certification for biodiesel v.-- Biodiesel V used in the production of a qualified biodiesel mixture shall be taken into account only if the taxpayer described in subparagraph (A) obtains a certification from the producer of the biodiesel V which identifies the product produced.
Casual off-farm production not eligible.--No credit shall be allowed under this section with respect to any casual off-farm production of a qualified biodiesel mixture.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Biodiesel v defined.--The term `biodiesel V' means the monoalkyl esters of long chain fatty acids derived solely from virgin vegetable oils for use in compressional-ignition (diesel) engines.
Such term shall include esters derived from vegetable oils from corn, soybeans, sunflower seeds, cottonseeds, canola, crambe, rapeseeds, safflowers, flaxseeds, rice bran, and mustard seeds.
Biodiesel nv defined.--The term `biodiesel nv' means the monoalkyl esters of long chain fatty acids derived from nonvirgin vegetable oils or animal fats for use in compressional-ignition (diesel) engines.
Registration requirements.--The terms `biodiesel V' and `biodiesel NV' shall only include a biodiesel which meets-- ``(A) the registration requirements for fuels and fuel additives established by the Environmental Protection Agency under section 211 of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7545), and ``(B) the requirements of the American Society of Testing and Materials D6751.
Biodiesel mixture not used as a fuel, etc.-- ``(A) Imposition of tax.--If-- ``(i) any credit was determined under this section with respect to biodiesel V or biodiesel NV used in the production of any qualified biodiesel mixture, and ``(ii) any person-- ``(I) separates such biodiesel from the mixture, or ``(II) without separation, uses the mixture other than as a fuel, then there is hereby imposed on such person a tax equal to the product of the biodiesel mixture rate applicable under subsection (b)(1)(B) and the number of gallons of the mixture.
Applicable laws.--All provisions of law, including penalties, shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with this section, apply in respect of any tax imposed under subparagraph (A) as if such tax were imposed by section 4081 and not by this chapter.
Pass-thru in the case of estates and trusts.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the rules of subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
Election To Have Biodiesel Fuels Credit Not Apply.-- ``(1) In general.--A taxpayer may elect to have this section not apply for any taxable year.
Time for making election.--An election under paragraph (1) for any taxable year may be made (or revoked) at any time before the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the last date prescribed by law for filing the return for such taxable year (determined without regard to extensions).
Manner of making election.--An election under paragraph (1) (or revocation thereof) shall be made in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.''.
Credit Treated as Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) the biodiesel fuels credit determined under section 40A(a).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 39(d) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) No carryback of biodiesel fuels credit before january 1, 2004.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the biodiesel fuels credit determined under section 40A may be carried back to a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2004.''.
Section 196(c) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10), and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) the biodiesel fuels credit determined under section 40A(a).''.
Section 6501(m) of such Code is amended by inserting ``40A(e),'' after ``40(f),''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding after the item relating to section 40 the following new item: ``Sec.
Biodiesel used as fuel.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.