This Act may be cited as the ``Transit in Parks Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRANSIT IN PARKS PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 53 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5315 the following: ``Sec.
Transit in parks ``(a) Establishment of Program.-- ``(1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Transit in Parks Act, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Transportation shall enter into a memorandum of understanding to establish a transit in parks program in accordance with the provisions of this section.
Purpose.--The purpose of the program shall be to encourage and promote the development of transportation systems described in section 5301(a) within units of the National Park System to improve visitor mobility and enjoyment, reduce pollution and congestion, and enhance resource protection through the use of transit.
Administration of Program.--The program shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior, in conjunction with the Secretary of Transportation.
Contents of Program.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the program shall provide for the following: ``(A) Development of transportation plans and programs for units of the National Park System by the Secretary of the Interior instead of a metropolitan planning organization in accordance with sections 5303(a) and 5303(b).
Development of a long-range transportation plan for such units by the Secretary of the Interior instead of a metropolitan planning organization in accordance with section 5303(f).
The making of contracts and grants by the Secretary of Transportation to the Secretary of the Interior for planning, engineering, design, and evaluation of mass transportation projects in such units, and for technical studies, in accordance with section 5303(g).
Development and updating of a transportation improvement program for such units, and the selection and carrying out of projects in such units, by the Secretary of the Interior instead of a metropolitan planning organization in accordance with section 5304; except that any transportation improvement program developed under section 204(a) of title 23 for such unit shall be treated as meeting the requirement of this subparagraph until the Secretary of the Interior provides otherwise and the approval required by section 5304(a) shall only be the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
The making of grants by the Secretary of Transportation to the Secretary of the Interior for capital projects by financing the planning and improvement costs of equipment, facilities, and associated capital maintenance in mass transportation for such units in accordance with subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of section 5307; except that the Secretary of the Interior shall serve as the designated recipient for the purposes of subsection (a)(2) of such section.
The making of grants by the Secretary of Transportation to the Secretary of the Interior for capital investment as described in subsection (a) of section 5309 in accordance with subsections (a), (d), and (e) of such section, (other than subsections (e)(1)(C) and (e)(4), relating to local financial commitment).
Projects for bicycle access in accordance with the first sentence of section 5319.
The making of contracts and grants by the Secretary of Transportation to the Secretary of the Interior for crime prevention and security in accordance with section 5321.
The making of contracts and grants by the Secretary of Transportation to the Secretary of the Interior for human resources programs in accordance with section 5322.
Grants under the program may be used to pay the operating cost of equipment and facilities used in mass transportation for such units.
Projects for which grants may be made under the program may include turnkey system projects under section 5326.
Labor protection in accordance with section 5333.
Exceptions.--The memorandum of understanding entered into under subsection (a) shall limit or modify the applicability of the provisions referred to in paragraph (1) to the program to the extent necessary to carry out the objectives of this section and to be compatible with the laws and regulations governing units of the National Park System.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of any project or activity carried out under this section shall be 100 percent.
Mass Transportation Defined.--In this section and for purposes of the program carried out under this section, the term `mass transportation' means transportation by a conveyance that provides regular and continuing general or special transportation to the public, but does not include school bus or charter transportation.
Limitation on Applicability.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the other provisions of this chapter (other than sections 5302 and 5338) shall not apply to this section and the program carried out under this section.
Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as superseding, amending, modifying or repealing any provision of law applicable to units of the National Park System.''.
Conforming Amendments.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5315 the following: ``5316.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 5338 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Transit in Parks.--There shall be available from the Mass Transit Account of the Highway Trust Fund $90,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2010 to carry out section 5316.''.
Contract Authority.--Section 5338(g)(1) of such title is amended by striking ``or (f)(2)(A)'' and inserting ``(f)(2)(A), or (j)''.
Period of Availability.--Section 5338(i) of such title is amended-- (1) by striking the 1st comma; and (2) by striking the 2nd comma and inserting ``and subsection (j)''.