This Act may be cited as the ``Equitable Health Care for Neurobiological Disorders Act of 1993''.
Congress finds that-- (1) there are sufficient neuroscientific data to document that many severe ``mental'' illnesses are actually physical illnesses known as neurobiological disorders that are characterized by significant neuroanatomical and neurochemical abnormalities; (2) American families should have adequate health insurance protection for the costs of treating neurobiological disorders that is commensurate with the protections provided for other illnesses; (3) currently, many public and private health insurance programs discriminate against persons with neurobiological disorders by providing more restrictive coverage for treatments of those illnesses in comparison to coverage provided for treatments of other medical problems; (4) unequal health insurance coverage contributes to the destructive and unfair stigmatization of persons with neurobiological disorders that are as beyond the control of the individuals as are cancer, diabetes, and other serious physical health problems; (5) about 95 percent of what is known about both normal and abnormal structure and function of the brain has been learned in the last 10 years, but millions of severely mentally ill people have yet to benefit from these startling research advances in clinical and basic neuroscience; and (6) according to the National Institutes of Mental Health, equitable insurance coverage for severe mental disorders will yield $2.2 billion annually in net savings through decreased use of general medical services and a substantial decrease in social costs.
STANDARDS FOR NONDISCRIMINATORY TREATMENT OF NEUROBIOLOGICAL DISORDERS FOR EMPLOYER HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
In General.--The standards for the nondiscriminatory and equitable treatment by employer health benefit plans of individuals with neurobiological disorders are requirements that such plans (and carriers offering such plans) provide for coverage of services that are essential to the effective treatment of neurobiological disorders in a manner that-- (1) is not more restrictive than coverage provided for other major physical illnesses; (2) provides adequate financial protection to the person requiring the medical treatment for a neurobiological disorder; and (3) is consistent with effective and common methods of controlling health care costs for other major physical illnesses.
Plan Deemed to Meet Standards.--An employer health benefit plan shall be deemed to meet the standards described in subsection (a) if the plan provides for the following: (1) Stop-loss protection for catastrophic expenses.
Coverage of facility-based care.
Coverage of outpatient medical management on a par with other medical procedures to encourage the use of cost-effective ambulatory treatment, including treatment in non-traditional settings.
Coverage of visits for psychological supportive, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services, with coinsurance and fees set to ensure effective cost control of high demand services.
Coverage of prescription drugs essential to the cost effective treatment of neurobiological disorders.
Coverage of medically necessary services for comorbidity of other disorders.
ENFORCEMENT THROUGH EXCISE TAX.
In General.--Chapter 43 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to qualified pension, etc., plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
FAILURE TO COMPLY WITH EMPLOYER HEALTH BENEFIT PLAN STANDARDS FOR NONDISCRIMINATORY TREATMENT FOR NEUROBIOLOGICAL DISORDERS.
Imposition of Tax.--There is hereby imposed a tax on the failure of a carrier or an employer health benefit plan to comply with the standards relating to the nondiscriminatory treatment of neurobiological disorders under section 3 of the Equitable Health Care for Neurobiological Disorders Act of 1993.
Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall be an amount not to exceed 25 percent of the amounts received by the carrier or under the plan for coverage during the period such failure persists.
Limitation in case of individual failures.--In the case of a failure that only relates to specified individuals or employers (and not to the plan generally), the amount of the tax imposed by subsection (a) shall not exceed the aggregate of $100 for each day during which such failure persists for each individual to which such failure relates.
A rule similar to the rule of section 4980B(b)(3) shall apply for purposes of this section.&lt;plus-minus&gt; ``(c) Liability for Tax.--The tax imposed by this section shall be paid by the carrier.
Exceptions.-- ``(1) Corrections within 30 days.--No tax shall be imposed by subsection (a) by reason of any failure if-- ``(A) such failure was due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, and ``(B) such failure is corrected within the 30-day period beginning on earliest date the carrier knew, or exercising reasonable diligence would have known, that such failure existed.
Waiver by secretary.--In the case of a failure which is due to reasonable cause and not to willful neglect, the Secretary may waive part or all of the tax imposed by subsection (a) to the extent that payment of such tax would be excessive relative to the failure involved.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms `carrier' and `employer health benefit plan' have the respective meanings given such terms in section 5 of the Equitable Health Care for Neurobiological Disorders Act of 1993.''
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 43 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new items: ``Sec.
Failure to comply with employer health benefit plan standards for nondiscriminatory treatment for neurobiological disorders.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to plan years beginning after December 31, 1993.
In this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Carrier.--The term ``carrier'' means any entity which provides health insurance or health benefits in a State, and includes a licensed insurance company, a prepaid hospital or medical service plan, a health maintenance organization, the plan sponsor of a multiple employer welfare arrangement or an employee benefit plan (as defined under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), or any other entity providing a plan of health insurance subject to State insurance regulation.
Employer health benefit plan.--The term ``employer health benefit plan'' means a health benefit plan (including an employee welfare benefit plan, as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) which is offered to employees through an employer and for which the employer provides for any contribution to such plan or any premium for such plan are deducted by the employer from compensation to the employee.
Health benefit plan.--The term ``health benefit plan'' means any hospital or medical expense incurred policy or certificate, hospital or medical service plan contract, or health maintenance subscriber contract, or a multiple employer welfare arrangement or employee benefit plan (as defined under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974) which provides benefits with respect to health care services, but does not include-- (A) coverage only for accident, dental, vision, disability income, or long-term care insurance, or any combination thereof, (B) medicare supplemental health insurance, (C) coverage issued as a supplement to liability insurance, (D) worker's compensation or similar insurance, or (E) automobile medical-payment insurance, or any combination thereof.
Neurobiological disorder.-- (A) In general.--An individual with a ``neurobiological disorder'' is an individual diagnosed with one or more of the following conditions: (i) Affective disorders, including bipolar disorder and major depressive disorder.
Anxiety disorders, including obsessive-compulsive disorder and panic disorder.
Autism and other pervasive developmental disorders.
Psychotic disorders, including schizophrenia spectrum disorders.
Periodic review of definition.-- (i) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations directing the National Institute of Mental Health to conduct a biannual review of the definition of neurobiological disorders under subparagraph (A).
In conducting such review, the National Institute of Mental Health shall consult with extramural researchers to review such definition and make recommendations for necessary revisions.
Review by advisory council required.-- The Secretary may not promulgate any regulation modifying the definition of neurobiological disorders under subsection (a) until the recommendations of the National Institute of Mental Health under clause (i) have been reviewed by the National Advisory Mental Health Council.