This Act may be cited as the ``Teacher Next Door Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) urban and inner city school districts have greater difficulty attracting and retaining qualified teachers than their suburban counterparts; and (2) the cost of property is higher in urban areas and inner cities that in suburban areas.
TEACHER NEXT DOOR PROGRAM.
Section 204 of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1710) is amended by inserting after subsection (j) the following new subsection: ``(k) Disposition of Assets Under Teacher Next Door Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may sell eligible properties (as such term is defined in paragraph (9)) at a discount to teachers, as provided under this subsection.
In the case of eligible properties under paragraph (9)(B)(i), the provisions of subsection (h) shall apply to such properties, except to the extent specifically provided otherwise in this subsection.
Primary residence.--An eligible property may be sold pursuant to a discount under paragraph (3) only if the property is used, for not less than the 3-year period beginning upon such sale, as the primary residence of a teacher.
The Secretary shall ensure compliance with this paragraph through inclusion of appropriate deed restrictions.
Discount.--If an eligible property is sold to a teacher for use in accordance with paragraph (2), the sale price shall be equal to 50 percent of the appraised value of the eligible property (as determined in accordance with the procedure under subsection (h)(6)(B)).
In the case of an eligible property under paragraph (9)(B)(i) that is eligible for both a discount under this paragraph and a discount under subsection (h)(6), the discount under subsection (h)(6) shall not apply.
Sale methods.--The Secretary may sell an eligible property pursuant to a discount under this subsection-- ``(A) to a unit of general local government or nonprofit organization, for resale or transfer to a teacher; or ``(B) directly (or through a real estate broker) to a purchaser who is a teacher.
Resale.--In the case of any purchase by a unit of general local government or nonprofit organization of an eligible property sold at a discounted price under this subsection, the sale agreement shall-- ``(A) require the purchasing unit of general local government or nonprofit organization to provide the full benefit of the discount to the teacher obtaining the property; and ``(B) in the case of a purchase involving multiple properties, any of which is such an eligible property, designate the specific eligible property or properties to be subject to the requirements of paragraph (2).
Mortgage downpayment assistance.--If a teacher purchases an eligible property pursuant to a discounted sale price under this paragraph and finances such purchase through a mortgage insured under this title, notwithstanding any provision of section 203 the downpayment on such mortgage shall be $100.
Prevention of undue profit.--The Secretary shall issue regulations to prevent undue profit from the resale of eligible properties in violation of the requirement under paragraph (2).
Awareness program.--The Secretary shall provide for field offices of the Department to take appropriate actions necessary to inform elementary schools and secondary schools within the jurisdiction of the field office and the public of the program under this subsection and of the properties located within the jurisdiction of the field office that are available for purchase by teachers under this subsection.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions shall apply: ``(A) The terms `elementary school' and `secondary school' have the meaning given such terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
The term `eligible property' means-- ``(i) an eligible asset described in subsection (h)(2)(A); or ``(ii) a property that is-- ``(I) designed as a dwelling for occupancy for 1 to 4 families; ``(II) was previously subject to a mortgage insured under the provisions of this Act; ``(III) is owned by the Secretary pursuant to the payment of insurance benefits under this Act; and ``(IV) is located in an area that is not a revitalization area designated under subsection (h)(3), but is an area that the Secretary determines is appropriate for participation in the program under this subsection because of a need for economic development, the incidence in transactions involving properties in such area of seller concessions (such as take-back financing), a high rate of property ownership by investor-owners, or such other factors as the Secretary considers appropriate.
The term `teacher' means an individual who is employed on a full-time basis as a teacher in an elementary or secondary school.
Effective date.--This subsection shall apply beginning on January 1, 2001.''.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue regulations to implement section 204(k) of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1710(k)), as added by the amendment made by section 3 of this Act.