This Act may be cited as the ``Pornography Victims Protection Act of 1993''.
Section 2251 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking out ``subsection (d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsection (e)'' and by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``or if such person knows or has reason to know that the minor was transported in interstate or foreign commerce for the purpose of producing any such visual depiction of such conduct''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking out ``subsection (d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsection (e)'' and by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``or if such person knows or has reason to know that the minor was transported in interstate or foreign commerce for the purpose of producing any such visual depiction of such conduct''; (3) by inserting immediately after subsection (b) the following: ``(c)(1) Any person who coerces, intimidates, or fraudulently induces an individual 18 years or older to engage in any sexually explicit conduct for the purpose of producing any visual depiction of such conduct shall be punished as provided under subsection (e), if such person knows or has reason to know that such visual depiction will be transported in interstate or foreign commerce or mailed, if such visual depiction has actually been transported in interstate or foreign commerce or mailed, or if such person knows or has reason to know that the individual 18 years or older was transported in interstate or foreign commerce for the purpose of producing any such visual depiction of such conduct.
Proof of one or more of the following facts or conditions shall not, without more, negate a finding of coercion under this subsection: ``(A) that the person is or has been a prostitute; ``(B) that the person is connected by blood or marriage to anyone involved in or related to the making of the pornography; ``(C) that the person has previously had, or been thought to have had, sexual relations with anyone, including anyone involved in or related to the making of the pornography; ``(D) that the person has previously posed for sexually explicit pictures for or with anyone, including anyone involved in or related to the making of the pornography at issue; ``(E) that anyone else, including a spouse or other relative, has given permission on the person's behalf; ``(F) that the person actually consented to a use of the performance that is changed into pornography; ``(G) that the person knew that the purpose of the acts or events in question was to make pornography; ``(H) that the person signed a contract to produce pornography; or ``(I) that the person was paid or otherwise compensated.
''; (4) in subsection (c), by striking out ``(c)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(d)''; (5) in subsection (d), by striking out ``(d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(e)''; and (6) by amending the heading to read as follows: ``Sec.
CIVIL REMEDIES AND PROCEDURE.
Modification of Existing Civil Remedies.--Section 2255 of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction to prevent and restrain violations of section 2251 of this title by issuing appropriate orders, including-- ``(1) ordering any person to divest himself of any interest, direct or indirect, in any legal or business entity; ``(2) imposing reasonable restrictions on the future activities or investments of any person including prohibiting such person from engaging in the same type of legal or business endeavor; or ``(3) ordering dissolution or reorganization of any legal or business entity after making due provision for the rights of innocent persons.
The Attorney General or any person threatened with loss or damage by reason of a violation of section 2251 of this title may institute proceedings under subsection (a) of this section and, in the event that the party bringing suit prevails, such party shall recover the cost of the suit, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
Pending final determination, the court may at any time enter such restraining orders or prohibitions, or take such other actions, including the acceptance of satisfactory performance bonds, as it shall deem proper.
For purposes of this section, a violation of section 2251 of this title shall be determined by a preponderance of the evidence.
Any victim of a violation of section 2251 of this title who suffers physical injury, emotional distress, or property damage as a result of such violation may sue to recover damages in any appropriate United States district court and shall recover threefold the damages such person sustains as a result of such violation and the cost of the suit, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
For purposes of this section, a violation of section 2251 of this title shall be determined by a preponderance of the evidence.
A final judgment or decree rendered in favor of the United States in any criminal proceeding brought by the United States under this chapter shall estop the defendant from denying the essential allegations of the criminal offense in any subsequent civil proceeding.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize any order restraining the exhibition, distribution or dissemination of any visual material without a full adversary proceeding and a final judicial determination that such material contains a visual depiction of sexually explicit conduct, engaged in by a minor or by a person who was coerced, intimidated, or fraudulently induced to engage in such sexually explicit conduct.''.
Additional Remedies and Procedure.--Chapter 110 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Any person found to violate section 2251 of this title by preponderance of the evidence shall be liable to the United States Government for a civil penalty of $100,000 and the forfeiture of any interest in property described in section 2254.
The Attorney General may bring an action for recovery of any such civil penalty or forfeiture against any such person.
If the Attorney General prevails he may also recover the cost of the suit, including a reasonable attorney's fee.
If the identity of any victim of an offense provided in section 2251 of this title is established before an award of a civil penalty made to the United States under this section, the victim shall be entitled to the award.
If there is more than one victim, the court shall apportion the award among the victims on an equitable basis after considering the harm suffered by each such victim.
Any civil action or proceeding brought under this chapter may be instituted in the district court of the United States for any district in which the defendant resides, is found, has an agent, or transacts his affairs.
In any action under section 2255 or 2259 of this title in any district court of the United States in which it is shown that the ends of justice require that other parties residing in any other district be brought before the court, the court may cause such parties to be summoned, and process for that purpose may be served in any judicial district of the United States by the marshal of such judicial district.
In any civil or criminal action or proceeding under this chapter in the district court of the United States for any judicial district, a subpoena issued by such court to compel the attendance of witnesses may be served in any other judicial district except that no subpoena shall be issued for service upon any individual who resides in another district at a place more than one hundred miles from the place at which such court is held without approval given by a judge of such court upon a showing of good cause.
All other process in any action or proceeding under this chapter may be served on any person in any judicial district in which such person resides, is found, has an agent, or transacts his affairs.
``In any civil action instituted under this chapter by the United States in any district court of the United States, the Attorney General may file with the clerk of such court a certificate stating that in his opinion the case is of general public importance.
A copy of that certificate shall be furnished immediately by such clerk to the chief judge or in his absence to the presiding district judge of the district in which such action is pending.
Upon receipt of such copy, such judge shall designate immediately a judge of that district to hear and determine the action.
The judge designated to hear and determine the action shall assign the action for hearing as soon as practicable and hold hearings and make a determination as expeditiously as possible.
``In any proceeding ancillary to or in any civil action instituted under this chapter the proceedings may be opened or closed to the public at the discretion of the court after consideration of the rights of affected persons.
``A civil action under section 2255 or 2259 of this title must be brought within six years from the date the violation is committed.
In any such action brought by or on behalf of a person who was a minor at the date the violation was committed, the running of such six-year period shall be deemed to have been tolled during the period of such person's minority.''.
Table of Sections.--The table of sections for chapter 110 of part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``CHAPTER 110--SEXUAL EXPLOITATION ``Sec.
Selling or buying of children.
Failure to report child abuse.
Table of Chapters.--The table of chapters for part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking the item relating to chapter 110 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``110.