This Act may be cited as the ``Limited Congressional Pension Act of 1995''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO THE CIVIL SERVICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Limitations relating to Members ``(a)(1) For the purpose of this section-- ``(A) the term `maximum allowable period of member service' means the greater of-- ``(i) 12 years of member service; or ``(ii) the total number of years of member service completed by the Member before the effective date of this section (expressed in terms of the full years and twelfth parts thereof, excluding from the aggregate the fractional part of a month, if any); ``(B) the term `deemed separation date', as used with respect to a Member, means the date such Member is deemed under subsection (b)(1)(A) or (B), as the case may be, to have separated from service as a Member; and ``(C) the term `deemed separation' means a separation deemed to have occurred under subsection (b)(1)(A) or (B).
This section shall apply with respect to any individual serving as a Member on or after the effective date of this section, excluding a reemployed annuitant whose annuity commenced before such effective date.
Except as otherwise provided in this section-- ``(1)(A) any Member who has completed the maximum allowable period of member service before the effective date of this section shall, for purposes of this subchapter, be deemed to have separated from service on the day before such effective date; and ``(B) any Member who completes the maximum allowable period of member service on or after the effective date of this section shall, for purposes of this subchapter, be deemed to have separated from service on the date on which such Member completes the maximum allowable period of member service; and ``(2) any Member who is deemed to have separated from service under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1)-- ``(A) may not thereafter remain or become subject to either the Civil Service Retirement System or the Federal Employees' Retirement System as a Member of Congress (as defined by section 2106); and ``(B) for purposes of this subchapter, shall, while thereafter serving as a Member of Congress (as so defined), be treated in the same way as a former Member not then performing Government service.
(1) This subsection shall apply with respect to any Member described in subsection (b)(1)(A) or (B).
A Member to whom this subsection applies shall not be eligible for an immediate or deferred annuity based on any deemed separation.
Rather, actual separation must occur in order to be eligible for such an annuity.
For purposes of determining whether a Member satisfies the age and service requirements for title to an annuity-- ``(A) the Member's age as of the Member's deemed separation date shall be used; and ``(B) the Member's total service as of the Member's deemed separation date shall be used, subject to paragraph (7).
The requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of section 8333 shall be considered met if the Member would satisfy those requirements as of the Member's deemed separation date (assuming the Member actually separated on that date).
For purposes of any computation of annuity-- ``(A) average pay shall be determined disregarding pay for any member service performed after the Member's deemed separation date; ``(B) any reduction under section 8339(h) shall be made using the age determined under paragraph (3)(A); and ``(C) the Member's total service shall be equal to the total service determined under paragraph (3)(B).
For purposes of applying the respective limitations under sections 8339(f) and 8340(g), the average pay and final pay (or final basic pay) of a Member shall likewise be determined based on the Member's deemed separation date.
(A) Any deadline (such as for making an election or making a deposit) which is fixed by reference to date of separation shall be applied using the Member's actual separation date.
Any determination as to the marital status of the Member as of date of separation shall be made based on the Member's actual separation date.
For purposes of determining any period of military service which is creditable for purposes of section 8339(c)(1), the date of final separation from service as a Member (as referred to in section 8332(d)) shall be the Member's actual separation date.
(1) No contribution to the Thrift Savings Fund may be made by any Member with respect to any pay period beginning on or after the effective date of this section.
Except as provided in paragraph (1), nothing in this section shall be considered to permit or require that a Member be treated as having separated before such Member's actual separation date for purposes of the Thrift Savings Plan.
Regulations to carry out this section may be prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management and the Executive Director (within the meaning of section 8401(13)) with respect to matters within their respective areas of jurisdiction.
This section shall take effect as of the first day of the Congress next beginning after the date of the enactment of the Limited Congressional Pension Act of 1995.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``8352.
Limitations relating to Members.''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO THE FEDERAL EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Limitations relating to Members ``(a)(1) For the purpose of this section-- ``(A) the term `maximum allowable period of member service' means the greater of-- ``(i) 12 years of member service; or ``(ii) the total number of years of member service completed by the Member before the effective date of this section (expressed in terms of the full years and twelfth parts thereof, excluding from the aggregate the fractional part of a month, if any); ``(B) the term `deemed separation date', as used with respect to a Member, means the date such Member is deemed under subsection (b)(1)(A) or (B), as the case may be, to have separated from service as a Member; ``(C) the term `deemed separation' means a separation deemed to have occurred under subsection (b)(1)(A) or (B); and ``(D) the term `member service' means any service as a Member and any service constituting member service within the meaning of section 8331(14).
This section shall apply with respect to any individual serving as a Member on or after the effective date of this section, excluding a reemployed annuitant whose annuity commenced before such effective date.
Except as otherwise provided in this section-- ``(1)(A) any Member who has completed the maximum allowable period of member service before the effective date of this section shall, for purposes of this chapter, be deemed to have separated from service on the day before such effective date; and ``(B) any Member who completes the maximum allowable period of member service on or after the effective date of this section shall, for purposes of this chapter, be deemed to have separated from service on the date on which such Member completes the maximum allowable period of member service; and ``(2) any Member who is deemed to have separated from service under subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1)-- ``(A) may not thereafter remain or become subject to the Federal Employees' Retirement System as a Member of Congress (as defined by section 2106); and ``(B) for purposes of this chapter, shall, while thereafter serving as a Member of Congress (as so defined), be treated in the same way as a former Member not then performing Government service.
(1) This subsection shall apply with respect to any Member described in subsection (b)(1)(A) or (B).
A Member to whom this subsection applies shall not be eligible for an immediate or deferred annuity based on any deemed separation.
Rather, actual separation must occur in order to be eligible for such an annuity.
For purposes of determining whether a Member satisfies the age and service requirements for title to an annuity-- ``(A) the Member's age as of the Member's deemed separation date shall be used; and ``(B) the Member's total service as of the Member's deemed separation date shall be used, subject to paragraph (6).
However, for purposes of determining eligibility for an annuity supplement under section 8421, the Member's actual age shall be used.
For purposes of any computation of annuity-- ``(A) average pay shall be determined disregarding pay for any member service performed after the Member's deemed separation date; and ``(B) the Member's total service shall be equal to the total service determined under paragraph (3)(B).
Any annuity supplement under section 8421 shall be computed in a manner consistent with the preceding sentence.
(A) Any deadline (such as for making an election or making a deposit) which is fixed by reference to date of separation shall be applied using the Member's actual separation date.
Any determination as to the marital status of the Member and any similar determination shall be made based on the Member's actual separation date.
For purposes of determining any period of military service which is creditable for purposes of section 8411(c), the date of separation from service as a Member shall be the Member's actual separation date.
(1) No contribution to the Thrift Savings Fund may be made by or for the benefit of any Member (including under section 8432(c)(1)) with respect to any pay period beginning on or after the effective date of this section.
Except as provided in paragraph (1), nothing in this section shall be considered to permit or require that a Member be treated as having separated before such Member's actual separation date for purposes of the Thrift Savings Plan.
Regulations to carry out this section may be prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management and the Executive Director with respect to matters within their respective areas of jurisdiction.
This section shall take effect as of the first day of the Congress next beginning after the date of the enactment of the Limited Congressional Pension Act of 1995.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``8404.
Limitations relating to Members.