PERMANENT LOAN GUARANTEE FEE WAIVERS FOR VETERANS.
Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (14)(B)(ii), by adding at the end the following: ``(III) Guarantee fee waiver for veterans.-- ``(aa) Definition.--In this subclause, the term `veteran or spouse of a veteran' has the meaning given the term in paragraph (31)(G)(iii).
Guarantee fee waiver.--The Administrator may not collect a guarantee fee described in paragraph (18) in connection with a loan of not more than $150,000 made under this paragraph to a veteran or spouse of a veteran on or after October 1 of the first fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this subclause.
Exception.--If the President's budget for the upcoming fiscal year, submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, includes a cost for the program established under this subsection that is above zero, the requirements of item (bb) shall not apply to loans made during such upcoming fiscal year.
''; (2) in paragraph (16), by adding at the end the following: ``(G) Guarantee fee waiver for veterans.-- ``(i) Definition.--In this subparagraph, the term `veteran or spouse of a veteran' has the meaning given the term in paragraph (31)(G)(iii).
Guarantee fee waiver.--The Administrator may not collect a guarantee fee described in paragraph (18) in connection with a loan of not more than $150,000 made under this paragraph to a veteran or spouse of a veteran on or after October 1 of the first fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this subparagraph.
Exception.--If the President's budget for the upcoming fiscal year, submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, includes a cost for the program established under this subsection that is above zero, the requirements of clause (ii) shall not apply to loans made during such upcoming fiscal year.
''; and (3) in paragraph (34), by adding at the end the following: ``(D) Guarantee fee waiver for veterans.-- ``(i) Definition.--In this subparagraph, the term `veteran or spouse of a veteran' has the meaning given the term in paragraph (31)(G)(iii).
Guarantee fee waiver.--The Administrator may not collect a guarantee fee described in paragraph (18) in connection with an express loan of not more than $150,000 made under this paragraph to a veteran or spouse of a veteran on or after October 1 of the first fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this subparagraph.
Exception.--If the President's budget for the upcoming fiscal year, submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, includes a cost for the program established under this subsection that is above zero, the requirements of clause (ii) shall not apply to express loans made during such upcoming fiscal year.