This Act may be cited as the ``Interstate Commerce Efficiency and Safety Improvement Act of 1993''.
The purpose of this Act is to promote fiscal responsibility by transferring the functions of the Interstate Commerce Commission to the Department of Transportation and to advance safety on the highways of the United States by consolidating the regulation of motor carrier safety in the Department of Transportation.
In this Act, the term-- (1) ``Commission'' means the Interstate Commerce Commission; (2) ``function'' means a function, power, or duty; and (3) ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
TRANSFER OF AUTHORITY TO SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION.
In General.--There are transferred to the Secretary, effective October 1, 1993, all functions of the Commission.
Authority of Office of Management and Budget.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the Commission and the Secretary, may make such determinations as may be necessary with regard to the functions transferred by this Act, and to make such additional incidental dispositions of assets, liabilities, contracts, property, and records, as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
The unobligated funds of the Commission shall not be transferred to the Department of Transportation in order to carry out the transfer of functions under this Act, and the number of fulltime employee positions within the Department of Transportation shall not be increased as a result of such transfer of functions.
Joint Planning for Transfer.--The Chairman of the Commission and the Secretary shall, beginning as soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, jointly plan for the orderly transfer of functions under this Act.
Interim Use of Interstate Commerce Commission Personnel.--Prior to October 1, 1993, and with the consent of the Commission, the Secretary may use the services of officers, employees, and other personnel of the Commission under such terms and conditions as will reasonably facilitate the orderly transfer of functions under this Act.
In General.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, contracts, certificates, licenses, and privileges-- (1) which have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by any agency or official thereof, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the performance of any function which is transferred by this Act to the Secretary from the Commission; and (2) which are in effect immediately before the transfer of functions by this Act, shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the Secretary or any other duly authorized official, by any court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Continuation of Proceedings.--The transfer of functions by this Act shall not affect any proceedings, including rulemaking proceedings, or any application for any license, permit, or certificate, pending before the Commission immediately before the transfer takes effect.
Such proceedings and applications shall be continued at the Department of Transportation.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, and appeals shall be taken therefrom, as if this Act had not been enacted; and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by the Secretary of Transportation, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
Effect on Pending Civil Actions.--Except as provided in subsection (e)-- (1) the transfer of any function under this Act shall not affect any civil action relating to such function which is commenced prior to the date the transfer takes effect; and (2) in all such actions, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered, in the same manner and effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No action or other proceeding commenced by or against any officer in that officer's official capacity as an officer of the Commission shall abate by reason of the transfer of any function under this Act.
No cause of action by or against the Commission, or by or against any officer thereof in that officer's official capacity, shall abate by reason of the transfer of any function under this Act.
Judicial Administrative Provision.--If immediately before the transfer of functions by this Act the Commission or any officer thereof in that officer's official capacity is a party to an action relating to a function transfer by this Act, then such action shall be continued with the Secretary or other appropriate official of the Department of Transportation substituted or added as a party.
References.--With respect to any function transferred by this Act and performed on or after the effective date of the transfer, reference in any Federal law to the Interstate Commerce Commission or the Commission (insofar as such term refers to the Interstate Commerce Commission), or to any officer or office thereof, shall be deemed to refer to the Department of Transportation, or other official or component of the Department of Transportation in which such function vests.
Exercise of Functions by Secretary.--In the exercise of any function transferred by this Act, the Secretary shall have the same authority as that vested in the Commission with respect to such function immediately preceding its transfer, and actions of the Secretary shall have the same force and effect as when exercised by the Commission.
Orders and actions of the Secretary in the exercise of the functions transferred under this Act shall be subject to judicial review to the same extent and in the same manner as if such orders and actions had been by the Commission in the exercise of such functions immediately preceding their transfer.
Any statutory requirements relating to notice, hearings, actions upon the record, or administrative review that apply to any functions transferred by this Act shall apply to the exercise of such functions by the Secretary.
No later than March 31, 1994, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the functions transferred from the Commission to the Department of Transportation under this Act.
The report shall include-- (1) an assessment of benefits compared to costs associated with each of these functions, both with respect to persons affected directly and to the public generally; (2) recommendations for the elimination of functions identified as redundant, or substantially the same as functions or services which are performed by the Department of Transportation or other public or private organizations prior to the transfer of functions under this Act; and (3) recommendations to modify or eliminate those functions that do not provide substantial economic or safety benefits to the general public.
Executive Level Pay Rates.--(1) Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Chairman, Interstate Commerce Commission.''.
Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Members, Interstate Commerce Commission.''.
Termination of Commission.--Sections 10301 through 10308 of title 49, United States Code, are repealed.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall become effective on October 1, 1993.