The Congress finds as follows: (1) The number of couples reporting infertility has increased from 6.1 million in 2002 to more than 7.5 million currently.
Studies reveal that 80 to 90 percent of infertility is acquired and could be prevented.
Sexually transmitted diseases (``STDs'') are the most preventable causes of infertility and potentially fatal tubal pregnancies.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention estimates that 19 million new STD infections occur each year, with almost half of them among young people ages 15 to 24 and with an increased incidence in minority populations.
New data reveals that environmental toxins, including lead and mercury, as well as tobacco and alcohol, are a direct threat to reproductive health.
The Nation's expanding aging population requires that health care providers and government agencies be prepared to address the fertility complications of aging.
In 10 percent of infertility cases, the causes cannot be explained.
Public awareness of the causes of infertility can reduce its incidence.
Many medical schools lack the resources to adequately train students in the causes, treatment, and patient counseling needed to reduce the incidence of infertility.
INTERAGENCY INFERTILITY PREVENTION TASK FORCE.
Establishment.--There is established a task force to be known as the ``Infertility Prevention Task Force'' (in this section referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Duties.--The Task Force shall develop a strategy for the Federal Government to facilitate activities to prevent infertility, including strategies for-- (1) maximizing cooperation among departments and agencies of the Federal Government and the use of resources of the Federal Government in compiling data on the incidence of infertility and the incidence and impact of the various contributing factors; (2) coordinating and encouraging research in the public and private sector on the causes and treatment of infertility; (3) developing integrated Federal policies to promote public awareness of the causes of infertility that would include substantial participation by the private sector; (4) creating an infertility prevention curriculum to serve as a model for the Nation's medical schools; and (5) establishing partnerships with industry, organized labor, academia, and State and local governments-- (A) to collect and disseminate information on infertility prevention; and (B) to coordinate appropriate agency resources, including grants, loans, and scholarships in the area of infertility prevention, including research on the causes and treatment, increased public awareness and improved medical education.
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Task Force shall be composed of 10 members, as follows: (A) One member shall be the Assistant Secretary for Health.
One member shall be a representative of the National Institutes of Health and shall be designated by the Director of such agency.
One member shall be a representative of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and shall be designated by the Director of such agency.
One member shall be a representative of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality and shall be designated by the Director of such agency.
One member shall be a representative of the Environmental Protection Agency and shall be designated by the Administrator of such agency.
One member shall be a representative of the Association of American Medical Colleges and shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Four members shall be practicing or retired obstetrics-and-gynecology physicians specializing in fertility techniques and infertility prevention.
Of such members-- (i) one shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (ii) one shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House; (iii) one shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate; and (iv) one shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Chairperson.--The Assistant Secretary for Health shall serve as the chairperson of the Task Force.
Deadline for appointment.--Each of the members of the Task Force shall be designated or appointed under subsection (c) for service on the Task Force not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Task Force shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Prohibition of compensation.--Members of the Task Force may not receive pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Task Force.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Task Force shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Frequency.--The Task Force shall meet not less than four times each year.
Quorum.--Six members of the Task Force shall constitute a quorum.
Annual Reports.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for the succeeding four years, the Task Force shall submit to the Congress, and make available to the public, a report detailing the activities of the Task Force and containing the findings, strategies, recommendations, policies, and initiatives developed pursuant to the duties of the Task Force under subsection (b).
Termination.--The Task Force shall terminate on the date of the submission of the final report under subsection (e).