This Act may be cited as the ``School Safety Enhancement Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) While our Nation's schools are still relatively safe, it is imperative that schools be provided with adequate resources to prevent incidents of violence.
Approximately 10 percent of all public schools reported at least 1 serious violent crime to a law enforcement agency over the course of the 1996-1997 school year.
In 1996, approximately 225,000 students between the ages of 12 and 18 were victims of nonfatal violent crime in schools in the United States.
From 1992 through 1994, 76 students and 29 non-students were victims of murders or suicides that were committed in schools in the United States.
The school violence incidents in several States across the Nation in 1998 and 1999 caused enormous damage to schools, families, and whole communities.
Because of escalating school violence, the children of the United States are increasingly afraid that they will be attacked or harmed at school.
A report issued by the Department of Education in August, 1998, entitled ``Early Warning, Early Response'' concluded that the reduction and prevention of school violence is best achieved through safety plans which involve the entire community, policies which emphasize both prevention and intervention, training school personnel, parents, students, and community members to recognize the early warning signs of potential violent behavior and to share their concerns or observations with trained personnel, establishing procedures which allow rapid response and intervention when early warning signs of violent behavior are identified, and providing adequate support and access to services for troubled students.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR SCHOOL AND YOUTH SAFETY.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Education and the Attorney General shall jointly establish a National Center for School and Youth Safety (in this section referred to as the ``Center'').
The Secretary of Education and the Attorney General may establish the Center at an existing facility, if the facility has a history of performing two or more of the duties described in subsection (b).
The Secretary of Education and the Attorney General shall jointly appoint a Director of the Center to oversee the operation of the Center.
Duties.--The Center shall carry out emergency response, anonymous student hotline, consultation, and information and outreach activities with respect to elementary and secondary school safety, including the following: (1) Emergency response.--The staff of the Center, and such temporary contract employees as the Director of the Center shall determine necessary, shall offer emergency assistance to local communities to respond to school safety crises.
Such assistance shall include counseling for victims and the community, assistance to law enforcement to address short-term security concerns, and advice on how to enhance school safety, prevent future incidents, and respond to future incidents.
Anonymous student hotline.--The Center shall establish a toll-free telephone number for students to report criminal activity, threats of criminal activity, and other high-risk behaviors such as substance abuse, gang or cult affiliation, depression, or other warning signs of potentially violent behavior.
The Center shall relay the reports, without attribution, to local law enforcement or appropriate school hotlines.
The Director of the Center shall work with the Attorney General to establish guidelines for Center staff to work with law enforcement around the Nation to relay information reported through the hotline.
Consultation.--The Center shall establish a toll-free number for the public to contact staff of the Center for consultation regarding school safety.
The Director of the Center shall hire administrative staff and individuals with expertise in enhancing school safety, including individuals with backgrounds in counseling and psychology, education, law enforcement and criminal justice, and community development to assist in the consultation.
Information and outreach.--The Center shall compile information about the best practices in school violence prevention, intervention, and crisis management, and shall serve as a clearinghouse for model school safety program information.
The staff of the Center shall work to ensure local governments, school officials, parents, students, and law enforcement officials and agencies are aware of the resources, grants, and expertise available to enhance school safety and prevent school crime.
The staff of the Center shall give special attention to providing outreach to rural and impoverished communities.
SAFE COMMUNITIES, SAFE SCHOOLS.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Education, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and the Attorney General may award grants, on a competitive basis, to help communities develop community- wide safety programs involving students, parents, educators, guidance counselors, psychologists, law enforcement officials or agencies, civic leaders, and other organizations serving the community.
Authorized Activities.--Funds provided to carry out this Act may be used for activities that may include efforts to-- (1) increase early intervention strategies; (2) expand parental involvement; (3) increase students' awareness of warning signs of violent behavior; (4) promote students' responsibility to report the warning signs to appropriate persons; (5) promote conflict resolution and peer mediation programs; (6) increase the number of after-school programs; (7) expand the use of safety-related equipment and technology; and (8) expand students' access to mental health services.
AMENDMENTS TO THE NATIONAL CHILD PROTECTION ACT OF 1993.
Section 5(10) of the National Child Protection Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 5119c(10)) is amended to read as follows: ``(10) the term `qualified entity' means-- ``(A) a business or organization, whether public, private, for-profit, not-for-profit, or voluntary, that provides care or care placement services, including a business or organization that licenses or certifies others to provide care or care placement services; or ``(B) an elementary or secondary school.