This Act may be cited as the ``True American Heroes Act of 2002''.
TITLE I--MEDALS FOR RESPONDERS AND RESISTERS SEC.
CONGRESSIONAL GOLD MEDALS FOR GOVERNMENT WORKERS WHO RESPONDED TO THE ATTACKS ON THE WORLD TRADE CENTER AND PERISHED.
Presentation Authorized.--In recognition of the bravery and self-sacrifice of officers, emergency workers, and other employees of State and local government agencies, including the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and of the United States Government and others, who responded to the attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City, and perished in the tragic events of September 11, 2001 (including those who are missing and presumed dead), the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate shall make appropriate arrangements for the presentation, on behalf of the Congress, of a gold medal of appropriate design for each such officer, emergency worker, employee, or other individual to the next of kin or other personal representative of each such officer, emergency worker, employee, or other individual.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike gold medals with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be determined by the Secretary to be emblematic of the valor and heroism of the men and women honored.
Determination of Recipients.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall determine the number of medals to be presented under this section and the appropriate recipients of the medals after consulting with appropriate representatives of Federal, State, and local officers and agencies and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Duplicative Gold Medals For Departments and Duty Stations.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall strike duplicates in gold of the gold medals struck pursuant to subsection (a) for presentation to each of the following, for permanent display in the respective offices, houses, stations, or places of employment: (A) The Governor of the State of New York.
The Mayor of the City of New York.
The Commissioner of the New York Police Department, the Commissioner of the New York Fire Department, the head of emergency medical services for the City of New York, and the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Each precinct house, fire house, emergency response station, or other duty station or place of employment to which each person referred to in subsection (a) was assigned on September 11, 2001, for display in each such place in a manner befitting the memory of such persons.
Duplicate Bronze Medals.--Under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck under subsection (a) at a price sufficient to cover the costs of the bronze medals (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses) and the cost of the gold medal.
Use of the United States Mint at West Point, New York.--It is the sense of the Congress that the medals authorized under this section should be struck at the United States Mint at West Point, New York, to the greatest extent possible.
CONGRESSIONAL GOLD MEDALS FOR PEOPLE ABOARD UNITED AIRLINES FLIGHT 93 WHO HELPED RESIST THE HIJACKERS AND CAUSED THE PLANE TO CRASH.
Congressional Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) On September 11, 2001, United Airlines Flight 93, piloted by Captain James Dahl, departed from Newark International Airport at 8:01 a.m. on its scheduled route to San Francisco, California, with 7 crew members and 38 passengers on board.
Shortly after departure, United Airlines Flight 93 was hijacked by terrorists.
At 10:37 a.m. United Airlines Flight 93 crashed near Shanksville, Pennsylvania.
Evidence indicates that people aboard United Airlines Flight 93 learned that other hijacked planes had been used to attack the World Trade Center in New York City and resisted the actions of the hijackers on board.
The effort to resist the hijackers aboard United Airlines Flight 93 appears to have caused the plane to crash prematurely, potentially saving hundreds or thousands of lives and preventing the destruction of the White House, the Capitol, or another important symbol of freedom and democracy.
The leaders of the resistance aboard United Airlines Flight 93 demonstrated exceptional bravery, valor, and patriotism, and are worthy of the appreciation of the people of the United States.
Presentation of Congressional Gold Medals Authorized.--In recognition of heroic service to the Nation, the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate shall make appropriate arrangements for the presentation, on behalf of the Congress, of a gold medal of appropriate design for each passenger or crew member on board United Airlines Flight 93 who is identified by the Attorney General as having aided in the effort to resist the hijackers on board the plane to the next of kin or other personal representative of each such individual.
Design and Striking.--For the purpose of the presentation referred to in subsection (b), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike gold medals of a single design with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary.
Duplicate Medals.--Under such regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, the Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medals struck under subsection (b) at a price sufficient to cover the cost of the bronze medals (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses) and the cost of the gold medals.
CONGRESSIONAL GOLD MEDALS FOR GOVERNMENT WORKERS WHO RESPONDED TO THE ATTACKS ON THE PENTAGON AND PERISHED.
Presentation Authorized.--In recognition of the bravery and self-sacrifice of officers, emergency workers, and other employees of the United States Government, who responded to the attacks on the Pentagon Washington, D.C. and perished in the tragic events of September 11, 2001 (including those who are missing and presumed dead) the Speaker of the House and the President pro tempore of the Senate shall make appropriate arrangements for the presentation, on behalf of the Congress, of a gold medal of appropriate design for each such officer, emergency worker, or employee to the next of kin or other personal representative of each such officer, emergency worker, or employee.
Design and Striking.--For the purpose of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike gold medals of a single design with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary.
Determination of Recipients.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall determine the number of medals to be presented under this section and the appropriate recipients of the medals after consulting with the Secretary of Defense and any other appropriate representative of Federal, State, and local officers and agencies.
The medals struck under this title are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
TITLE II--SPIRIT OF AMERICA COMMEMORATIVE COINS SEC.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) On September 11, 2001, the United States suffered the worst act of terrorism in its history.
The more than 6,000 people who lost their lives as a result of the terrorist attacks that occurred in New York City, at the Pentagon, and in Pennsylvania on September 11, 2001, will not be forgotten.
Hundreds of emergency personnel responded heroically to the crisis and lost their lives as a result.
People from everywhere in the United States responded to the crisis with an outpouring of support for the victims of the terrorist attacks and their families.
The civilized world stands with strength and fortitude in opposition to the cowardly terrorist attacks against the United States that occurred on September 11, 2001.
It is essential to remember not only the tragedy of the attacks, but also the strength and resolve demonstrated by the people of the United States in the aftermath of the attacks.
The minting of coins in commemoration of the Spirit of America will pay tribute to the countless heroes who risked their lives during the terrorist attacks and in their aftermath so that others may live and to a united people whose belief in freedom, justice, and democracy has never swayed.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the Spirit of America, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $50 gold coins.--Such number of 50 dollar coins as the Secretary determines under subsection (b), which shall-- (A) weigh 1 ounce; (B) have a diameter of 1.287 inches; and (C) contain 91.67 percent gold and 8.33 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--Such number of 1 dollar coins as the Secretary determines appropriate to meet demand, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar clad coins.--Such number of half dollar coins as the Secretary determines appropriate to meet demand, which shall-- (A) weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
Number of Gold Coins.-- (1) In general.--The number of gold coins minted and issued under this title shall equal the sum of 25,000 and the number determined under paragraph (2).
Determination of number.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General of the United States and the Governors of New York, Pennsylvania, and Virginia shall determine the number of innocent individuals confirmed or presumed to have been killed as a result of the terrorist attacks against the United States that occurred on September 11, 2001, and shall identify such individuals.
The Secretary, under subsection (a)(1), shall mint and issue a number of 50 dollar coins equal to the number of such individuals.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Sources of Bullion.--For the purpose of minting coins under this title, the Secretary may only use metals that are from natural deposits in the United States or any territory or possession of the United States.
Special Treatment Under Exigent Circumstances.-- (1) Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (A) The limitations contained in paragraphs (1) and (2)(A) of section 5112(m) of title 31, United States Code, and section 5134(f)(1)(B) of such title have well served, and continue to serve, their purpose of bringing greater stability to the markets for commemorative coins, maximizing demand and participation in such programs, and ensuring that such programs have a broad base of private support and are not used as the primary means of fundraising by organizations that are the recipients of surcharges.
The shocking circumstances of September 11, 2001, the broad base of public interest in showing the Spirit of America and participating in the raising of funds for the victims of the crimes committed on that date, and the importance of implementing this coin program as quickly as possible, notwithstanding the fact that 2 commemorative coin programs are already in effect for 2001 and 2002, justify exempting the coins produced under this title from such limitations.
Exemption.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 5112(m) of title 31, United States Code, and section 5134(f)(1)(B) of such title shall not apply to coins authorized under this title.
In General.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the tragic events that occurred at the Pentagon, in New York City, and in Pennsylvania, on September 11, 2001.
Designation and Inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title there shall be-- (1) a designation of the value of the coin; (2) an inscription of the date ``September 11, 2001'' (and such coin shall bear no other date); and (3) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts.
STRIKING AND ISSUANCE OF COINS.
Quality of Coins.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided under paragraph (2), coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated quality.
Gold coins.--50 dollar coins minted under section 202(a)(1) shall be issued only in proof quality.
Mint Facility.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided under paragraph (2), only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this title.
Clad coins.--Any number of facilities of the United States Mint may be used to strike the half dollar coins minted under section 202(a)(3).
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary-- (1) shall commence issuing coins minted under this title as soon as possible after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) shall not issue any coins after the end of the 1-year period beginning on the date such coins are first issued.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under section 202(a) (other than the 50 dollar gold coins referred to in subsection (d)) shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharges required by section 206(a) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under section 202(a) at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders received before the issuance of the coins minted under section 202(a).
The sale prices with respect to such prepaid orders shall be at a reasonable discount.
Gold Coins.--Notwithstanding section 204(c)(2), the Secretary shall issue a 50 dollar coin minted under section 202(a)(1) for presentation free of charge to the next of kin or personal representative of each individual identified under section 202(b).
The Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President Pro Tempore of the Senate shall make appropriate arrangements for the presentation, on behalf of the Congress, of such gold coins.
SURCHARGES ON SALE OF COINS.
Assessment.--Any sale by the Secretary of a coin minted under this title shall include a surcharge of an amount determined by the Secretary to be sufficient to cover the cost of the gold coins minted under section 202(a)(1) (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, and shipping) for presentment in accordance with section 205(d), which charge may not be less than-- (1) $100 per coin for the 50 dollar gold coins; (2) $10 per coin for the 1 dollar coin; and (3) $5 per coin for the half dollar coin.
Distribution of Excess Proceeds.--Any proceeds from the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this title in excess of the cost of producing all coins issued under this title (including coins issued for individuals identified pursuant to section 202(b)(2)) shall be-- (1) used to cover the costs incurred in the production of gold medals under title I that have not been recovered from the sale of duplicate bronze medals under such title; and (2) with respect to any amount remaining after the costs described in paragraph (1) are covered, transferred to any fund for victims of the tragedies of September 11, 2001, that the Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General jointly determine to be appropriate.
Passed the House of Representatives July 22, 2002.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.