CONSIDERATION OF MILITARY INSTALLATIONS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES FOR CLOSURE AND REALIGNMENT.
Expansion of Scope of Base Closure Law.--The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (Part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 2910 and 2911 as sections 2911 and 2912, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 2909 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONSIDERATION OF MILITARY INSTALLATIONS OUTSIDE THE UNITED STATES.
Recommendations for Termination and Reductions of Military Operations Outside the United States.--With respect to recommendations made in 1995 for the closure and realignment of military installations under this part, the Secretary and the Commission shall include recommendations for the termination and reduction of military operations carried out by the United States at military installations outside the United States.
Selection Criteria.--(1) Not later than December 31, 1993, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register and transmit to the congressional defense committees the criteria proposed to be used by the Department of Defense in making recommendations for terminating and reducing military operations carried out by the United States at military installations outside the United States.
The Secretary shall provide an opportunity for public comment on the proposed criteria for a period of at least 30 days and shall include notice of that opportunity in the publication required under the preceding sentence.
Not later than February 15, 1994, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register and transmit to the congressional defense committees the final criteria to be used in making recommendations for terminating and reducing military operations carried out by the United States at military installations outside the United States.
The criteria developed under this subsection, along with the force-structure plan referred to in section 2903(a), shall be the final criteria to be used in making recommendations for terminating and reducing military operations carried out by the United States at military installations outside the United States, unless the criteria are-- ``(A) disapproved by a joint resolution of Congress enacted on or before March 15, 1994; or ``(B) amended by the Secretary in the manner described in section 2903(b)(2)(B).
Recommendations of the Secretary.--The Secretary shall transmit recommendations to the Commission for the termination and reduction of military operations of the United States at specified military installations outside the United States.
The recommendations shall be included in the recommendations transmitted to the Commission with respect to the closure and realignment of military installations inside the United States under section 2903(c).
Review and Recommendations by Commission.--The Commission shall review the recommendations transmitted by the Secretary under subsection (c).
The Commission may make changes in the recommendations made by the Secretary only in the manner provided in subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) of section 2903(d)(2).
The Commission shall include, in its recommendations to the President under section 2903(d), its recommendations for the termination and reduction of military operations of the United States at specified military installations outside the United States.
Review and Transmittal by the President.--The recommendations transmitted by the President under section 2903(e) shall contain the recommendations of the Commission for the termination and reduction of military operations of the United States at specified military installations outside the United States.``.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Subsection (b) of section 2901 of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Purpose.--The purpose of this part is to provide a fair process that will result in the timely closure and realignment of military installations inside and outside the United States.''.
Section 2911 of such Act, as redesignated by subsection (a)(1), is amended-- (A) in paragraph (4), by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``With respect to military operations carried out by the United States outside the United States, such term includes the sites and facilities at which such operations are carried out without regard to whether the sites and facilities are owned by the United States.
''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) The terms `closure' and `realignment' include, with respect to military operations carried out by the United States outside the United States, the termination or reduction of such operations.