This Act may be cited as the ``Abandoned and Derelict Vessel Removal Act of 1997''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Abandon.--The term ``abandon'' means to moor, strand, wreck, sink, or leave a vessel unattended for longer than 45 days.
Navigable waters of the united states.--The term ``navigable waters of the United States'' means waters of the United States, including the territorial sea.
Removal; remove.--The term ``removal'' or ``remove'' means relocation, sale, scrapping, or other method of disposal.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
Vessel.--the term ``vessel'' includes recreational, commercial, and government-owned vessels but does not include vessels operated by the Coast Guard or the Navy.
Vessel removal contractor.--The term ``vessel removal contractor'' means a person that enters into a contract with the United States to remove an abandoned vessel under this Act.
ABANDONMENT OF VESSEL PROHIBITED.
An owner or operator of a vessel may not abandon it on the navigable waters of the United States.
A vessel is deemed not to be abandoned if-- (1) it is located at a federally or State-approved mooring area; (2) it is on private property with the permission of the owner of the property; or (3) the owner or operator notifies the Secretary that the vessel is not abandoned and the location of the vessel.
PENALTY FOR UNLAWFUL ABANDONMENT OF VESSEL.
Thirty days after the notification procedures under section 5(a)(1) are completed, the Secretary may assess a civil penalty of not more than $500 for each day of the violation against an owner or operator that violates section 3.
A vessel with respect to which a penalty is assessed under this Act is liable in rem for the penalty.
REMOVAL OF ABANDONED VESSELS.
Procedures.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Commandant of the Coast Guard, may remove a vessel that is abandoned if-- (A) an elected official of a local government has notified the Secretary of the vessel and requested that the Secretary remove the vessel; and (B) the Secretary has provided notice to the owner or operator-- (i) that if the vessel is not removed it will be removed at the owner or operator's expense; and (ii) of the penalty under section 4.
Form of notice.--The notice to be provided to an owner or operator under paragraph (1)(B) shall be-- (A) if the identity of the owner or operator can be determined, via certified mail; and (B) if the identity of the owner or operator cannot be determined, via an announcement in a notice to mariners and in an official journal of the county (or other equivalent political subdivision) in which the vessel is located.
Limitation on liability of united states.--The United States, and any officer or employee of the United States is not liable to an owner or operator for damages resulting from removal of an abandoned vessel under this Act.
Liability of Owner or Operator.--The owner or operator of an abandoned vessel is liable, and an abandoned vessel is liable in rem, for all expenses that the United States incurs in removing the abandoned vessel under this Act.
Contracting Out.-- (1) Solicitation of bids.--The Secretary may, after providing notice under subsection (a)(1), solicit by public advertisement sealed bids for the removal of an abandoned vessel.
Contract.--After solicitation under paragraph (1) the Secretary may award a contract.
The contract-- (A) may be subject to the condition that the vessel and all property on the vessel is the property of the vessel removal contractor; and (B) must require the vessel removal contractor to submit to the Secretary a plan for the removal.
Commencement date for removal.--Removal of an abandoned vessel may begin 30 days after the Secretary completes the procedures under subsection (a)(1).
LIABILITY OF VESSEL REMOVAL CONTRACTORS.
A vessel removal contractor and its subcontractor are not liable for damages that result from actions taken or omitted to be taken in the course of removing a vessel under this Act.
This section does not apply-- (1) with respect to personal injury or wrongful death; or (2) if the contractor or subcontractor is grossly negligent or engages in willful misconduct.
RELATIONSHIP TO STATE LAW.
This Act shall not be construed to preempt any provision of the laws of any State or local government that provides greater protection against the abandonment of vessels or that better ensures the removal of abandoned vessels.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years beginning after September 30, 1997.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.