This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on International Coordination of Financial Regulation Act''.
Findings.--The Congress hereby finds the following: (1) Innovation in financial services and products is outpacing the ability of regulatory bodies to monitor and control the stability of the international financial system.
The rapid growth and integration of international capital markets has resulted in a volume of financial transactions that exceeds the resources of any single country and any single regulatory body.
Although most countries have regulatory bodies that govern the operation of each such country's financial markets and participants, the globalization of the financial markets requires better efforts to coordinate international regulation and supervision.
Financial regulators in the United States pursue separate strategies for dealing with international financial issues, including derivative financial instruments, often with inadequate communication among themselves and their foreign counterparts.
Given the increased globalization of financial markets, it is imperative that regulators establish an effective system of crisis management to deal with any shock to international financial markets.
As market participants continue to globalize their operations, financial regulatory bodies must develop a coordinated approach to enforcement actions.
Large differences in the operations of the world's major clearing and settlement systems, in terms of both efficiency and risk, pose a threat to the stability of the international financial system.
Because financial assets directed through so-called ``off-shore tax havens'' are growing, such off-shore tax havens need to be identified and their role in the international financial system, the reasons for their growth, and the effect of their unrestricted growth on the international financial system need to be fully examined.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide for the United States to play a leadership role in-- (1) ensuring a stable and efficient international financial system; and (2) enhancing cooperation among financial regulatory bodies around the world.
COMMISSION ON INTERNATIONAL COORDINATION OF FINANCIAL REGULATION.
There is hereby established the Commission on International Coordination of Financial Regulation, an advisory committee under the Federal Advisory Committee Act, hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission''.
The duties of the Commission are as follows: (1) Identify the various regulatory bodies and mechanisms that are used to regulate and supervise international capital markets, including mechanisms that governments employ to manage international capital market instability.
Appraise the adequacy of the cooperation between the various regulatory entities and mechanisms referred to in paragraph (1).
Propose solutions for improving cooperation among the various regulatory bodies and mechanisms, including a proposal, if feasible, for establishing a single international body or mechanism with responsibility for coordinating international regulation and promoting the stability of the international financial system.
Identify the various enforcement methods which countries use to enforce laws and regulations relating to capital markets and the extent and adequacy of cooperation among regulators in taking enforcement actions.
Propose solutions for improving global enforcement of laws and regulations relating to capital markets and other aspects of the international financial system.
Analyze the major clearing and settlement systems and the differences among those systems in terms of volume, risk, and efficiency and evaluate the impact each system has on the stability of the other major payments and settlements systems.
Propose solutions for improving coordination among the major clearing and settlement systems, including programs to raise the quality of the weaker systems.
Identify all so-called ``off-shore tax havens'' and analyze their role in the international capital markets and the reasons for their growth.
Propose solutions for minimizing any adverse effect the growth of the ``tax havens'' may have on the international financial system, including, if warranted, a proposal for curbing the growth of such havens.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall consist of 15 members as follows: (1) The Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or the Chairman's designee.
The Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's designee.
The Chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission or the Chairman's designee.
6 members appointed by the President.
3 members appointed by the Speaker and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, acting jointly, not more than 2 of whom may be members of the same political party.
3 members appointed by the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate, acting jointly, not more than 2 of whom may be members of the same political party.
Qualifications of Appointed Members.--The members appointed pursuant to paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) of subsection (a) shall be appointed from among individuals who-- (1) are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of their education, training, and experience in international finance and business, accounting, currency transactions, the international payment system, trade matters, banking, or securities; and (2) have a broad understanding of the global economy.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Initial Appointments.--The initial members of the Commission shall be appointed before the end of the 30-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Vacancy.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Removal.--An appointed member of the Commission may be removed only for malfeasance in office.
Quorum.--5 members shall constitute a quorum.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate a chairperson of the Commission from among members appointed under paragraph (4), (5), or (6) of subsection (a).
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of the members.
Policy Actions.--No action establishing a policy or recommendation of the Commission may be adopted without the approval of at least 8 members.
Travel and Per Diem.--Members of the Commission shall be paid actual travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director.--The principal administrative officer of the Commission shall be a director who shall-- (1) be appointed by the Commission; (2) be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code; and (3) serve on a full-time basis.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--With the approval of the Commission, the director may appoint and fix the pay of such personnel as the director determines to be appropriate.
Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Temporary staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the director may appoint such employees as may be necessary to carry out the functions of the Commission for a period of not more than 1 year, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, except that the rates of pay for such temporary staff shall not exceed the maximum rate payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code at rates for individuals not to exceed the maximum rate payable under section 5376 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act-- (1) hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate; and (2) administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Obtaining Official Data.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Provision of information.--Upon the request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of any department or agency of the United States shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Deposit and disbursement.--Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
REPORT (a) Report Required.--The Commission shall submit a final report to the President and the Congress before the end of the 18-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Contents of Report.--The report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with the Commission's recommendations for such legislative and administrative actions as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting the report pursuant to section 8.
There is authorized to be appropriated for the fiscal years 1995 and 1996 not to exceed $2,000,000 to carry out the purposes of this Act.