This Act may be cited as the ``Russian Fissile Materials Disposition Loan Guarantee Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The proliferation of nuclear weapons represents a risk to the national security of the United States.
Countries seeking new nuclear weapons capabilities require both technical expertise and nuclear weapons materials.
The nuclear weapons complex of the former Soviet Union contains large amounts of such technical expertise and materials and could present risks for nuclear proliferation.
Several current programs address the potential for loss of such technical expertise and materials.
Progress on the Highly Enriched Uranium Agreement and on the Plutonium Disposition Agreement will enhance United States security against nuclear proliferation, but United States security would be further enhanced were additional progress achieved in securing and disposing of the nuclear weapons materials of the former Soviet Union.
In addition to the programs referred to in paragraphs (4) and (5), a program providing for the placement of nuclear weapons materials of the Russian Federation under permanent safeguards in exchange for the guarantee of loans for nonproliferation programs and activities of the Russian Federation could enhance the economy of the Russian Federation and achieve the interest of nations worldwide in providing for the security of nuclear weapons materials that are not currently under international safeguards.&lt;plus-minus&gt; SEC.
Authority To Guarantee Loan.--Subject to the provisions of this section, the Secretary of Energy may, with the approval of the President, guarantee loans made to the Government of the Russian Federation for purposes of nuclear nonproliferation programs and activities of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Limitations on Guarantees.--(1) The aggregate amount of loan principal covered by guarantees under this section at any one time may not exceed $1,000,000,000.
The guarantee of a loan under this section applies to principal and to interest on principal only up to 3 percent of principal.
Loans Eligible for Guarantee.--(1) A loan eligible for guarantee under this section is any loan made by a private lender to the Government of the Russian Federation the proceeds of which are to be utilized by the Government of the Russian Federation for one or both of the following purposes: (A) Support of nuclear nonproliferation programs and activities of the Government of the Russian Federation.
Development of the energy infrastructure of the Russian Federation, including peaceful uses of nuclear energy in a manner that complies with the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty.
A loan is not eligible for guarantee under this section if the proceeds of the loan are to be used for any purpose or activity under the Plutonium Disposition Agreement, including to cover the costs of the manufacture and use of mixed oxide (MOX) fuel in Russia under the Plutonium Disposition Agreement.
Loan Terms.--A loan guaranteed under this section shall have the following terms: (1) The loan principal shall be in increments of $20,000,000.
The term of the loan with respect to any principal increment of the loan shall be not less than 15 years.
Payments of principal and interest on the loan shall be based on an amortization schedule providing that-- (A) interest on a principal increment of the loan will commence on the date of the dispersal of the principal increment of the loan; (B) no payment of principal or interest on a principal increment of the loan will be required for at least 5 years after the date of the dispersal of the principal increment of the loan; (C) once payments of principal and interest commence pursuant to subparagraph (B), such payments will be made on a semi-annual basis; and (D) all interest and principal on each principal increment of the loan will be paid not later than the completion of the term of the loan with respect to such principal increment of the loan.
The proceeds of the loan shall be dispersed only to the Ministry of Atomic Energy of the Russian Federation.
The lender may, upon default of the Government of the Russian Federation on the loan, exercise the option described in subsection (e)(3).
Loan Security.--(1) As security for a loan guaranteed under this section, the Government of the Russian Federation shall, for each loan principal increment of $20,000,000, place 1.00 metric tons of weapons-usable plutonium and 1.00 metric tons of weapons-usable highly enriched uranium under International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) safeguards at a facility in Russia.
The placement of materials under such safeguards as security for a principal increment of a loan shall be completed before the dispersal of the principal increment of the loan.
As security for a loan guaranteed under this section, the Government of the Russian Federation shall certify to the Secretary that any materials placed under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards pursuant to paragraph (1) shall remain under such safeguards indefinitely, including after the loan is paid off by the Government of the Russian Federation.
(A) In the event of a default on a loan guaranteed under this section by the Government of the Russian Federation, the lender may, with the approval of the Secretary, provide for the disposition or utilization of materials placed under safeguards pursuant to paragraph (1) as security for the loan to repay all or part of the loan.
The disposition or utilization of materials under this paragraph shall be in accordance with applicable International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards regarding such materials, and such materials may not, during the course of such disposition or utilization, be removed from such safeguards.
Materials placed under International Atomic Energy Agency safeguards pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not be treated as part of the 34.00 metric tons of weapons-grade plutonium to be used by the Government of the Russian Federation largely as mixed oxide (MOX) fuel under the Plutonium Disposition Agreement.
Treatment of Guarantees Under Plutonium Disposition Agreement.--The guarantee of any loan under this section shall not be treated as a contribution to the Government of the Russian Federation under the Plutonium Disposition Agreement.
Prohibition on Collection of Fees.--The Secretary may not impose or collect any fee in connection with the guarantee of a loan under this section.
SUPPORT OF INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY MATERIALS SAFEGUARDS.
Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available to the Secretary of Energy each fiscal year for Materials Protection Control and Accounting, not more than $15,000,000 shall be available to the Secretary for purposes of covering the expenses of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) in implementing and maintaining safeguards under section 3(e) on materials providing security for loans guaranteed under section 3.
Cost of Loan Guarantees.--For the cost of the loans guaranteed under this Act as defined in section 502 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 661(a)), there is authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 2001 through 2004, such amounts as may be necessary.
Cost of Administration.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Energy for fiscal year 2001, $10,000,000 for purposes of activities under this Act, other than to cover costs under subsection (a) and to cover expenses under section 4.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorizations of appropriations in subsections (a) and (b) shall remain available until expended.
DEFINITIONS In this Act: (1) Highly enriched uranium agreement.--The term ``Highly Enriched Uranium Agreement'' means the Agreement Between the United States of America and the Government of the Russian Federation Concerning the Disposition of Highly Enriched Uranium Extracted from Nuclear Weapons, dated February 18, 1993.
Nuclear nonproliferation treaty.--The term ``Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty'' means the Treaty on the Nonproliferation of Nuclear Weapons, as opened for signature July 1, 1968.
Plutonium disposition agreement.--The term ``Plutonium Disposition Agreement'' means the Agreement Between the Government of the United States of America and the Government of the Russian Federation Concerning the Management and Disposition of Plutonium Designated As No Longer Required for Defense Purposes and Related Cooperation, signed by the United States on September 1, 2000.
The authority of the Secretary of Energy to guarantee loans under this Act shall terminate on December 31, 2003.
The termination of authority to guarantee loans under this section shall not affect the validity of any guarantee made under this Act before that date.