SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT TO 1986 CODE; COORDINATION WITH TAXPAYER RELIEF ACT OF 1997.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Affordable Education Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Coordination With Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997.--Any reference in this Act to any section of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 amended or added by the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997 shall be a reference to such section as so amended or added.
EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME OF EDUCATION DISTRIBUTIONS FROM QUALIFIED TUITION PROGRAMS; COVERAGE OF PRIVATE PROGRAMS.
Exclusion.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (B) of section 529(c)(3) (relating to distributions) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) Distributions for qualified higher education expenses.--If a distributee elects the application of this subparagraph for any taxable year-- ``(i) no amount shall be includible in gross income by reason of a distribution which consists of providing a benefit to the distributee which, if paid for by the distributee, would constitute payment of a qualified higher education expense, and ``(ii) the amount which (but for the election) would be includible in gross income by reason of any other distribution shall not be so includible in an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount which would be so includible as the amount of the qualified higher education expenses of the distributee bears to the amount of the distribution.''.
Additional tax on amounts not used for higher education expenses.--Section 529 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Additional Tax for Distributions Not Used for Educational Expenses.-- ``(1) In general.--The tax imposed by section 530(d)(4) shall apply to payments and distributions from qualified tuition programs in the same manner as such tax applies to education individual retirement accounts except that section 529(f) shall be applied by reference to qualified higher education expenses.
Excess contributions returned before due date of return.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the distribution to a contributor of any contribution paid during a taxable year to a qualified tuition program to the extent that such contribution exceeds the limitation in section 4973(e) if such distribution (and the net income with respect to such excess contribution) meet requirements comparable to the requirements of section 530(d)(4)(C).''
Coordination with education credits.--Section 25A(e)(2) is amended by inserting ``529(c)(3)(B) or'' before ``530(d)(2)''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to distributions after December 31, 1997, for education furnished in academic periods beginning after such date.
Eligible Educational Institutions Permitted To Maintain Qualified Tuition Programs.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 529(b) (defining qualified State tuition program) is amended by inserting ``or by one or more eligible educational institutions'' after ``maintained by a State or agency or instrumentality thereof''.
Limitation on contributions to qualified tuition programs not maintained by a state.--Subsection (b) of section 529 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Limitation on contributions to qualified tuition programs not maintained by a state.--In the case of a program not maintained by a State or agency or instrumentality thereof, such program shall not be treated as a qualified tuition program unless it limits the annual contribution to the program on behalf of a designated beneficiary to $2,000.''.
Tax on excess contributions.-- (A) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 4973 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (3), by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5), and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) a qualified tuition program (as defined in section 529) not maintained by a State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, or''.
Excess contributions defined.--Section 4973(e) is amended to read as follows: ``(e) Excess Contributions to Private Qualified Tuition Program and Education Individual Retirement Accounts.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of private education investment accounts maintained for the benefit of any 1 beneficiary, the term `excess contributions' means the amount by which the amount contributed for the taxable year to such accounts exceeds $2,000.
Private education investment account.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `private education investment account' means-- ``(A) a qualified tuition program (as defined in section 529) not maintained by a State or any agency or instrumentality thereof, and ``(B) an education individual retirement account (as defined in section 530).
Special rules.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the following contributions shall not be taken into account: ``(A) Any contribution which is distributed out of the education individual retirement account in a distribution to which section 530(d)(4)(C) applies.
Any contribution to a qualified tuition program (as so defined) described in section 530(b)(2)(B) from any such account.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Paragraph (2) of section 26(b) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (Q) as subparagraphs (F) through (R), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following new subparagraph: ``(E) section 529(f) (relating to additional tax on certain distributions from qualified tuition programs),''.
The text and headings of sections 529 and 530 are amended by striking ``qualified State tuition program'' each place it appears and inserting ``qualified tuition program''.
(i) The section heading of section 529 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
The item relating to section 529 in the table of sections for part VIII of subchapter F of chapter 1 is amended by striking ``State''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall take effect on January 1, 1998.
EXTENSION OF EXCLUSION FOR EMPLOYER-PROVIDED EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Section 127 (relating to educational assistance programs) is amended by striking subsection (d) and by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (d).
Repeal of Limitation on Graduate Education.--The last sentence of section 127(c)(1) is amended by striking ``, and such term also does not include any payment for, or the provision of any benefits with respect to, any graduate level course of a kind normally taken by an individual pursuing a program leading to a law, business, medical, or other advanced academic or professional degree''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Extension.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
Graduate education.--The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply with respect to expenses relating to courses beginning after December 31, 1996.
INCREASE IN CONTRIBUTION LIMIT TO EDUCATION INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS; APPLICATION TO ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY EDUCATION.
Increase in Maximum Annual Contributions.-- (1) In general.--Section 530(b)(1)(A)(iii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``$500'' and inserting ``$2,000''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 530(d)(4)(C) of such Code is amended by striking ``$500'' and inserting ``$2,000''.
Section 4973(e)(1)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``$500'' and inserting ``$2,000''.
Tax-Free Expenditures for Elementary and Secondary School Expenses.-- (1) In general.--Section 530(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Qualified education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified education expenses' means-- ``(i) qualified higher education expenses (as defined in section 529(e)(3)), and ``(ii) in the case of taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000, qualified elementary and secondary education expenses (as defined in paragraph (4)).
Such expenses shall be reduced as provided in section 25A(g)(2).
Qualified tuition programs.--Such term shall include amounts paid or incurred to purchase tuition credits or certificates, or to make contributions to an account, under a qualified tuition program (as defined in section 529(b)) for the benefit of the beneficiary of the account.''
Qualified elementary and secondary education expenses.--Section 530(b) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Qualified elementary and secondary education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified elementary and secondary education expenses' means tuition, fees, tutoring, special needs services, books, supplies, equipment, transportation, and supplementary expenses required for the enrollment or attendance of the designated beneficiary of the trust at a public, private, or sectarian school.
Special rule for homeschooling.--Such term shall include expenses described in subparagraph (A) required for education provided for homeschooling if the requirements of any applicable State or local law are met with respect to such education.
School.--The term `school' means any school which provides elementary education or secondary education (through grade 12), as determined under State law.''
Conforming amendments.--Subsections (b)(1) and (d)(2) of section 530 of such Code are each amended by striking ``higher'' each place it appears in the text and heading thereof.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.