This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Workforce Reduction and Realignment Commission Act''.
There is established an independent commission to be known as the ``Federal Workforce Reduction and Realignment Commission'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The purpose of the Commission is to develop and submit, to the President and the Congress, recommendations for reducing the number of Federal employees nationwide, in non-defense-related agencies, by 250,000.
Requirements.--The recommendations of the Commission-- (1) shall be based on data which shall be supplied by Federal agencies; and (2) shall be developed in a manner so as to improve Government efficiency.
Number and Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Nominations.--The President shall transmit to the Senate his nominations for appointment to the Commission no later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Consultation.--In selecting individuals for nomination for appointment to the Commission, the President shall consult with-- (1) the Speaker of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of 2 members; (2) the majority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of 1 member; (3) the minority leader of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of 1 member; and (4) the minority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of 1 member.
Chairman.--At the time the President nominates individuals for appointment to the Commission, the President shall designate 1 such individual to serve as Chairman of the Commission.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Meetings.-- (1) Frequency.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman or a majority of its members.
Open meetings.--Each meeting of the Commission shall be open to the public.
Pay.--Each member shall be paid at the rate equal to the daily equivalent of the rate payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of such personnel as it considers appropriate, except that not more than \1/3\ of the personnel employed by or detailed to the Commission may be on detail from a Federal agency.
Relating to the Commission.--The Commission shall transmit a report to the President and the Congress not later than 90 days after the Commission is appointed.
Such report shall contain the recommendations of the Commission (as described in section 3(a)), including recommendations relating to any legislation or other measures which the Commission considers necessary, with particular attention to the methodology used by the Commission.
Relating to the President.--The President shall transmit a written report to the Congress, not later than 10 days after receiving the report of the Commission, in which the President shall indicate-- (1) approval, in which case the Congress shall introduce these recommendations as a joint resolution; or (2) disapproval, in which case the President shall submit changes to the Commission within 10 days; the Commission shall then have an additional 10 days to consider these changes and submit their final report to Congress.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF COMMISSION REPORT.
Terms of the Resolution.--For the purposes of this Act, the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution which is introduced within a 10-day period beginning on the date on which the President or the Commission transmits the report to Congress and-- (1) which does not have a preamble; (2) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress approves the recommendations of the Federal Workforce Reduction and Realignment Commission as submitted by the President on __________________ '', the blank space being filled by the appropriate date; and (3) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint resolution approving the recommendations of the Federal Workforce Reduction and Realignment Commission.''.
Referral.--A resolution described in subsection (a) that is introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Post Office and Civil Service of the House of Representatives.
A resolution described in subsection (a) introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate.
Discharge.--If the committee to which a resolution described in subsection (a) is referred has not reported such resolution (or an identical resolution) by the end of the 20-day period beginning on the date on which the President transmits a report to the Congress under section 6(b), such committee shall be, at the end of such period, discharged from further consideration of such resolution, and such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.--(1) On or after the third day after the date on which the committee to which the resolution is referred has reported, or has been discharged, it shall be in order for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution (but only on the day after the calendar day on which such Member announces to the House concerned the Member's intention to do so).
All points of order against the resolution and against consideration of the resolution are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the respective House shall immediately proceed to consideration of the joint resolution without intervening motion, order, or other business, and the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 2 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
An amendment to the resolution is not in order.
A motion to further limit debate is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Immediately following conclusion of the debate on a resolution described in subsection (a) and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate is requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the resolution shall occur.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution described in subsection (a) shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by the Other House.--(1) If, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House described in subsection (a), that House receives from the other House a resolution described in subsection (a), then the following procedures shall apply: (A) The resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House receiving it except in the case of final passage as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii).
With respect to a resolution described in subsection (a) of the House receiving the resolution-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no resolution had been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the other House.
Upon disposition of the resolution received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider the resolution that originated in the receiving House.
Rules of the Senate and House.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution described in subsection (a), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
The Commission shall terminate as of the date on which it transmit its final report under section 6(b)(2).