This Act may be cited as the ``Contraception and Infertility Research Centers Act of 1993''.
GRANTS AND CONTRACTS FOR RESEARCH CENTERS WITH RESPECT TO CONTRACEPTION AND RESEARCH CENTERS WITH RESPECT TO INFERTILITY.
Subpart 7 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 3 of Public Law 101-613, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``research centers with respect to contraception and infertility ``Sec.
The Director of the Institute, after consultation with the advisory council for the Institute, shall make grants to, or enter into contracts with, public or nonprofit private entities for the development and operation of centers to conduct activities for the purpose of improving methods of contraception and centers to conduct activities for the purpose of improving methods of diagnosis and treatment of infertility.
In carrying out subsection (a), the Director of the Institute shall, subject to the extent of amounts made available in appropriations Acts, provide for the establishment of three centers with respect to contraception and for two centers with respect to infertility.
(1) Each center assisted under this section shall, in carrying out the purpose of the center involved-- ``(A) conduct clinical and other applied research, including-- ``(i) for centers with respect to contraception, clinical trials of new or improved drugs and devices for use by males and females (including barrier methods); and ``(ii) for centers with respect to infertility, clinical trials of new or improved drugs and devices for the diagnosis and treatment of infertility in males and females; ``(B) develop protocols for training physicians, scientists, nurses, and other health and allied health professionals; ``(C) conduct training programs for such individuals; ``(D) develop model continuing education programs for such professionals; and ``(E) disseminate information to such professionals and the public.
A center may use funds provided under subsection (a) to provide stipends for health and allied health professionals enrolled in programs described in subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1), and to provide fees to individuals serving as subjects in clinical trials conducted under such paragraph.
The Director of the Institute shall, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of information among the centers assisted under this section.
Each center assisted under subsection (a) shall use the facilities of a single institution, or be formed from a consortium of cooperating institutions, meeting such requirements as may be prescribed by the Director of the Institute.
Support of a center under subsection (a) may be for a period not exceeding 5 years.
Such period may be extended for one or more additional periods not exceeding 5 years if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and scientific peer review group established by the Director and if such group has recommended to the Director that such period should be extended.
For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $30,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 and 1996.''.
LOAN REPAYMENT PROGRAM FOR RESEARCH WITH RESPECT TO CONTRACEPTION AND INFERTILITY.
Part F of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 288 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 487A the following section: ``loan repayment program for research with respect to contraception and infertility ``Sec.
The Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, shall establish a program of entering into agreements with qualified health professionals (including graduate students) under which such health professionals agree to conduct research with respect to contraception, or with respect to infertility, in consideration of the Federal Government agreeing to repay, for each year of such service, not more than $20,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans of such health professionals.
The provisions of sections 338B, 338C, and 338E shall apply to the program established in subsection (a) to the same extent and in the same manner as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in subpart III of part D of title III.
Amounts appropriated for carrying out this section shall remain available until the expiration of the second fiscal year beginning after the fiscal year for which the amounts were appropriated.