This Act may be cited as the ``Promoting Partnerships to Transform Opportunities Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to provide resources to eligible institutions to prepare individuals with multiple barriers to employment, including underrepresented minorities, to enter the workforce by providing support services, job training, and education.
PROGRAMS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH MULTIPLE BARRIERS TO EMPLOYMENT.
Subtitle D of title I of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 is amended by inserting after section 166 (29 United States Code 2911) the following new section: ``SEC.
PROGRAMS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH MULTIPLE BARRIERS TO EMPLOYMENT.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to support employment and training activities for individuals with multiple barriers to employment in order-- ``(1) to develop more fully the academic, occupational, and literacy skills of such individuals; ``(2) to make such individuals more competitive in the workforce; and ``(3) to promote the economic and social development of the communities, including minority communities, of those individuals in accordance with the goals and values of the communities described in this paragraph.
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Eligible institution.--The term `eligible institution' means-- ``(A) a historically Black college or university; ``(B) a Hispanic-serving Institution; ``(C) a Tribal College or University; or ``(D) a Predominantly Black Institution.
Hispanic-serving institution.--The term `Hispanic- serving institution' has the meaning given the term in section 502 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1101a).
Historically black college or university.--The term `historically Black college or university' has the meaning given the term `part B institution' in section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1061).
Nonprofit organization.--The term `nonprofit organization' means a nonprofit organization that focuses on preparing individuals with multiple barriers to employment to enter the workforce by providing such individuals with support services, job training, and education.
Predominantly black institution.--The term `Predominantly Black Institution' has the meaning given the term in section 318 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1059e).
Tribal college or university.--The term `Tribal College or University' has the meaning given the term in section 316 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1059c).
Program Authorized.--The Secretary shall, on a competitive basis, make grants to, or enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with, eligible institutions to carry out the authorized activities described in subsection (d).
Such an eligible institution may carry out the activities directly, or through a partnership with a nonprofit organization.
Authorized Activities.--An eligible institution receiving a grant, contract, or agreement under subsection (c) shall use such funds to serve individuals with multiple barriers to employment by carrying out one or more of the following activities: ``(1) Education services, including postsecondary education, English as a second language courses, General Educational Development preparation, financial literacy workshops, access to information technology workshops and courses, Generational Diversity Awareness programs, and health and wellness programs.
Activities that increase access to workforce services, including on-the-job training, internships, skills training, job placement, financial literacy training, and personal development.
Additional support services, including health and nutrition services, housing assistance, transportation, child care, and clothing.
Program Plan.--In order to receive a grant or enter into a contract or cooperative agreement under subsection (c), an eligible institution shall submit to the Secretary a program plan that describes a strategy for meeting the needs of individuals with multiple barriers to employment in the area served by such organization.
Such plan shall-- ``(1) be consistent with the purpose of this section; ``(2) identify the population to be served; ``(3) identify the education and employment needs of the population to be served and the manner in which the activities to be provided will strengthen the ability of the individuals served to obtain or retain unsubsidized employment; ``(4) describe the activities to be provided and the manner in which such activities are to be integrated with other appropriate activities; and ``(5) describe, after the eligible institution consults with the Secretary, the performance measures to be used to assess the performance of the eligible institution, and any nonprofit organization that carries out authorized activities assisted under this section, in carrying out the activities.
Priority.--In making grants or entering into contracts or cooperative agreements under subsection (c), the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible institution that-- ``(1) proposes to carry out the authorized activities through a partnership described in subsection (c); or ``(2) demonstrates that the institution is unable to carry out the activities through such a partnership because the institution is not within a reasonable distance (as determined by the Secretary) of a nonprofit organization.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section for each of fiscal years 2015 through 2019.