SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Stimulus Tax Act of 1993''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
REPEAL OF LIMITATION ON PASSIVE ACTIVITY LOSSES AND CREDITS.
In General.--Section 469 (relating to passive activity losses and credits limited) is hereby repealed.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of part II of subchapter E of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 469.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
ACCELERATED DEPRECIATION SCHEDULE FOR REAL ESTATE.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 168(c) (relating to applicable recovery period) is amended by striking the items relating to residential rental property and nonresidential real property and inserting the following: ``Residential rental property................ 15 years Nonresidential real property................. 18 years''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 1993.
RESTORATION OF 10-PERCENT INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.--Section 46 (relating to amount of investment credit) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) the general investment credit.''
Amount of Credit.--Section 48 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) General Investment Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 46, the general investment credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to 10 percent of the qualified investment for such taxable year.
Qualified investment.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the qualified investment for any taxable year is the aggregate of-- ``(i) the applicable percentage of the basis of each new section 38 property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year, plus ``(ii) the applicable percentage of the cost of each used section 38 property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable percentage for any property shall be determined under paragraphs (2) and (7) of section 46(c) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
Certain rules made applicable.--The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 48 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this paragraph.
Section 38 property.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `section 38 property' means-- ``(A) tangible personal property (other than an air conditioning or heating unit), or ``(B) other tangible property (not including a building and its structural components) but only if such property-- ``(i) is used as an integral part of manufacturing, production, or extraction or of furnishing transportation, communications, electrical energy, gas, water, or sewage disposal services, or ``(ii) constitutes a research facility used in connection with any of the activities referred to in clause (i), or ``(iii) constitutes a facility used in connection with any of the activities referred to in clause (i) for the bulk storage of fungible commodities (including commodities in a liquid or gaseous state), or ``(C) elevators and escalators, but only if-- ``(i) the construction, reconstruction, or erection of the elevator or escalator is completed by the taxpayer, or ``(ii) the original use of such elevator or escalator commences with the taxpayer, or ``(D) single purpose agricultural or horticultural structures; or ``(E) a storage facility (not including a building and its structural components) used in connection with the distribution of petroleum or any primary product of petroleum.
Such term includes only property to which section 168 applies without regard to any useful life and any other property with respect to which depreciation (or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable and having a useful life (determined as of the time such property is placed in service) of 3 years or more.
Coordination with other credits.--This subsection shall not apply to any property to which the energy credit or rehabilitation credit would apply unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such credits to such property.
Certain progress expenditure rules made applicable.-- Rules similar to rules of subsection (c)(4) and (d) of section 46 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (C) of section 49(a)(1) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: ``(iv) the basis of any new section 38 property and the cost of any used section 38 property.''
Subparagraph (E) of section 50(a)(2) is amended by inserting ``or 48(c)(5)'' before the period at the end thereof.
Paragraph (5) of section 50(a) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Special rules for certain property.--In the case of any section 38 property which is 3-year property (within the meaning of section 168(e))-- ``(i) the percentage set forth in clause (ii) of the table contained in paragraph (1)(B) shall be 66 percent, ``(ii) the percentage set forth in clause (iii) of such table shall be 33 percent, and ``(iii) clauses (iv) and (v) of such table shall not apply.''
(A) The section heading for section 48 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 48 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to periods after the date of the enactment of this Act under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
50 PERCENT DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN CAPITAL GAINS.
Taxpayers Other Than Corporations.--Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 (relating to treatment of capital gains) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN CAPITAL GAINS.
General Rule.--If for any taxable year a taxpayer other than a corporation has a qualified net capital gain, there shall be allowed as a deduction from gross income an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified net capital gain.
Qualified Net Capital Gain.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified net capital gain' means the lesser of-- ``(A) the net capital gain for the taxable year, or ``(B) the net capital gain for the taxable year determined by taking into account only gain or loss from qualified assets.
Qualified assets.--The term `qualified asset' means any property with a holding period of at least 1 year at the time of disposition, other than-- ``(A) stock or securities for which there is a market on an established securities market or otherwise, and ``(B) property (other than stock or securities) of a kind regularly traded on an established market.
Estates and Trusts.--In the case of an estate or trust, the deduction under subsection (a) shall be computed by excluding the portion (if any) of the gains for the taxable year from sales or exchanges of capital assets which, under section 652 and 662 (relating to inclusions of amounts in gross income of beneficiaries of trusts), is includible by the income beneficiaries as gain derived from the sale or exchange of capital assets.''
Corporations.--Section 1201 (relating to alternative tax for corporations) is amended by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c) and by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) Deduction for Certain Capital Gains.-- ``(1) In general.--If for any taxable year a corporation has a qualified net capital gain, there shall be allowed as a deduction from gross income an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified net capital gain.
Qualified net capital gain.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified net capital gain' has the meaning given such term in section 1202(b).''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1)(A) Subsection (h) of section 1 is amended by inserting after ``net capital gain'' each place it appears the following: ``(other than qualified net capital gain (within the meaning of section 1202(b))''.
Subsection (a) of section 1201 is amended by inserting after ``net capital gain'' each place it appears the following: ``(other than qualified net capital gain (within the meaning of section 1202(b))''.
Subsection (a) of section 62 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(15) Qualified net capital gains.--The deduction allowed by section 1202.''
(A) The heading for section 1201 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
ALTERNATIVE TAX FOR CORPORATIONS; DEDUCTION FOR CERTAIN CAPITAL GAINS.''
The item relating to section 1201 in the table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Alternative tax for corporations; deduction for certain capital gains.''
The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Deduction for certain capital gains.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales and exchanges after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE IN DEDUCTIBLE HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS FOR SELF-EMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS.
Deduction Made Permanent.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (l) of section 162 (relating to special rules for health insurance costs of self-employed individuals) is amended by striking paragraph (6).
Conforming amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 110 of the Tax Extension Act of 1991 is amended by striking paragraph (2).
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1991.
Deduction Increased to 100 Percent.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 162(l) is amended by striking ``25 percent'' and inserting ``100 percent''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
RESTORATION OF INCOME AVERAGING.
In General.--Section 141 of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (and the amendments made by such section) are hereby repealed, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied and administered as if such section (and amendments) had not been enacted.
Effective Date.--The repeal made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
MODIFICATIONS IN SOCIAL SECURITY TAXES.
Removal of Ceiling on Wages Subject to Tax.-- (1) FICA taxes.-- (A) Section 3121(a) (defining wages) is amended by striking paragraph (1).
Section 3121 is amended by striking subsection (x) (relating to applicable contribution base).
SECA tax.-- (A) Section 1402(b) (defining self-employment income) is amended-- (i) in the 1st sentence, by striking paragraph (1), and (ii) by striking the 2d sentence.
Section 1402 is amended by striking subsection (k) (relating to applicable contribution base).
Reduction in Social Security Taxes.-- (1) Employee tax.--Subsection (a) of section 3101 (relating to rate of tax on employees) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance.--In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed on the income of every individual a tax equal to 4.55 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) received by the individual with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).''
Employer tax.--Subsection (a) of section 3111 (relating to rate of tax on employers) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance.--In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed on every employer an excise tax equal to 4.55 percent of the wages (as defined in section 3121(a)) paid by the employer with respect to employment (as defined in section 3121(b)).''
Self-employment tax.--Subsection (a) of section 1401 (relating to rate of tax on self-employment income) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance.--In addition to other taxes, there is hereby imposed for each taxable year, on the self-employment income of every individual, a tax equal to 6.82 percent of the amount of the self-employment income for the taxable year.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1)(A) Paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 3121(i) (relating to computation of wages in certain cases) are each amended by striking ``, subject to the provisions of subsection (a)(1) of this section,''.
Paragraph (4) of section 3121(i) is amended by striking ``, subject to the provisions of subsection (a)(1),''.
Section 3121(s) (relating to concurrent employment by 2 or more employers) is amended by striking ``3102, 3111, and 3121(a)(1)'' and inserting ``3102 and 3111''.
Section 3122 (relating to Federal service) is amended by striking the 3d sentence.
Subsections (a), (b), (c), and (d) of section 3125 (relating to returns in the case of governmental employees in the States, Guam, American Samoa, and the District of Columbia) are each amended by striking the last sentence.
(A) Clause (i) of section 3231(e)(2)(A) is amended by striking ``The'' and inserting ``In the case of the taxes imposed by sections 3201(b), 3211(a)(2), and 3221(b), the''.
Subparagraph (B) of section 3231(e)(2) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) Applicable base.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `applicable base' means for any calendar year the contribution and benefit base determined under section 230 of the Social Security Act for such calendar year; except that, for such purposes and for purposes of computing average monthly compensation under section 3(j) of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 (except with respect to annuity amounts determined under subsection (a) or (f)(3) of section 3 of such Act), clause (2) of the first sentence, and the second sentence, of section 230(c) of the Social Security Act shall be disregarded.''
Subparagraph (C) of section 3231(e)(2) (defining compensation for purposes of railroad retirement tax) is amended by inserting after ``employers)'' the following: ``, as such section was in effect immediately before its repeal by the Farm and Small Business Tax Equity Act of 1993,''.
The heading of paragraph (2) of section 3231(e) is amended by striking ``bases'' and inserting ``base to tier 2 taxes''.
Section 6413 is amended by striking subsection (c) (relating to special refunds for employees receiving wages from more than 1 employer).
Section 230(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 430(c)) is amended by striking ``and sections 1402, 3121, 3122, 3125, 6413, and 6654 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to remuneration paid after December 31, 1993, and with respect to earnings from self-employment attributable to taxable years beginning after such date.