Congress makes the following findings: (1) The premature exhaustion of telephone area codes causes economic dislocation for businesses and unnecessary inconvenience for households.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-104) was enacted with the objective of facilitating the development of competitive markets in telecommunications services.
The efficient allocation of telephone numbers would further the achievement of that objective.
The technology and procedures for the efficient allocation of telephone numbers are currently in place in many areas and are in the process of being implemented nationwide.
The combination of rapid growth in competition for telecommunication services and the inefficient allocation of numbering resources devoted to such services will result in the creation of scores of new telephone area codes, almost all of which will become wholly unnecessary once procedures for the efficient allocation of telephone numbers are in place.
The potential exhaustion of available area codes within the North American Numbering Plan (``NANP'') would require that 1 or more digits be added to all telephone numbers in the United States, creating massive disruptions and costs for all consumers, businesses, institutions, and governments comparable to the ``Year 2000'' computer problem, except that, unlike the ``Year 2000'' problem, the potential for area code exhaustion is entirely avoidable if efficient and effective number conservation measures are adopted and implemented without undue delay.
State regulatory authorities have the interest and capability to tailor mechanisms to conserve telephone numbers to the needs of the telecommunications markets.
Mechanisms for the conservation of telephone numbers can be implemented without impeding competition for telecommunications services.
EFFICIENT ALLOCATION OF TELEPHONE NUMBERS.
Plan.--Not later than December 31, 2000, the Federal Communications Commission shall develop and implement a plan for the efficient allocation of telephone numbers.
Elements.--The plan under subsection (a) shall-- (1) include mechanisms to ensure full portability of telephone numbers among services and service providers within individual rating areas, and establish rules applicable to service providers not subject to or otherwise not in compliance with such number portability requirements, including the segregation of services furnished by such service providers into separate area codes or service access codes, for the purpose of maximizing the effectiveness of number conservation measures requiring number portability within the area codes in which such measures are to be implemented; (2) provide for full sharing of unassigned telephone numbers among telecommunications carriers; (3) take into account any telecommunications technology widely available as of December 31, 2000, that requires a telephone number; and (4) consider and take steps to minimize the total societal costs and impacts of the plan for the efficient allocation of telephone numbers and any specific number relief or conservation measures that may arise therefrom.
Delegation of Numbering Jurisdiction.--Until the Commission has fully implemented the plan required by subsection (a), the Commission shall, upon the request of a State commission, delegate to the State commission the jurisdiction of the Commission over telecommunications numbering with respect to the State under section 251(e)(1) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 251(e)(1)) to the extent that such delegation will permit the State commission to implement measures to conserve telephone numbers, including measures as follows: (1) To establish minimum use and so-called ``fill'' rate requirements for central office codes.
To conduct audits of the use of telephone numbers and central office codes.
To require telecommunications carriers to return unused or underused central office codes and to return central office codes that have been obtained in a manner contrary to Federal or State numbering guidelines or protocols.
To establish individual number pooling, mandatory 1000- block pooling, and interim unassigned number porting.
To ration central office codes.
To develop and establish dialing protocols applicable for calls placed within the same area code or local calling area (or both) of the calling party that will consider, in addition to the potential effect upon competition, matters of public convenience and safety and the public interest generally.
To develop and implement, where the State commission finds it to be in the public interest and supportive of number conservation measures that it may adopt, area code relief measures involving the use of overlay area codes applicable to telecommunications service providers not subject to or otherwise not in compliance with local number portability, including a requirement that existing telephone numbers assigned to or in use (or both) by such service providers be transferred to the overlay area code, and including a requirement that calls placed within a calling party's home area code continue to be dialable on a 7-digit basis.