This Act may be cited as the ``Same Number Act of 2007''.
VOICE SERVICE NUMBER PORTABILITY.
In General.--Title VII of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 601 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 714 the following: ``SEC.
In General.--A provider of voice services has the duty to provide, to the extent technically feasible, number portability in accordance with requirements prescribed by the Commission.
Standards.-- ``(1) In general.--Within 270 days after the date of enactment of the Same Number Act of 2007, to facilitate consumer choice among voice service providers the Commission shall establish number portability performance standards for voice service providers that, at a minimum-- ``(A) identify classes of ports; ``(B) where appropriate, establish expeditious time frames for each class of port, which may include timeframes for different stages of the porting; ``(C) establish requirements governing the exchange of data between voice service providers in connection with porting a number, including any limits on customer validation fields or other data fields that may be required by voice service providers; and ``(D) encourage the reasonable automation of the porting process.
Flexibility.--In adopting performance standards under paragraph (1), the Commission may establish more flexible standards for different classes of providers within a type of voice service provider if the Commission determines that the uniform application of a single standard or time frame for compliance would result in unreasonable compliance costs for a class of providers.
Public access to timeframes.--The Commission shall make available to the public on its Internet website any standard timeframes established by the Commission under paragraph (1).
Porting Reporting.-- ``(1) Providers.--Beginning 1 year after the date on which the Commission issues a final rule under subsection (b) establishing number portability performance standards for voice service providers, a voice service provider shall submit a report each year to the Commission on its number portability activity during the preceding 12 months, including a statement of the number of ports it failed to complete within the time required by the standards, and an explanation of the reason for such failures.
Commission.--Beginning 1 year after the date on which the Commission issues the final rule under subsection (b), the Commission shall submit a report each year to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce on the effectiveness and efficiency of the number portability performance standards for voice service providers established under this section.
Sunset.--The requirements of this subsection shall cease to apply 60 months after the date on which the Commission issues such final rule.
Numbering Administration.-- ``(1) Commission authority and jurisdiction.--The Commission shall designate 1 or more impartial entities to administer telecommunications and voice service numbering and to ensure that numbers are available on an equitable basis.
The Commission has exclusive jurisdiction of those portions of the North American Numbering Plan that pertain to the United States.
Nothing in this subsection precludes the Commission from delegating to State Commission or other entities all or a portion of such jurisdiction.
Costs.--The costs of establishing numbering administration arrangements and number portability shall be borne by all voice service providers on a competitively neutral basis, as determined by the Commission.
Universal emergency telephone number.--The Commission and any agency or entity to which the Commission has delegated authority under section 715(e) shall designate 9-1-1 as the universal emergency telephone number within the United States for reporting an emergency to appropriate authorities and requesting assistance.
The designation shall apply to both wireline and wireless telephone service.
In making the designation, the Commission (and any such agency or entity) shall provide appropriate transition periods for areas in which 9-1-1 is not in use as an emergency telephone number on the date of enactment of the Wireless Communications and Public Safety Act of 1999.
Voice Service Defined.--In this section, the term `voice service' means-- ``(1) a telecommunications service; or ``(2) any service that is not a telecommunications service, but that otherwise is an IP-enabled voice service as defined in section 9.3 of the Commission's regulations (47 Code of Federal Regulations 9.3), as those regulations may be amended by the Commission from time to time.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 251 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 251) is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b)(2) and redesignating paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) of subsection (b) as paragraphs (2), (3), and (4), respectively; and (2) by striking subsection (e) and redesignating subsections (f), (g), (h), and (i) as subsections (e), (f), (g), and (h), respectively.