This Act may be cited as the ``National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act of 1997''.
PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC LIGHT STATIONS.
Title III of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470w-470w-6) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--In order to provide a national historic light station program, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) collect and disseminate information concerning historic light stations, including historic lighthouses and associated structures; ``(2) foster educational programs relating to the history, practice, and contribution to society of historic light stations; ``(3) sponsor or conduct research and study into the history of light stations; ``(4) maintain a listing of historic light stations; and ``(5) assess the effectiveness of the program established by this section regarding the conveyance of historic light stations.
Conveyance of Historic Light Stations.-- ``(1) Within 1 year after the date of enactment of the National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act of 1997, the Secretary and the Administrator of General Services (in this section referred to as the Administrator) shall establish a process for identifying, and selecting, an eligible entity to which a historic light station could be conveyed for education, park, recreation, cultural, and historic preservation purposes.
The Secretary shall review all applicants for the conveyance of a historic light station, when the historic light station has been identified as excess to the needs of the agency with administrative jurisdiction over the historic light station, and forward to the Administrator a single approved application for the conveyance of the historic light station.
When selecting an eligible entity, the Secretary may consult with the State Historic Preservation Officer of the State in which the historic light station is located.
A priority of consideration shall be afforded public entities that submit applications in which the public entity enters into a partnership with a nonprofit organization whose primary mission is historic light station preservation.
The Administrator shall convey, by quit claim deed, without consideration, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the historic light station, together with any related real property, subject to the conditions set forth in subsection (c) upon the Secretary's selection of an eligible entity.
The conveyance of a historic light station under this section shall not be subject to the provisions of Public Law 100-77 (42 United States Code 11301 et sequentes).
Terms of Conveyance.-- ``(1) The conveyance of a historic light station shall be made subject to any conditions as the Administrator considers necessary to ensure that-- ``(A) the lights, antennas, sound signal, electronic navigation equipment, and associated light station equipment located on the property conveyed, which are active aids to navigation, shall continue to be operated and maintained by the United States for as long as needed for this purpose; ``(B) the eligible entity to which the historic light station is conveyed under this section shall not interfere or allow interference in any manner with aids to navigation without the express written permission of the head of the agency responsible for maintaining the aids to navigation; ``(C) there is reserved to the United States the right to relocate, replace, or add any aid to navigation or make any changes to the property conveyed under this section as may be necessary for navigation purposes; ``(D) the eligible entity to which the historic light station is conveyed under this section shall maintain the property in accordance with this Act, the Secretary's Historic Preservation Standards, and other applicable laws; and ``(E) the United States shall have the right, at any time, to enter property conveyed under this section without notice for purposes of maintaining and inspecting aids to navigation and ensuring compliance with paragraph (C), to the extent that it is not possible to provide advance notice.
The Secretary, the Administrator, and any eligible entity to which a historic light station is conveyed under this section, shall not be required to maintain any active aids to navigation associated with a historic light station.
In addition to any term or condition established pursuant to this subsection, the conveyance of a historic light station shall include a condition that the property in its existing condition, at the option of the Administrator, revert to the United States if-- ``(A) the property or any part of the property ceases to be available for education, park, recreation, cultural, and historic preservation purposes for the general public at reasonable times and under reasonable conditions which shall be set forth in the eligible entity's application; ``(B) the property or any part of the property ceases to be maintained in a manner that ensures its present or future use as an aid to navigation or compliance with this Act, the Secretary's Historic Preservation Standards, and other applicable laws; or ``(C) at least 30 days before the reversion, the Administrator provides written notice to the owner that the property is needed for national security purposes.
Description of Property.--The legal description of any historic light station, and any real property and improvements associated therewith, conveyed under this section shall be determined by the Administrator.
The Administrator may retain all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to any historical artifact, including any lens or lantern, that is associated with the historical light station whether located at the light station or elsewhere.
Responsibilities of Conveyees.--Each eligible entity to which a historic light station is conveyed under this section shall use and maintain the light station in accordance with this section, and have such terms and conditions recorded with the deed of title to the light station and any real property conveyed therewith.
Definitions.-- For purposes of this section: ``(1) Historic light station.--The term `historic light station' includes the light tower, lighthouse, keepers dwelling, garages, storage sheds, support structures, piers, walkways, and underlying land; provided that the light tower or lighthouse shall be-- ``(A) at least 50 years old; ``(B) evaluated for inclusion in the National Register of Historic Places; and ``(C) included on the Secretary's listing of historic light stations.
Eligible entity.--The term `eligible entity' means any department or agency of the Federal Government, any department or agency of the State in which the historic light station is located, the local government of the community in which the historic light station is located, nonprofit corporation, educational agency, or community development organization that-- ``(A) has agreed to comply with the conditions set forth in subsection (c) and to have those conditions recorded in the conveyance documents to the light station and any real property and improvements that may be conveyed therewith; ``(B) is financially able to maintain the light station (and any real property and improvements conveyed therewith) in accordance with the conditions set forth in subsection (c); and ``(C) can indemnify the Federal Government to cover any loss in connection with the light station and any real property and improvements that may be conveyed therewith, or any expenses incurred due to reversion.''.
SALE OF SURPLUS LIGHT STATIONS.
Title III of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470w-470w-6) is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
HISTORIC LIGHT STATION SALES.
``In the event no applicants are approved for the conveyance of a historic light station pursuant to section 308, the historic light station shall be offered for sale.
Terms of such sales shall be developed by the Administrator of General Services.
Conveyance documents shall include all necessary covenants to protect the historical integrity of the site.
Net sale proceeds shall be transferred to the National Maritime Heritage Grant Program, established by the National Maritime Heritage Act of 1994 (Public Law 103-451) within the Department of the Interior.''.
TRANSFER OF HISTORIC LIGHT STATIONS TO FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Title III of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470- 470x) is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
TRANSFER OF HISTORIC LIGHT STATIONS TO FEDERAL AGENCIES.
``After the date of enactment of the National Historic Lighthouse Preservation Act of 1997, any department or agency of the Federal Government to which a historic light station is conveyed shall maintain the historic light station in accordance with this Act, the Secretary's Historic Preservation Standards, and other applicable laws.