This Act may be cited as the ``Transform America Transaction Fee of 2004''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) An effective stimulus plan meets the criteria of job creation, fiscal responsibility, fairness, targeting of unmet needs, tax reform and revenue sharing.
Economic viability is inexorably linked to the rate of economic growth.
The current tax structure creates economic distortions that limit growth and job creation.
The cost of compliance to taxpayers is five billion hours and approximately $200 billion.
The tax code produces inefficiency in revenue raising that forces the nation to struggle unnecessarily under the burden of unequal and inadequate systems of public education and health care, a crumbling physical and social services infrastructure, and a crushing national debt.
Restructuring the tax code would promote economic prosperity.
Replacing existing Federal taxes with a fee on transactions eliminates systemic inefficiency that plagues the current tax code.
Implementing a transaction fee would allow businesses to undertake projects that were not profitable in the past and workers would be more willing to supply labor than before.
Responsible tax reform is necessary for all to enjoy financial security, economic prosperity, educational opportunities, and affordable health care.
Therefore, it is necessary for the Department of the Treasury to conduct a transaction fee and implementation feasibility study to achieve these stated goals.
STUDY ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A TRANSACTION FEE.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall conduct an in- depth study on the implementation of a transaction tax in the United States.
In particular, such study shall include a detailed feasibility and impact analysis of the proposal outlined in subsection (b) (as well as an implementation/action plan) to replace all existing Federal taxes with a per transaction fee based on the value of the transaction.
Transaction Tax Proposal.-- (1) In general.--The fee under the proposal would apply to all cash and non-cash transactions (including checks, credit cards, transfers of stocks, bonds, and other financial instruments).
Exclusions.--The fee would not apply to-- (A) cash transactions of less than $500, and (B) salaries and wages by employers to employees.
Cash withdrawals from financial institutions.--The fee under the proposal would apply to cash withdrawals from financial institutions and be set at a rate that is either double or higher than the standard transaction fee.
Fee rate.-- (A) In general.--The fee rate is set at a level sufficient to generate revenues equal to revenues under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Other potential uses of fee.--The fee rate could be structured to cover 1 or more of the following: (i) A national debt reduction plan requiring elimination of the current national debt of $6.846 trillion over a period of 10 years, with equal annual payments.
A Federal revenue sharing program providing funding to States to support 50% of the K-16 education costs of each State which agrees to adopt an equitable public school finance system.
A Federal program providing health care insurance coverage (for the current estimated 43 million uninsured Americans) which is comparable to the Federal employee benefit program or Medicare.
A Federal revenue sharing program supporting community and economic development investments in high poverty rural and urban areas at a level equal to 10% of current Federal tax revenues.
Progressivity.--The base standard transaction fee shall not be greater than 1% for all noncash transactions under $500.
If more revenues are needed to meet the requirements of paragraph (4), the Secretary of the Treasury would calculate the minimum level of progressivity required to cover these costs.
This progressivity factor may include-- (A) a higher transaction fee for all transactions above $500, and (B) a progressive schedule of rates to tiered ranges of transactions above $500.
General provisions.-- (A) Liability for fee.--Persons become liable for the fee at the moment the person exercises control over a piece of property or service, regardless of the payment method.
Collection.--The fees will be collected by the seller or financial institution servicing the transaction.
Report of Study.-- (1) In general.--The results of the study shall be submitted to the Congress by the Secretary of the Treasury in a comprehensive analytical report, detailing-- (A) the methodology employed in the calculation of the fee rate, (B) the factors considered in assessing feasibility of the proposed revenue generating system and the weight applied to each, and (C) the portion of the transaction fee attributable to each of the programs identified in paragraph (3)(B) and the methodology used to calculate each.
Other requirements.--The study shall (in the following order)-- (A) compute the fee needed to meet current revenue generation, (B) compute the fee needed to meet revenue neutrality and generate additional revenue to support the program described in paragraph (3)(B)(i) (relating to national debt reduction plan), (C) compute the fee needed to meet revenue neutrality and generate additional revenue to support all the programs described in paragraph (3)(B), and (D) determine the utility of pegging changes in the transaction fee schedule of rates to the rate of inflation.
Comparative analysis.--The study shall include a comparative analysis of the existing revenue-raising system versus the proposed fee-based system on economic behavior.
The study shall include an analysis of effect of the 2 systems on-- (A) job creation, (B) economic growth, (C) consumption, (D) investments, and (E) savings levels.
Types of transactions.--The study shall include a broad-based examination of all types and categories of transactions, including information on frequency and value of transactions in each category.
Impact of exemptions.--The study shall examine the impact of the transaction fee exemption for all cash transactions under $500.
Program operations.--The study shall provide instructions on program operations, including-- (A) transaction fee collection, (B) transaction fee implementation, and (C) transaction fee compliance, enforcement, and administrative costs.
Fee as tool of fiscal policy.--The study shall assess the transaction fee as a tool of Federal fiscal policy, including an impact analysis on the elimination or retention of existing tax expenditures, incentives, penalties, and credits.
The study should also research and comment on options for rebating citizens currently not subject to Federal income taxes and/or other current aspects of the Federal tax code (i.e.
the earned income credit, the alternative minimum tax, and the child tax credit).
Impact of fee by income levels.--The study shall include an assessment of the impact of the transaction fee by quartile income levels.
Implementation plan.--The study shall include a detailed action plan on how best to implement a transaction tax in the United States and shall include-- (A) information on timeline, agency reform, potential pertinent regulatory issues, and type of congressional action needed, and (B) an examination of the feasibility of modifying the overall mission and jurisdiction of the Internal Revenue Service from one focused on tax law application to one focused on uncovering and eliminating waste, fraud, and abuse throughout the Federal Government.
Due Date.--The report of the study shall be submitted to the Congress not later than 1 year after enactment of this Act.