This Act may be cited as the ``Clone Pager Authorization Act of 1999''.
In General.--Section 2511(2)(h) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking clause (i) and inserting the following: ``(i) to use a pen register, a trap and trace device, or a clone pager, as those terms are defined in chapter 206 (relating to pen registers, trap and trace devices, and clone pagers) of this title; or''; (b) Exception.--Section 3121 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a) In General.--Except as provided in this section, no person may install or use a pen register, trap and trace device, or clone pager without first obtaining a court order under section 3123 or section 3129 of this title, or under the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act of 1978 (50 United States Code 1801 et sequentes).
''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``a pen register or a trap and trace device'' and inserting ``a pen register, trap and trace device, or clone pager''; and (3) by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``Sec.
General prohibition on pen register, trap and trace device, and clone pager use; exception''.
Assistance.--Section 3124 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (c) through (f) as subsections (d) through (g), respectively; (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) Clone Pager.--Upon the request of an attorney for the Government or an officer of a law enforcement agency authorized to use a clone pager under this chapter, a provider of electronic communication service shall furnish to such investigative or law enforcement officer all information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to accomplish the use of the clone pager unobtrusively and with a minimum of interference with the services that the person so ordered by the court provides to the subscriber, if such assistance is directed by a court order, as provided in section 3129(b)(2) of this title.
''; and (3) by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Assistance in installation and use of a pen register, trap and trace device, or clone pager''.
Emergency Installations.--Section 3125 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``pen register or a trap and trace device'' and ``pen register or trap and trace device'' each place those terms appear, and inserting ``pen register, trap and trace device, or clone pager''; (2) in subsection (a), by striking ``an order approving the installation or use is issued in accordance with section 3123 of this title'' and inserting ``an application is made for an order approving the installation or use in accordance with section 3122 or section 3128 of this title''; (3) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following: ``In the event that such application for the use of a clone pager is denied, or in any other case in which the use of the clone pager is terminated without an order having been issued, an inventory shall be served as provided for in section 3129(e).
''; and (4) by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Emergency pen register, trap and trace device, and clone pager installation and use''.
Reports.--Section 3126 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``pen register orders and orders for trap and trace devices'' and inserting ``orders for pen registers, trap and trace devices, and clone pagers''; and (2) by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Reports concerning pen registers, trap and trace devices, and clone pagers''.
Definitions.--Section 3127 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``or'' at the end; and (B) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following: ``(B) with respect to an application for the use of a pen register or trap and trace device, a court of general criminal jurisdiction of a State authorized by the law of that State to enter orders authorizing the use of a pen register or a trap and trace device; or ``(C) with respect to an application for the use of a clone pager, a court of general criminal jurisdiction of a State authorized by the law of that State to issue orders authorizing the use of a clone pager;''; (2) in paragraph (5), by striking ``and'' at the end; (3) in paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) the term `clone pager' means a numeric display device that receives communications intended for another numeric display paging device.''.
Applications.--Chapter 206 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Application for an order for use of a clone pager ``(a) Application.-- ``(1) Federal representatives.--Any attorney for the Government may apply to a court of competent jurisdiction for an order or an extension of an order under section 3129 of this title authorizing the use of a clone pager.
State representatives.--A State investigative or law enforcement officer may, if authorized by a State statute, apply to a court of competent jurisdiction of such State for an order or an extension of an order under section 3129 of this title authorizing the use of a clone pager.
Contents of Application.--An application under subsection (a) of this section shall include-- ``(1) the identity of the attorney for the Government or the State law enforcement or investigative officer making the application and the identity of the law enforcement agency conducting the investigation; ``(2) the identity, if known, of the individual or individuals using the numeric display paging device to be cloned; ``(3) a description of the numeric display paging device to be cloned; ``(4) a description of the offense to which the information likely to be obtained by the clone pager relates; ``(5) the identity, if known, of the person who is subject of the criminal investigation; and ``(6) an affidavit or affidavits, sworn to before the court of competent jurisdiction, establishing probable cause to believe that information relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation being conducted by that agency will be obtained through use of the clone pager.
Issuance of an order for use of a clone pager ``(a) In General.--Upon an application made under section 3128 of this title, the court shall enter an ex parte order authorizing the use of a clone pager within the jurisdiction of the court if the court finds that the application has established probable cause to believe that information relevant to an ongoing criminal investigation being conducted by that agency will be obtained through use of the clone pager.
Contents of an Order.--An order issued under this section-- ``(1) shall specify-- ``(A) the identity, if known, of the individual or individuals using the numeric display paging device to be cloned; ``(B) the numeric display paging device to be cloned; ``(C) the identity, if known, of the subscriber to the pager service; and ``(D) the offense to which the information likely to be obtained by the clone pager relates; and ``(2) shall direct, upon the request of the applicant, the furnishing of information, facilities, and technical assistance necessary to use the clone pager under section 3124 of this title.
Time period and extensions.-- ``(1) In general.--An order issued under this section shall authorize the use of a clone pager for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Such 30-day period shall begin on the earlier of the day on which the investigative or law enforcement officer first begins use of the clone pager under the order or the tenth day after the order is entered.
Extensions.--Extensions of an order issued under this section may be granted, but only upon an application for an order under section 3128 of this title and upon the judicial finding required by subsection (a).
An extension under this paragraph shall be for a period not to exceed 30 days.
Report.--Within a reasonable time after the termination of the period of a clone pager order or any extensions thereof under this subsection, the applicant shall report to the issuing court the number of numeric pager messages acquired through the use of the clone pager during such period.
Nondisclosure of Existence of Clone Pager.--An order authorizing the use of a clone pager shall direct that-- ``(1) the order shall be sealed until otherwise ordered by the court; and ``(2) the person who has been ordered by the court to provide assistance to the applicant may not disclose the existence of the clone pager or the existence of the investigation to the listed subscriber, or to any other person, until otherwise ordered by the court.
Notification.--Within a reasonable time, not later than 90 days after the date of termination of the period of a clone pager order or any extensions thereof, the issuing judge shall cause to be served, on the individual or individuals using the numeric display paging device that was cloned, an inventory including notice of-- ``(1) the fact of the entry of the order or the application; ``(2) the date of the entry and the period of clone pager use authorized, or the denial of the application; and ``(3) whether or not information was obtained through the use of the clone pager.
Upon an ex-parte showing of good cause, a court of competent jurisdiction may in its discretion postpone the serving of the notice required by this section.''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections for chapter 206 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking the item relating to section 3121 and inserting the following: ``3121.
General prohibition on pen register, trap and trace device, and clone pager use; exception.
''; (2) by striking the items relating to sections 3124, 3125, and 3126 and inserting the following: ``3124.
Assistance in installation and use of a pen register, trap and trace device, or clone pager.
Emergency pen register, trap and trace device, and clone pager installation and use.
Reports concerning pen registers, trap and trace devices, and clone pagers.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``3128.
Application for an order for use of a clone pager.
Issuance of an order for use of a clone pager.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 605(a) of title 47, United States Code, is amended by striking ``chapter 119'' and inserting ``chapters 119 and 206''.