This Act may be cited as the ``Ensuring Quality Education for Veterans Act''.
REVISION OF 90-10 RULE.
Revision of 90-10 Rule.--Section 487 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1094) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(24), by inserting after ``other than'' the following: ``veterans' education benefits (as defined in subsection (d)(5)) or''; (2) in subsection (d)-- (A) in paragraph (2)(A), by inserting at the end the following: ``The Secretary of Education shall notify the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs when, by reason of failing to meet a requirement of subsection (a)(24), a proprietary institution of higher education becomes ineligible to participate in the programs authorized by this title, and when the institution regains such eligibility.
''; and (B) by inserting at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Veterans' education benefits defined.--For the purpose of this subsection, the term `veterans' education benefits' includes the veterans' education benefits listed in subparagraphs (A) through (L) of section 480(c)(2) and any other educational assistance benefits provided by the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to an individual.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The heading for subsection (d) of section 487 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1094(d)) is amended by inserting after ``Non-Title IV'' the following: ``and Non- Veterans' Education Benefits''.
INELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN PROPRIETARY INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION TO PARTICIPATE IN DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE OR DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS PROGRAMS OF EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.
Department of Defense.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 101 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 2008 the following new section: ``Sec.
Ineligibility of certain proprietary institutions of higher education to participate in Department of Defense programs of educational assistance ``Upon notice from the Secretary of Education under section 487(d)(2)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1094(d)(2)(A)) that a proprietary institution of higher education is ineligible to participate in the programs authorized by title IV of such Act (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes), the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that no educational assistance provided by the Secretary under this title or any other provision of law is available or used for education at the institution for the period of institutional fiscal years during which the institution remains ineligible to participate in the programs authorized by title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes).''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 101 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2008 the following new item: ``2008a.
Ineligibility of certain proprietary institutions of higher education to participate in Department of Defense programs of educational assistance.''.
Department of Veterans Affairs.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter II of chapter 36 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 3681 the following new section: ``Sec.
Ineligibility of certain proprietary institutions of higher education to participate in Department of Veterans Affairs programs of educational assistance ``(a) In General.--Upon notice from the Secretary of Education under section 487(d)(2)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1094(d)(2)(A)) that a proprietary institution of higher education is ineligible to participate in the programs authorized by title IV of such Act (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that no educational assistance provided by the Secretary under this title or any other provision of law is available or used for education at the institution for the period of institutional fiscal years during which the institution remains ineligible to participate in the programs authorized by title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes).''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 36 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3681 the following new item: ``3681A.
Ineligibility of certain proprietary institutions of higher education to participate in Department of Veterans Affairs programs of educational assistance.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall be effective July 1, 2016.