This Act may be cited as the ``American Samoa Study Commission Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the islands of Tutuila and Manua, and certain other islands that compose American Samoa, were ceded by the chiefs of the islands to the United States by 2 treaties ratified on April 10, 1900, and July 16, 1904; (2) American Samoa's status as an unorganized and unincorporated territory of the United States, and American Samoa's political relationship to the United States, are not clearly defined in any single document; (3) there is a need for a comprehensive study and review of the historical and legal bases of American Samoa's status and political relationship with the United States, including-- (A) a determination of American Samoa's present political relationship with the United States compared to other relationships such as commonwealth, free association, and covenant; and (B) an examination of whether the treaties of cession created trust obligations to American Samoa on the part of the United States; and (4) the economic and social needs of American Samoa are substantially affected by the nature of American Samoa's political status and relationship with the United States.
The need for a comprehensive study also of Swains Island.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``American Samoa Study Commission''.
In General.--It shall be the duty of the Commission-- (1) to study and evaluate all factors that led to American Samoa's historical and present political status and relationship with the United States, including-- (A) the events that led to the cession to the United States of the islands that compose American Samoa; and (B) the constitutions, statutes, treaties, and agreements that affect American Samoa's political status and relationship with the United States; (2) to determine the nature of American Samoa's political status and relationship with the United States compared to relationships such as commonwealth, free association, and covenant, and the extent to which the treaties of cession created trust obligations to American Samoa on the part of the United States; (3) to determine whether a single document is needed to set forth American Samoa's political status and relationship with the United States; and (4) to study and evaluate the impact of American Samoa's political status and relationship with the United States (as determined by the Commission under paragraph (2)) on the economic and social needs of American Samoa and its residents.
Consultation.--The Commission shall, to the maximum extent practicable, consult with American Samoans in carrying out the duties of the Commission under subsection (a).
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 5 members appointed as follows: (1) 3 members appointed by the Secretary of the Interior, including-- (A) 1 member appointed from among individuals recommended by the Governor of American Samoa; and (B) 1 member appointed from among individuals recommended by the legislature of the Territorial government of American Samoa.
1 member appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
1 member appointed by the President of the Senate.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall be paid, to the extent of amounts made available in appropriation Acts, $150 for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Except as provided in subsection (d), members of the Commission who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or the Territorial government of American Samoa may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--3 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Vice Chairperson.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall call the initial meeting of the members of the Commission.
Subsequent meetings.--The Chairperson or a majority of the members of the Commission shall call any meeting of the Commission that occurs after the meeting called under paragraph (1).
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director, who shall be appointed by the Commission.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson of the Commission may appoint and fix the pay of personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-16 of the General Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed $150 per day.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Hearings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and locations, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Location of certain hearings.-- (A) Required hearings.--The Commission shall conduct at least 1 hearing at any location on each of-- (i) Tutuila; (ii) Ofu; (iii) Olosega; and (iv) Tau.
Other hearings.--The Commission may conduct at least 3 separate hearings in the United States at locations where significant numbers of American Samoans reside.
Notice.--The Commission shall provide notice to the public of the hearings referred to in paragraphs (1) and (2), including information regarding the date, location, and topic of each meeting, and shall take other actions as the Commission considers necessary to obtain, to the maximum extent practicable, public participation in the hearings.
Delegation of Authority.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this Act.
Obtaining Official Data.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson or Vice Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the Federal agency shall furnish the information to the Commission.
Exception.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any information that the Commission is prohibited to secure or request by another law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Draft Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than the expiration of the 1- year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall prepare and publish a draft report containing the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Commission.
Distribution.--The Commission shall distribute such report to appropriate Federal and American Samoan agencies and shall make such report available to members of the public upon request.
Solicitation of comments.--The Commission shall solicit written comments from the Federal and American Samoan agencies and other persons to which copies of such report are distributed under paragraph (2).
Final Report.--Not later than the expiration of the 9-month period beginning on the date of the publication of the report required by subsection (a)(1), the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a final report, which shall include-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions made by the Commission after consideration of the comments received by the Commission under subsection (a)(3); (2) the recommendations of the Commission for legislative and administrative actions that the Commission determines to be appropriate; and (3) copies of all written comments received by the Commission under subsection (a)(3).
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``American Samoan'' has the meaning given the term ``native American Samoan'' in section 4 of Public Law 100- 571 (16 United States Code 410qq-3).
The term ``Commission'' means the American Samoa Study Commission established in section 3.
There is authorized to be appropriated $200,000 to carry out this Act.
The Commission shall terminate not later than the expiration of the 60-day period beginning on the date on which the Commission submits its final report under section 8.