This Act may be cited as the ``Information Technology Act of 2000''.
In this Act: (1) Certified commercial information technology training provider.--The term ``certified commercial information technology training provider'' means a private sector provider of educational products and services utilized for training in information technology that is certified with respect to-- (A) the curriculum that is used for the training; or (B) the technical knowledge of the instructors of such provider, by 1 or more software publishers or hardware manufacturers the products of which are a subject of the training.
Dislocated worker.--The term ``dislocated worker'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801).
Information technology certification.--The term ``information technology certification'' means certification in information technology, in accordance with such standards as-- (A)(i) the Computing Technology Industry Association, the Information Technology Training Association, the International Society for Technology in Education, or another information technology professional association may issue, after consultation with chief education officers of States, State boards and entities that certify or license teachers, and other entities impacted by the standards; or (ii) a State board or entity that certifies or licenses teachers may issue, after consultation with chief education officers of States, and other entities impacted by the standards; and (B) the Secretaries may approve.
Information technology training program.--The term ``information technology training program'' means a program for the training of-- (A) computer programmers, systems analysts, and computer scientists or engineers (as such occupations are defined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics); and (B) persons for such other occupations as are determined to be appropriate by the Secretaries, after consultation with a working group broadly solicited by the Secretaries and open to all interested information technology entities and trade and professional associations.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1002).
Native american.--The term ``Native American'' means an Indian or a Native Hawaiian, as defined in section 166(a) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2911(a)).
Secretaries.--The term ``Secretaries'' means the Secretary of Education and the Secretary of Labor, acting jointly.
Veteran.--The term ``veteran'' has the meaning given the term in section 101 of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801).
INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY TRAINING PROGRAM GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretaries may make grants to eligible partnerships to pay for the Federal share of the cost of establishing and carrying out information technology training programs for minorities, women, older individuals, veterans, Native Americans, dislocated workers, and former participants in information technology training programs who have not received information technology certification.
Partnerships.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a partnership shall consist of-- (1) an institution of higher education; and (2) a private organization, such as a certified commercial information technology training provider or an information technology trade or professional association.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a partnership shall submit an application to the Secretaries at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretaries may require.
Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in subsection (a) shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost shall be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each subsequent fiscal year.
BONUS GRANTS FOR INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY CERTIFICATION.
In General.--The Secretary of Education may make grants to appropriate organizations, to assist the organizations in awarding bonuses to teachers who achieve information technology certification.
Amount.--Subject to the availability of appropriations under subsection (d), the Secretary of Education shall award a grant to an organization under subsection (a) in an amount not greater than the product of $5,000 and the number of teachers described in subsection (c)(2).
Application.-- (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary of Education at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--At a minimum, the application shall contain information describing the number of teachers that-- (A) have achieved information technology certification, including such certification for integrating information technology into the classroom and a curriculum; (B) have not previously received awards under this section; and (C) have entered into agreements with the agency to continue to teach for the agency for periods of not less than 3 years, after receiving bonuses under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005.