This Act may be cited as the ``Ojito Wilderness Act''.
In this Act: (1) Pueblo.--The term ``Pueblo'' means the Pueblo of Zia.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of New Mexico.
Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``Ojito Wilderness Act'' and dated September 8, 2004.
Wilderness.--The term ``Wilderness'' means the Ojito Wilderness designated under section 3(a).
DESIGNATION OF THE OJITO WILDERNESS.
In General.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), there is hereby designated as wilderness, and, therefore, as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System, certain land in the Albuquerque District-Bureau of Land Management, New Mexico, which comprise approximately 11,183 acres, as generally depicted on the map, and which shall be known as the ``Ojito Wilderness''.
Map and Legal Description.--The map and a legal description of the Wilderness shall-- (1) be filed by the Secretary with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act; (2) have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the legal description and map; and (3) be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Bureau of Land Management.
Management of Wilderness.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Wilderness shall be managed by the Secretary in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) and this Act, except that, with respect to the Wilderness, any reference in the Wilderness Act to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference to the date of the enactment of this Act.
Management of Newly Acquired Land.--If acquired by the United States, the following land shall become part of the Wilderness and shall be managed in accordance with this Act and other laws applicable to the Wilderness: (1) Section 12 of township 15 north, range 01 west, New Mexico Principal Meridian.
Any land within the boundaries of the Wilderness.
Management of Lands To Be Added.--The lands generally depicted on the map as ``Lands to be Added'' shall become part of the Wilderness if the United States acquires, or alternative adequate access is available to section 12 of township 15 north, range 01 west.
Release.--The Congress hereby finds and directs that the lands generally depicted on the map as ``Lands to be Released'' have been adequately studied for wilderness designation pursuant to section 603 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1782) and no longer are subject to the requirement of section 603(c) of such Act (16 United States Code 1782(c)) pertaining to the management of wilderness study areas in a manner that does not impair the suitability of such areas for preservation as wilderness.
Grazing.--Grazing of livestock in the Wilderness, where established before the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be administered in accordance with the provisions of section 4(d)(4) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(4)) and the guidelines set forth in Appendix A of the Report of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs to accompany H.R.
2570 of the One Hundred First Congress (H. Rept.
Fish and Wildlife.--As provided in section 4(d)(7) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this section shall be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State with respect to fish and wildlife in the State.
Water.--Nothing in this section shall affect any existing valid water right.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Wilderness, the lands to be added under subsection (e), and lands authorized to be acquired by the Pueblo as generally depicted on the map are withdrawn from-- (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, and disposal under the public land laws; (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) operation of the mineral leasing, mineral materials, and geothermal leasing laws.
Exchange.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall seek to complete an exchange for State land within the boundaries of the Wilderness.
LAND HELD IN TRUST.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights and the conditions under subsection (d), all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the lands (including improvements, appurtenances, and mineral rights to the lands) generally depicted on the map as ``BLM Lands Authorized to be Acquired by the Pueblo of Zia'' shall, on receipt of consideration under subsection (c) and adoption and approval of regulations under subsection (d), be declared by the Secretary to be held in trust by the United States for the Pueblo and shall be part of the Pueblo's Reservation.
Description of Lands.--The boundary of the lands authorized by this section for acquisition by the Pueblo where generally depicted on the map as immediately adjacent to CR906, CR923, and Cucho Arroyo Road shall be 100 feet from the center line of the road.
Consideration.-- (1) In general.--In consideration for the conveyance authorized under subsection (a), the Pueblo shall pay to the Secretary the amount that is equal to the fair market value of the land conveyed, as subject to the terms and conditions in subsection (d), as determined by an independent appraisal.
Appraisal.--To determine the fair market value, the Secretary shall conduct an appraisal paid for by the Pueblo that is performed in accordance with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions and the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice.
Availability.--Any amounts paid under paragraph (1) shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation and until expended, for the acquisition from willing sellers of land or interests in land in the State.
Public Access.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the declaration of trust and conveyance under subsection (a) shall be subject to the continuing right of the public to access the land for recreational, scenic, scientific, educational, paleontological, and conservation uses, subject to any regulations for land management and the preservation, protection, and enjoyment of the natural characteristics of the land that are adopted by the Pueblo and approved by the Secretary; Provided that the Secretary shall ensure that the rights provided for in this paragraph are protected and that a process for resolving any complaints by an aggrieved party is established.
Conditions.--Except as provided in subsection (f)-- (A) In general.--The land conveyed under subsection (a) shall be maintained as open space, and the natural characteristics of the land shall be preserved in perpetuity.
Prohibited uses.--The use of motorized vehicles (except on existing roads or as is necessary for the maintenance and repair of facilities used in connection with grazing operations), mineral extraction, housing, gaming, and other commercial enterprises shall be prohibited within the boundaries of the land conveyed under subsection (a).
Rights of Way.-- (1) Existing rights of way.--Nothing in this section shall affect-- (A) any validly issued right-of-way, or the renewal thereof; or (B) the access for customary construction, operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement activities in any right-of-way issued, granted, or permitted by the Secretary.
New rights of way and renewals.-- (A) In general.--The Pueblo shall grant any reasonable requests for rights-of-way for utilities and pipelines over land acquired under subsection (a) that is designated as the Rights-of-Way corridor #1 as established in the Rio Puerco Resource Management Plan in effect on the date of the grant.
Administration.--Any right-of-way issued or renewed after the date of the enactment of this Act over land authorized to be conveyed by this section shall be administered in accordance with the rules, regulations, and fee payment schedules of the Department of the Interior, including the Rio Puerco Resources Management Plan in effect on the date of issuance or renewal of the right-of-way.
Judicial Relief.-- (1) In general.--To enforce subsection (d), any person may bring a civil action in the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico seeking declaratory or injunctive relief.
Sovereign immunity.--The Pueblo shall not assert sovereign immunity as a defense or bar to a civil action brought under paragraph (1).
Effect.--Nothing in this section-- (A) authorizes a civil action against the Pueblo for money damages, costs, or attorneys fees; or (B) except as provided in paragraph (2), abrogates the sovereign immunity of the Pueblo.