This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan Rural Law Enforcement Crime-Fighting Scholarship Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the organization of illegal gangs and many systems of illegal drug trafficking and distribution have become increasingly similar in both urban and rural areas of the United States; (2) crime- and drug-ridden neighborhoods in both urban and rural areas demonstrate many of the same characteristics; (3) many law enforcement agencies in urban areas utilize the most modern technology and cutting-edge police tactics to fight gangs, abolish illegal drug trafficking and distribution systems, and create safer neighborhoods and communities; and (4) law enforcement agencies in rural areas may improve their efforts in the community if officers have an opportunity to participate in a program permitting them to conduct firsthand observations of the strategies and technologies utilized by Federal and urban law enforcement agencies to fight gangs, abolish illegal drug trafficking and distribution systems, and create safer neighborhoods and communities.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE RURAL LAW ENFORCEMENT CRIME-FIGHTING SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
In General.--The Attorney General, through the Office of Justice Programs and in consultation with the National Center for Rural Law Enforcement at the University of Arkansas, shall establish a rural law enforcement scholarship program by providing grants to rural law enforcement agencies and consortia of law enforcement agencies.
The grants shall be used to allow law enforcement officers to observe the advanced strategies and technologies employed by Federal and urban law enforcement agencies to fight gangs, abolish illegal drug trafficking and distribution systems, and create safer neighborhoods and communities.
Site Identification and Notification.-- (1) Identification.--Before grants are awarded and not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall identify Federal and urban law enforcement agencies willing to allow rural law enforcement officers to observe the strategies and technologies used for fighting crime and creating safer neighborhoods and communities.
Notification.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall publish in the Federal Register a list of the urban and Federal agencies identified under paragraph (1).
Grant Amounts.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General shall determine the appropriate amount of each grant award after considering the relative costs associated with each observation opportunity.
Maximum grant award.--Each grant award may not exceed $2,500 for an individual rural law enforcement agency and $7,500 for a consortium of law enforcement agencies.
Participation Requirements.--Officers selected for a rural law enforcement scholarship may participate in a particular observation opportunity for a maximum period of 1 month.
Not more than 1 officer from the same rural law enforcement agency may participate.
In cases in which 1 or more rural law enforcement agencies establish a consortium, not more than 1 officer from each agency in the consortium may participate.
Uses of Funds.--Subject to subsections (c) and (d), a grant received under this Act may be used to pay the costs of official travel, lodging, and expenses that law enforcement officers incur while participating in the program.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this Act, a rural law enforcement agency, on its own behalf or for a consortium of law enforcement agencies shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Selection.--The Attorney General shall select grant recipients by using the following criteria: (1) Criminal activities.--The extent of violent crime, drug trafficking and distribution, drug use, and other major indicators of crime that threaten the public safety in the area served by the rural law enforcement agency, as identified in studies conducted by the Department of Justice and in State applications submitted under part E of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 for the Edward Bryne Memorial State and Local Law Enforcement Assistance Programs.
Program benefits.--The extent to which the observation opportunity is likely to provide law enforcement officers who participate in the scholarship program with knowledge or skills that can be successfully employed in the area that the rural law enforcement agency serves.
Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit to the Committees on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives and the Senate a report regarding the success of participating rural law enforcement agencies in employing strategies or technology observed during participation in the rural law enforcement scholarship program.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``consortium of law enforcement agencies'' means not less than 1 rural law enforcement agency that executes an agreement with other law enforcement agencies which may include sheriff, highway patrol, and police departments that seek to organize more comprehensive crime-fighting strategies in rural areas.
The term ``law enforcement officer'' has the same meaning given such term in section 1204(5) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796b(5).
The term ``metropolitan statistical area'' has the same meaning given such term by the Bureau of the Census.
The term ``rural law enforcement agency'' means a law enforcement agency that serves-- (A) a city, town, township, borough, or village outside a metropolitan statistical area; (B) a city, town, township, borough, or village of less than 10,000 residents; or (C) a county or parish of less than 80,000 residents.
There are authorized to be appropriated $12,000,000 to carry out this Act for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2005.