SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``ILSA Enhancement and Compliance Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--AMENDMENTS TO THE IRAN AND LIBYA SANCTIONS ACT OF 1996 Sec.
TITLE II--OFFICE OF GLOBAL SECURITY RISK IN THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION Sec.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) On September 16, 2003, the Under Secretary for Arms Control and International Security, John R. Bolton, stated before the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives that: ``Without question, among rogue states, those most aggressively seeking to acquire or develop weapons of mass destruction and their means of delivery, and which are therefore threats to our national security, are Iran and North Korea, followed by Libya and Syria.
It is also the case that these states are among those we identify as state sponsors of terrorism.''.
In his statement before the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) of the United Nations on September 8, 2003, United States Ambassador Kenneth Brill denounced Iran's patterns of deception regarding its nuclear program by declaring Iran to be ``working in secret, going back into the 1980s, to develop sophisticated nuclear facilities; stalling, stonewalling, and on a number of occasions first providing the IAEA false information, and then changing its story when the original version was revealed to be inaccurate; and attempting to cover up traces of its activities to avoid detection by the Agency''.
The Final Resolution of the Board of Governors of the International Atomic Energy Agency on September 11, 2003, noted with concern, ``that the agency environmental sampling at Natanz has revealed the presence of two types of highly enriched uranium, which requires additional work to enable the Agency to arrive at a conclusion; that IAEA inspectors found considerable modifications had been made to the premises at the Kalaye Electric Company prior to inspections that may impact on the accuracy of the environmental sampling; that some of Iran's statements to the IAEA have undergone significant and material changes, and that the number of outstanding issues has increased since the report; and that despite the Board's statement in June 2003 encouraging Iran as a confidence- building measure, not to introduce nuclear material into its pilot centrifuge enrichment cascade at Natanz, Iran has introduced such material''.
The Government of Iran, in a letter to the International Atomic Energy Agency of August 19, 2003, acknowledged that, in the early 1990s, there had been ``bench scale'' uranium conversion experiments.
Iran has indicated that more time will be needed to find the people involved in these experiments and to trace any other closed down facilities.
Iranian authorities have stated that none of the imported uranium had been processed and specifically, that it had not been used in any centrifuge tests.
It was observed, however, during IAEA verification in March 2003, that some of the UF&lt;INF&gt;6&lt;/INF&gt; was in fact missing from the two small cylinders.
(A) Iranian authorities told the International Atomic Energy Agency that the decision to launch a centrifuge enrichment program had actually been taken in 1985 and that Iran had received drawings of the centrifuge through a foreign intermediary around 1987.
The Iranian authorities described the program as having consisted of three phases: activities during the first phase, from 1985 until 1997, had been located mainly at the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran (AEOI) premises in Tehran; during the second phase, between 1997 and 2002, the activities had been concentrated at the Kalaye Electric Company in Tehran; during the third phase, 2002 to the present, the research and development and assembly activities were moved to the Natanz facility.
In the August 19, 2003, letter from Iran, the International Atomic Energy Agency was informed that, in the past, apart from planned co-operation in laser fusion and laser spectroscopy which never materialized, there had been a research thesis on laser spectroscopy prepared by a university student in co-operation with the laser division of the Atomic Energy Organization of Iran.
Such a study by the AEOI could later prove to be relevant to the implementation of laser enrichment programs in Iran.
In September 2003, Britain, France, and Germany nevertheless offered western technology to Iran if it stopped its nuclear fuel enrichment program and accepted more intrusive United Nations inspections of its nuclear facilities, all in defiance of the United States efforts to achieve a united front to counter the burgeoning Iranian nuclear program.
European oil investment and credit provisions have unquestionably helped the Iranian economy by enabling it to build its nuclear program.
The Iranians are boasting that as much as $20,000,000,000 in oil agreements have been signed between Iran and European Union countries since 1995.
France's Totalfina formed a multi-billion dollar consortium to develop Iranian oil fields of South Pars in 1995 and has been adding to its development ever since.
Britain has issued credit guarantees to back up its oil investments in Iran as well.
Germany is actively seeking to increase its exports to Iran and in 2001 it quadrupled its export insurance to that country.
The French bank BNP Paribas has arranged $2,230,000,000 in loans for Iran since 1990.
Europe has also been actively seeking a European Union-Iran trade pact, formally giving the go-ahead to pursue investments in Iran.
The Assistant Secretary of State for Nonproliferation, John S. Wolf, in testimony before the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate on March 19, 2003, stated that: ``Libya has crossed the nuclear threshold and is among the list of nuclear wannabees.
These wannabees seek nuclear weapons capabilities even though they are all parties to the [Treaty on the Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons].''.
In testimony before the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate on February 10, 2003, the Director of Central Intelligence, George J. Tenet, remarked: ``Libya clearly intends to reestablish its offensive chemical weapons capability and has produced at least 100 tons of chemical agents at its Rabta facility.''.
In addition to manufacturing and possessing chemical weapons, Libya has a history of employing them.
According to the Department of Defense, in 1987 Libya employed chemical agents against troops from its neighboring country of Chad.
Libya has used missiles and aircraft in combat.
Libya also ``fired SCUD missiles at an Italian island in 1987'', according to the 2001 Department of Defense ``Proliferation: Threat and Response'' Report.
According to the same report, Libya may be capable of producing small quantities of biological agents.
And, ``with the suspension of UN sanctions, Libya's ability to acquire biological-related equipment and expertise will increase''.
The Government of Libya continues to seek ballistic missile delivery systems that could be used for chemical or nuclear warfare.
On October 31, 2002, the director of the United States Missile Defense Agency, Lieutenant General Ronald Kadish, stated: ``The Libyans have been pretty active in trying to get missile capability, and not just short-range.
They have enough money to buy it .
We worry a lot about Libya in the Missile Defense Agency.''.
TITLE I--AMENDMENTS TO THE IRAN AND LIBYA SANCTIONS ACT OF 1996 SEC.
Multilateral Negotiations.--Section 4(a) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``and Libya'' after ``Iran''; and (2) by striking ``Iran's efforts'' and inserting ``the efforts of both Iran and Libya''.
Reports to Congress.--Section 4(b) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Reports to Congress.--The President shall prepare and transmit to the appropriate congressional committees not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of the ILSA Enhancement and Compliance Act, and once every 6 months thereafter, a report on the specific diplomatic efforts undertaken pursuant to subsection (a), the results of these efforts, and a description of proposed diplomatic efforts pursuant to such subsection.
Each report shall include-- ``(1) the countries that have agreed to undertake measures to further the objectives of section 3 with respect to either Iran or Libya; ``(2) a description of those measures, including-- ``(A) government actions with respect to public or private entities (or their subsidiaries) located in their territories, that are engaged in Iran or Libya; ``(B) any decisions by the governments of these countries to rescind or continue the provision of credits, guarantees, or other governmental assistance to these entities; and ``(C) actions taken in international fora to further the objectives of section 3; and ``(3) the countries that have not agreed to undertake measures to further the objectives of section 3 with respect to Iran or Libya, and the reasons therefor.''.
Suspension.--Section 4(c) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Suspension.--The President may suspend the application of section 5(a) with respect to nationals of a country on a case by case basis for a period of not more than 6 months, if the President certifies to the appropriate congressional committees at least 30 days before the suspension is to take effect that-- ``(1) the suspension is vital to the national security of the United States; and ``(2) the country has undertaken substantial measures, including economic sanctions, to prevent the acquisition and development of weapons of mass destruction by the Government of Iran or Libya, as the case may be, and to carry out activities described in section 2 of this Act.''.
Investigations.--Section 4 of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Investigations.-- ``(1) In general.--Upon public or private disclosure of activity related to investment in Iran or Libya as described in this Act, the President shall direct the Secretary of the Treasury to initiate an investigation into the possible imposition of sanctions with respect to such activity and to provide a recommendation to the President for such purposes.
Determination and notification.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the disclosure of activity described in paragraph (1), the President shall make a determination whether or not to impose sanctions with respect to the activity and shall notify the appropriate congressional committees of the basis for this determination.''.
Sanctions With Respect to Development of Petroleum Resources.-- Section 5(a) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended-- (1) in the heading, by striking ``to Iran'' and inserting ``to Development of Petroleum Resources''; (2) by striking ``, with actual knowledge,''; and (3) by striking ``Iran's ability to develop petroleum resources in Iran'' and inserting ``the ability of Iran or Libya to develop petroleum resources, as the case may be''.
Sanctions With Respect to Development of Weapons of Mass Destruction or Other Military Capabilities.--Section 5(b) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Mandatory Sanctions With Respect to Development of Weapons of Mass Destruction or Other Military Capabilities.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the President shall impose 2 or more of the sanctions described in paragraphs (1) through (6) of section 6 if the President determines that a person has, on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, exported, transferred, or otherwise provided to Iran or Libya any goods, services, technology, or other items the provision of which significantly and materially-- ``(1) contributed to the ability of Iran or Libya to acquire chemical, biological, or nuclear weapons or destabilizing numbers and types of advanced conventional weapons or enhanced the military or paramilitary capabilities of Iran or Libya; or ``(2) contributed to the ability of Iran or Libya to maintain its aviation capabilities.''.
Persons Against Which the Sanctions Are To Be Imposed.--Section 5(c)(2) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) is a private or government lender, insurer, underwriter, re-insurer, or guarantor of the person referred to in paragraph (1).''.
Paragraphs (1) through (6) of section 6 of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended by striking ``may'' each place it occurs and inserting ``shall''.
Section 8 of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking the heading; (B) in the introductory matter preceding paragraph (1)-- (i) by inserting ``or Libya'' after ``Iran'' the first place it appears; and (ii) by inserting ``or Libya, as the case may be'' after ``Iran'' the second place it appears; (C) in paragraph (1)(C), by striking ``and'' at the end; (D) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (E) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) poses no threat to the national security of the United States, its interests, or allies.
''; and (2) by striking subsection (b).
Section 13 of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is hereby repealed.
Investment.--Section 14(9) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended in the last sentence by striking ``does not include'' and inserting ``includes''.
Person.--Section 14(14)(B) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended-- (1) by inserting after ``trust'' the following: ``, financial institution, insurer, underwriter, re-insurer, guarantors''; and (2) by striking ``operating as a business enterprise''.
Petroleum Resources.--Section 14(15) of the Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (50 United States Code 1701 note) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' and inserting a comma; and (2) by inserting ``, and petroleum by-products'' after ``resources''.
The amendments made by sections 102 and 103 shall apply to investments made on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--OFFICE OF GLOBAL SECURITY RISK IN THE SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION SEC.
The Securities and Exchange Commission shall establish an Office of Global Security Risk within the Division of Corporation Finance.
The duties of this office shall include, but will not be limited to: (1) Establishing a process by which the Commission identifies all issuers (as defined in section 2(a)(7) of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 (15 United States Code 7201(a)(7))) that are operating in countries, particularly Iran and Libya, the governments of which the Secretary of State has determined, for purposes of section 6(j)(1) of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (50 United States Code app.
2405(j)(1)), have repeatedly provided support for acts of international terrorism.
Ensuring that all issuers operating in countries described in paragraph (1) are disclosing to investors the nature of their operations in such countries.
Implementing enhanced disclosure requirements based on the asymmetric nature of the risk to corporate share value and reputation stemming from business interests in these higher risk countries.
Coordinating with other government agencies to ensure the sharing of relevant information across the Federal Government.
Initiating a global dialogue to ensure that foreign corporations whose shares are traded in the United States are properly disclosing their activities in countries described in paragraph (1) to United States investors.
The Commission shall provide the appropriate Congressional committees with quarterly reports on the activities of Office of Global Security Risk established pursuant to section 201.