This Act may be cited as the ``Dog and Cat Protection Act of 1999''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) An estimated 2,000,000 dogs and cats are slaughtered and sold annually as part of the international fur trade.
Internationally, dog and cat fur is used in a wide variety of products, including fur coats and jackets, fur-trimmed garments, hats, gloves, decorative accessories, stuffed animals, and other toys.
As demonstrated by forensic tests, dog and cat fur products are being imported into the United States, in some cases with deceptive labeling to conceal the use of dog or cat fur.
Dog and cat fur, when dyed, is not easily distinguishable to persons who are not experts from other furs such as fox, rabbit, coyote, wolf, and mink.
Dog and cat fur is generally less expensive than other types of fur and may be used as a substitute for more expensive types of furs.
Foreign fur producers use dogs and cats bred for their fur, and also use strays and stolen pets.
The methods of housing, transporting, and slaughtering dogs and cats for fur production are generally unregulated and inhumane.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to prohibit the sale, manufacture, offer for sale, transportation, and distribution in the United States of dog and cat fur products; (2) to require accurate labeling of fur species so that consumers in the United States can make informed choices; and (3) to prohibit the trade in, both imports and exports of, dog and cat fur products, to ensure that the United States market does not encourage the slaughter of dogs or cats for their fur, and to ensure that the purposes of this Act are not undermined.
In this Act: (1) Dog fur.--The term ``dog fur'' means the pelt or skin of any animal of the species canis familiaris.
Cat fur.--The term ``cat fur'' means the pelt or skin of any animal of the species felis catus.
United states.--The term ``United States'' means the customs territory of the United States, as defined in general note 2 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
Commerce.--The term ``commerce'' means transportation for sale, trade, or use between any State, territory, or possession of the United States, or the District of Columbia, and any place outside thereof.
Dog or cat fur product.--The term ``dog or cat fur product'' means any item of merchandise which consists, or is composed in whole or in part, of any dog fur, cat fur, or both.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes any individual, partnership, corporation, association, organization, business trust, government entity, or other entity.
Interested party.--The term ``interested party'' means any person having a contractual, financial, humane, or other interest.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
Duly authorized officer.--The term ``duly authorized officer'' means any United States Customs officer, any agent of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, or any agent or other person authorized by law or designated by the Secretary to enforce the provisions of this Act.
Prohibition on Manufacture, Sale, and Other Activities.--No person in the United States or subject to the jurisdiction of the United States may introduce into commerce, manufacture for introduction into commerce, sell, trade, or advertise in commerce, offer to sell, or transport or distribute in commerce, any dog or cat fur product.
Imports and Exports.--No dog or cat fur product may be imported into, or exported from, the United States.
Section 2(d) of the Fur Products Labeling Act (15 United States Code 69(d)) is amended by striking ``; except that such term shall not include such articles as the Commission shall exempt by reason of the relatively small quantity or value of the fur or used fur contained therein''.
In General.--The Secretary, either independently or in cooperation with the States, political subdivisions thereof, and interested parties, is authorized to carry out operations and measures to eradicate and prevent the activities prohibited by section 4.
Inspections.--A duly authorized officer may, upon his own initiative or upon the request of any interested party, detain for inspection and inspect any product, package, crate, or other container, including its contents, and all accompanying documents to determine compliance with this Act.
Seizures and Arrests.--If a duly authorized officer has reasonable cause to believe that there has been a violation of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act, such officer may search and seize, with or without a warrant, the item suspected of being the subject of the violation, and may arrest the owner of the item.
An item so seized shall be held by any person authorized by the Secretary pending disposition of civil or criminal proceedings.
Burden of Proof.--The burden of proof shall lie with the owner to establish that the item seized is not a dog or cat fur product subject to forfeiture and civil penalty under section 7.
Action by United States Reports Attorney.--Upon presentation by a duly authorized officer or any interested party of credible evidence that a violation of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act has occurred, the United States Attorney with jurisdiction over the suspected violation shall investigate the matter and shall take appropriate action under this Act.
Citizen Suits.--Any person may commence a civil suit to compel the Secretary to implement and enforce this Act, or to enjoin any person from taking action in violation of any provision of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act.
Reward.--The Secretary may pay a reward to any person who furnishes information which leads to an arrest, criminal conviction, civil penalty assessment, or forfeiture of property for any violation of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act.
Regulations.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall issue final regulations, after notice and opportunity for public comment, to implement this Act within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Fees.--The Secretary may charge reasonable fees for expenses to the Government connected with permits or certificates authorized by this Act, including expenses for-- (A) processing applications; (B) reasonable inspections; and (C) the transfer, handling, or storage of evidentiary items seized and forfeited under this Act.
All fees collected pursuant to this paragraph shall be deposited in the Treasury in an account specifically designated for enforcement of this Act and available only for that purpose.
Civil Penalty.--Any person who violates any provision of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act may be assessed a civil penalty of not more than $25,000 for each violation.
Criminal Penalty.--Any person who knowingly violates any provision of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act shall, upon conviction for each violation, be imprisoned for not more than 1 year, fined in accordance with title 18, United States Code, or both.
Forfeiture.--Any dog or cat fur product that is the subject of a violation of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture to the same extent as any merchandise imported in violation of the customs laws.
Injunction.--Any person who violates any provision of this Act or any regulation issued under this Act may be enjoined from further sales of any fur products.
Applicability.--The penalties in this section apply to violations occurring on or after the date of enactment of this Act.