This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Information and Benefits Enhancement Act of 2003''.
PRESUMPTION OF ADDITIONAL DISEASES OF FORMER PRISONERS OF WAR TO BE SERVICE-CONNECTED FOR COMPENSATION PURPOSES.
Presumption.--Section 1112(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (14), by striking ``or'' at the end; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraphs: ``(16) cardiovascular disease (heart disease), ``(17) cerebrovascular disease (stroke), or ``(18) chronic liver disease, including cirrhosis and primary liver carcinoma,''.
Effective Date.--(1) The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
No benefit may be paid by reason of the amendments made by subsection (a) for any period before the date of the enactment of this Act.
DOSE RECONSTRUCTION PROGRAM OF DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
Review of Mission, Procedures, and Administration.--(1) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall jointly conduct a review of the mission, procedures, and administration of the Dose Reconstruction Program of the Department of Defense.
In conducting the review under paragraph (1), the Secretaries shall-- (A) determine whether any additional actions are required to ensure that the quality assurance and quality control mechanisms of the Dose Reconstruction Program are adequate and sufficient for purposes of the program; and (B) determine the actions that are required to ensure that the mechanisms of the Dose Reconstruction Program for communication and interaction with veterans are adequate and sufficient for purposes of the program, including mechanisms to permit veterans to review the assumptions utilized in their dose reconstructions.
Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretaries shall jointly submit to Congress a report on the review under paragraph (1).
The report shall set forth-- (A) the results of the review; (B) a plan for any actions determined to be required under paragraph (2); and (C) such other recommendations for the improvement of the mission, procedures, and administration of the Dose Reconstruction Program as the Secretaries jointly consider appropriate.
On-Going Review and Oversight.--The Secretaries shall jointly take appropriate actions to ensure the on-going independent review and oversight of the Dose Reconstruction Program, including the establishment of the advisory board required by subsection (c).
Advisory Board.--(1) In taking actions under subsection (b), the Secretaries shall jointly appoint an advisory board to provide review and oversight of the Dose Reconstruction Program.
The advisory board under paragraph (1) shall be composed of the following: (A) At least one expert in historical dose reconstruction of the type conducted under the Dose Reconstruction Program.
At least one expert in radiation health matters.
At least one expert in risk communications matters.
A representative of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
A representative of the Defense Threat Reduction Agency.
At least three veterans, including at least one veteran who is a member of an atomic veterans group.
The advisory board under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) conduct periodic, random audits of dose reconstructions and decisions on claims for radiogenic diseases under the Dose Reconstruction Program; (B) assist the Department of Veterans Affairs and the Defense Threat Reduction Agency in communicating to veterans information on the mission, procedures, and evidentiary requirements of the Dose Reconstruction Program; and (C) carry out such other activities with respect to the review and oversight of the Dose Reconstruction Program as the Secretaries shall jointly specify.
The advisory board under paragraph (1) may make such recommendations on modifications in the mission or procedures of the Dose Reconstruction Program as the advisory board considers appropriate as a result of the audits conducted under paragraph (3)(A).
STUDY ON DISPOSITION OF AIR FORCE HEALTH STUDY.
In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall, in accordance with this section, carry out a study to determine the appropriate disposition of the Air Force Health Study, an epidemiologic study of Air Force personnel who were responsible for conducting aerial spray missions of herbicides during the Vietnam era.
Study Through National Academy of Sciences.--Not later than sixty days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall seek to enter into an agreement with the National Academy of Sciences, or another appropriate scientific organization, to carry out the study required by subsection (a).
Elements.--Under the study under subsection (a), the National Academy of Sciences, or other appropriate scientific organization, shall address the following: (1) The scientific merit of retaining and maintaining the medical records, other study data, and laboratory specimens collected in the course of the Air Force Health Study after the currently-scheduled termination date of the study in 2006.
Whether or not any obstacles exist to retaining and maintaining the medical records, other study data, and laboratory specimens referred to in paragraph (1), including privacy concerns.
The advisability of providing independent oversight of the medical records, other study data, and laboratory specimens referred to in paragraph (1), and of any further study of such records, data, and specimens, and, if so, the mechanism for providing such oversight.
The advisability of extending the Air Force Health Study, including the potential value and relevance of extending the study, the potential cost of extending the study, and the Federal or non-Federal entity best suited to continue the study if extended.
The advisability of making the laboratory specimens of the Air Force Health Study available for independent research, including the potential value and relevance of such research, and the potential cost of such research.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after entering into an agreement under subsection (b), the National Academy of Sciences, or other appropriate scientific organization, shall submit to the Secretary and Congress a report on the results of the study under subsection (a).
The report shall include the results of the study, including the matters addressed under subsection (c), and such other recommendations as the Academy, or other appropriate scientific organization, considers appropriate as a result of the study.
FUNDING OF MEDICAL FOLLOW-UP AGENCY OF INSTITUTE OF MEDICINE OF NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES FOR EPIDEMIOLOGICAL RESEARCH ON MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND VETERANS.
Funding by Department of Veterans Affairs.--(1) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make available to the National Academy of Sciences in each of fiscal years 2004 through 2013, $250,000 for the Medical Follow-Up Agency of the Institute of Medicine of the Academy for purposes of epidemiological research on members of the Armed Forces and veterans.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make available amounts under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year from amounts available for the Department of Veterans Affairs for that fiscal year.
Funding by Department of Defense.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall make available to the National Academy of Sciences in each of fiscal years 2004 through 2013, $250,000 for the Medical Follow-Up Agency for purposes of epidemiological research on members of the Armed Forces and veterans.
The Secretary of Defense shall make available amounts under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year from amounts available for the Department of Defense for that fiscal year.
Use of Funds.--The Medical Follow-Up Agency shall use funds made available under subsections (a) and (b) for epidemiological research on members of the Armed Forces and veterans.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Amounts made available to the Medical Follow-Up Agency under this section for a fiscal year for the purposes referred to in subsection (c) are in addition to any other amounts made available to the Agency for that fiscal year for those purposes.