This Act may be cited as the ``Trade and Professional Association Free Flow of Information Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) trade and professional associations serve the public interest by conducting research, collecting and distributing information, and otherwise providing services to their members with regard to products and materials purchased and used by those members; (2) in the decade preceding the date of enactment of this Act, many large class action lawsuits have been filed against manufacturers for allegedly defective products; (3) as a result of the lawsuits referred to in paragraph (2), many members of trade and professional associations who are consumers of those products have relied increasingly on trade and professional associations for information concerning those products, including information concerning-- (A) the conditions under which such a product may be used effectively; (B) whether it is necessary to repair or replace such a product, and if such a repair or replacement is necessary, the appropriate means of accomplishing that repair or replacement; and (C) any litigation concerning such a product; (4) trade and professional associations have, with an increasing frequency, been served broad and burdensome third- party subpoenas from litigants in product defect lawsuits, including class action lawsuits; (5) members of trade and professional associations are seeking potentially beneficial information relating to product defects, quality, or performance from the trade and professional associations; (6) trade and professional associations have been subject to lawsuits concerning methods of collection and dissemination of that information; (7) the burden of responding to third-party subpoenas in product defect lawsuits and the threat of litigation have had a substantial chilling effect on the ability and willingness of trade and professional associations to disseminate information described in paragraph (5) to members, and the threat that information provided on a confidential basis to members could be subject to discovery in a civil action also has a chilling effect; (8) because of the national scope of the problems described in paragraphs (1) through (7), it is not possible for States to fully address the problems by enacting State laws; and (9) the Federal Government has the authority under the United States Constitution (including article I, section 8, clause 3 of the Constitution and the 14th amendment to the Constitution) to remove barriers to interstate commerce and protect due process rights.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to promote the free flow of goods and services and lessen burdens on interstate commerce in accordance with the authorities referred to in subsection (a)(9) by ensuring the free flow of information concerning product defects, quality, or performance among trade and professional associations and their members.
In this Act: (1) Product.-- (A) In general.--The term ``product'' means any object, substance, mixture, or raw material in a gaseous, liquid, or solid state that-- (i) is capable of delivery itself or as an assembled whole, in a mixed or combined state, or as a component part or ingredient; (ii) is produced for introduction into trade or commerce; (iii) has intrinsic economic value; and (iv) is intended for sale or lease to persons for commercial or personal use, including improvements to real property and fixtures that are affixed or incorporated into those improvements.
Exclusions.--The term does not include-- (i) tissue, organs, blood, and blood products used for therapeutic or medical purposes, except to the extent that such tissue, organs, blood, and blood products (or the provision thereof) are subject, under applicable State law, to a standard of liability other than negligence; or (ii) electricity, natural gas, or steam.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, and any commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
Trade or professional association.--The term ``trade or professional association'' means an organization described in paragraph (3), (4), (5), or (6) of section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 that is exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code.
QUALIFIED EXEMPTION FROM CIVIL LIABILITY.
In General.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in subsection (b), a trade or professional association shall not be subject to civil liability relating to harm caused by the provision of information described in paragraph (2) by the trade or professional association to a member of the trade or professional association.
Information.--The information described in this paragraph is information relating to a product concerning-- (A) the quality of the product; (B) the performance of the product; or (C) any defect of the product.
Applicability.--This subsection applies with respect to civil liability under Federal or State law.
Exception for Liability.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to harm caused by an act of a trade or professional association that a court determines, on the basis of clear and convincing evidence, to have been caused by the trade or professional association by the provision of information described in subsection (a)(2) that the trade or professional association-- (1) knew to be false; or (2) provided a reckless indifference to the truth or falsity of that information.
SPECIAL MOTION TO STRIKE.
A trade or professional association may file a special motion to strike any claim in any judicial proceeding against the trade or professional association on the ground that the claim is based on an act with respect to which the association is exempt from liability under section 3.
REQUIRED PROCEDURES REGARDING SPECIAL MOTION TO STRIKE.
Treatment of Motion.--Upon the filing of any motion under section 4-- (1) to the extent consistent with this section, the motion shall be treated as a motion for summary judgment under Rule 56 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (or an equivalent motion under applicable State law); and (2) the trial court shall hear the motion within a period of time that is appropriate for preferred or expedited motions.
Suspension of Discovery.--Upon the filing of a motion under section 4, discovery requests to or from the moving party shall be suspended pending a decision on-- (1) the motion; and (2) any appeal on the ruling on the motion.
Burden of Proof.--The responding party shall have the burden of proof in presenting evidence that a motion filed under section 4 should be denied.
Basis of Determination.--A court shall make a determination on a motion filed under section 4 on the basis of the facts contained in the pleadings and affidavits filed in accordance with this section.
Dismissal.--With respect to a claim that is the subject of a motion filed under section 4, the court shall grant the motion and dismiss the claim, unless the responding party has produced evidence that would be sufficient for a reasonable finder of fact to conclude, on the basis of clear and convincing evidence, that the moving party is not exempt from liability for that claim under section 3.
Costs.--If a moving party prevails in procuring the dismissal of a claim as a result of a motion made under section 4, the court shall award that party the costs incurred by the party in connection with making the motion, including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees.
QUALIFIED EXEMPTION FROM THIRD-PARTY DISCOVERY.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a trade or professional association may only be served with a subpoena in a civil action described in subsection (b) if the party that serves the subpoena first establishes to the court, by clear and convincing evidence that-- (1) the materials or information sought by the subpoena are directly relevant to the civil action; and (2) the party serving the subpoena has a compelling need for the materials or information because the materials or information are not otherwise available.
Civil Actions Described.--A civil action described in this subsection is a civil action-- (1) relating to the quality, performance, or defect of a product; and (2) to which the trade or professional association involved is not a party.
SPECIAL MOTION TO QUASH A SUBPOENA.
A trade or professional association may file a special motion to quash a subpoena on the grounds that the trade or professional association is exempt from any third-party discovery request under section 6.
REQUIRED PROCEDURES REGARDING SPECIAL MOTION TO QUASH.
In General.--Upon the filing of any motion under section 7, the trial court shall hear the motion within the period of time that is appropriate for preferred or expedited motions.
Suspension of Compliance.--Upon the filing of a motion under section 7, the court shall not compel compliance with the subpoena during the period during which-- (1) the motion is under consideration; or (2) an appeal on the determination by the court to deny the motion has not resulted in a final ruling by the court on the appeal.
Burden of Proof.--The responding party shall have the burden of proof in presenting evidence that a motion filed under section 7 should be denied.
Basis of Determination.--A court shall make a determination on a motion filed under section 7 on the basis of the facts contained in the pleadings and affidavits filed in accordance with this section.
Quashing a Subpoena.--The court shall grant a motion filed under section 7 and quash the subpoena that is the subject of the motion, unless the responding party proves, by clear and convincing evidence, that the trade or professional association that received the subpoena is not exempt from responding to the subpoena under section 6.
Costs.--If a trade or professional association prevails in procuring the quashing of a subpoena as a result of a motion made under section 7, the court shall award the trade or professional association the costs incurred by that trade or professional association in connection with making the motion, including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees.
RIGHT TO OBJECT UNDER RULE 45 OF THE FEDERAL RULES OF CIVIL PROCEDURE.
Nothing in this Act may be construed to impair the right of a trade or professional association to serve written objections under rule 45(c)(2)(B) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure, or any similar rule or procedure under applicable State law.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), a member of a trade or professional association shall not be required to disclose any information described in section 3(a)(2), including any materials containing that information, that-- (1) relates to actual or anticipated litigation involving the quality, performance, or defect of a product; (2) is considered to be confidential by the trade or professional association and that member; and (3) is communicated by the trade or professional association with the reasonable expectation that the information will-- (A) be used in connection with actual or anticipated litigation; and (B) be maintained in confidence.
Exception.--Subsection (a) does not apply in any action in which a party seeking information described in that subsection has established to a court, by clear and convincing evidence, that-- (1) the materials or information sought are directly relevant to an action filed by that party; and (2) the party has a compelling need for the information because the information is not otherwise obtainable.
ELECTION OF STATE REGARDING NONAPPLICABILITY.
This Act shall not apply to any civil action in a State court with respect to which all of the parties are citizens of that State, if that State enacts, pursuant to applicable State law, a State statute that-- (1) cites the authority of this section; (2) specifies that the State elects to be exempt from the requirements of this Act pursuant to this section; and (3) contains no other provisions.
Preemption.--This Act supersedes the laws of any State to the extent such State laws apply to matters to which this Act applies.
Applicability.--Except as provided in section 11, and subject to subsection (a), this Act applies to any civil action commenced in a Federal or State court, on or after the date of enactment of this Act.