This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Gift Card Act''.
In this Act: (1) Gift certificate, store gift card, other prepaid cards.--The terms ``gift certificate'', ``store gift card'', and ``general-use prepaid card'' have the following meanings: (A) Gift certificate.--The term ``gift certificate'' means a written promise that is-- (i) usable at a single merchant or an affiliated group of merchants that share the same name, mark, or logo; (ii) issued in a specified amount and cannot be increased; (iii) purchased on a prepaid basis in exchange for payment; and (iv) honored upon presentation by such single merchant or affiliated group of merchants for goods or services.
Store gift card.--The term ``store gift card'' means a plastic card or other electronic payment device that is-- (i) usable at a single merchant or an affiliated group of merchants that share the same name, mark, or logo; (ii) issued in a specified amount and may or may not be increased in value or reloaded; (iii) purchased on a prepaid basis in exchange for payment; and (iv) honored upon presentation by such single merchant or affiliated group of merchants for goods or services.
General-use prepaid card.-- (i) In general.--The term ``general-use prepaid card'' means a card or other electronic payment device issued by a bank or financial institution, or by a licensed money transmitter that is-- (I) usable at multiple, unaffiliated merchants or service providers, or at automated teller machines; (II) issued in a requested amount whether or not that amount may be, at the option of the issuer, increased in value or reloaded if requested by the holder; (III) purchased or loaded on a prepaid basis; and (IV) honored, upon presentation, by merchants for goods or services, or at automated teller machines.
Exception.--The term ``general-use prepaid card'' does not include a debit card that is linked to a demand deposit or share draft account.
Exclusion.--The terms ``gift certificate'', ``store gift card'', and ``general-use prepaid card'' do not include a written promise, plastic card, or other electronic device that is-- (i) used solely for telephone services; or (ii) associated with a demand deposit, checking, savings or similar account in the name of the individual at a bank or financial institution, and that provides payment solely by debiting such account.
Debit card.--The term ``debit card'' has the meaning given that term under section 603(r)(3) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 United States Code 1681a(r)(3)).
Financial institution.--The term ``financial institution'' has the meaning given that term under section 603(f) of the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 United States Code 1681a(f)).
Dormancy fee; inactivity charge or fee.--The terms ``dormancy fee'' and ``inactivity charge or fee'' mean a fee, charge, or penalty for non use or inactivity of a gift certificate, store gift card, or prepaid general-use card.
Service fee.--The term ``service fee'' means a periodic fee, charge, or penalty for holding or use of a gift certificate, store card, or prepaid general use card.
Licensed money transmitter.--The term ``licensed money transmitter'' means a person who sells or issues payment instruments or engages in the business of receiving money for transmission or transmitting money within the United States or to locations abroad by any and all means, including but not limited to payment instrument, wire, facsimile or electronic transfer.
REGULATION OF UNFAIR AND DECEPTIVE ACTS AND PRACTICES IN CONNECTION WITH GIFT CARDS.
Imposition of Fees or Charges.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided for in paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) it is unlawful for any person to impose with respect to a gift certificate, store gift card, or general-use prepaid card a dormancy fee, inactivity charge or fee or a service fee.
Exception.--A dormancy fee, inactivity charge or fee, or service fee described in paragraph (1) may be charged with respect to a gift certificate, store gift card, or general-use prepaid card if-- (A) at the time the charge or fee is assessed the certificate or card has a remaining value of $5 or less; (B) the charge or fee does not exceed $1; (C) there has been no activity with respect to the certificate or the card for at least 24 consecutive months; (D) the holder of the certificate or the card may reload or add value to the certificate or the card; and (E) the requirements of paragraph (3) are met.
Requirements.--The requirements of this paragraph are that-- (A) the certificate or card clearly and conspicuously states in 10-point font-- (i) that a charge or fee described in paragraph (1) may be charged; and (ii) the amount of the charge or fee, how often the charge or fee may be assessed, and that the charge or fee may be assessed for inactivity; and (B) the issuer of the certificate or card informs the purchaser of the charge or the fee before the certificate or card is purchased, regardless of whether the certificate or card is purchased in person, over the Internet, or by telephone.
Exclusion.--The prohibitions and requirements contained in this subsection shall not apply to gift certificates that-- (A) are distributed pursuant to an award, loyalty, or promotional program and with respect to which there is no money or other value exchanged; or (B) expire not later than 30 days after the date they are sold and are sold below the face value of the certificate to an employer, or to a nonprofit or charitable organization for fundraising purposes.
Limitations on Expiration Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), it is unlawful for any person to sell or issue a gift certificate, store gift card, or general-use prepaid card that is subject to an expiration date.
Exceptions.--A gift certificate, store gift card, or general-use prepaid card may contain an expiration date if the expiration date is not less than 5 years from the date the card is purchased.
Expiration terms must be prominently disclosed in at least 10-point font and in all capital letters.
RELATION TO STATE LAWS.
The Act and any regulations or standards established pursuant to this Act shall not supersede any State law or regulation with respect to charges, fees, and expiration dates of gift certificates, store gift card, or general-use prepaid cards.
Unfair or Deceptive Act or Practice.--A violation of this Act shall be treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or deceptive act or practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Actions by the Commission.--The Federal Trade Commission shall enforce this Act in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et seq.)
were incorporated into and made a part of this Act.
Individual Cause of Action.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit an individual's rights to enforce a State law relating to unfair or deceptive acts or practices.