This Act may be cited as the ``End Financing to ISIL Act''.
REPORT ON PERSONS THAT PROVIDE MATERIAL OR FINANCIAL SUPPORT TO ISIL.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State shall jointly submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that contains the following: (1) An identification of each person that provides, directly or indirectly, material or financial support to ISIL, including purchasing oil or other materials that provide funding for ISIL or other terrorist organizations operating in the region.
An identification of the country in which such person is located and a description of actions taken by the Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State to notify the government of such country that-- (A) such person is located in such country; and (B) such person is providing material or financial support to ISIL or other terrorist organizations operating in the region.
A description of actions taken by the government of such country to restrict such person from providing material or financial support to ISIL.
Form.--The report required by subsection (a) may be submitted in classified form to the extent necessary.
Appropriate Congressional Committees.--In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
SUSPENSION OF MILITARY ASSISTANCE TO CERTAIN COUNTRIES.
In General.--The President shall suspend the provision of assistance described in subsection (b) to the government of a country that is identified in the report submitted under section 2 if the President determines that the government of such country has not taken actions to restrict each person that is located in such country from providing material or financial support to ISIL by not later than the date that is 30 days after the date on which the Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary of State (as the case may be) has notified the government of the country as described in section 2(a)(2).
Assistance Described.--Assistance described in this subsection is assistance under the following provisions of law: (1) Section 21 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2761) (relating to Foreign Military Sales authorizations).
Section 23 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2763) (relating to the Foreign Military Financing program).
Notification.--The President shall submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate a notification of suspension of the provision of assistance described in subsection (b) to the government of a country under subsection (a) and the reasons therefor.
TRANSACTIONS WITH COUNTRIES HARBORING PERSONS THAT PROVIDE MATERIAL SUPPORT FOR TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS.
Chapter 3 of the Arms Export Control Act (22 United States Code 2771 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
TRANSACTIONS WITH COUNTRIES HARBORING PERSONS THAT PROVIDE MATERIAL SUPPORT FOR TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS.
In General.--Except to the extent inconsistent with the purposes of this section, the prohibitions contained in subsections (a) and (b) of section 40 of this Act shall apply in the case of a country described in subsection (b) to the same extent and in the same manner as such prohibitions apply in the case of a country described in subsection (d) of such section.
Country Described.-- ``(1) In general.--A country described in this subsection is a country the government of which the Secretary of State determines has knowledge of any persons that are located within the territory of the country that provide material support for terrorist organizations, including the selling of materials that produce income for terrorist organizations.
Person defined.--In this paragraph, the term `person' has the meaning given the term in section 5 of the End Financing to ISIL Act.
Applicability of Other Provisions.--Except to the extent inconsistent with the purposes of this section, the provisions of subsections (e), (f), (g) (other than paragraph (2) of such subsection), (h), (i), (j), (k), and (l) (other than paragraphs (1), (4), and (5) of such subsection) of section 40 of this Act shall apply with respect to the application of this section to the same extent and in the same manner as such provisions apply with respect to the application of such section 40.''.
In this Act: (1) ISIL.--The term ``ISIL'' means any terrorist organization referred to as the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant, as well as any successor organization.
Person.-- (A) In general.--The term ``person'' means-- (i) a natural person; (ii) a corporation, business association, partnership, society, trust, financial institution, insurer, underwriter, guarantor, and any other business organization, any other nongovernmental entity, organization, or group, and any governmental entity operating as a business enterprise; and (iii) any successor to any entity described in clause (ii).
Application to governmental entities.--The term ``person'' does not include a government or governmental entity that is not operating as a business enterprise.