This Act may be cited as the ``COBRA Plus Act of 2001''.
REFUNDABLE HEALTH INSURANCE COSTS CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable personal credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and inserting after section 34 the following: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to the amount paid by the taxpayer during such taxable year for qualified health insurance for the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse and dependents.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum dollar amount.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount allowed as a credit under subsection (a) to the taxpayer for the taxable year shall not exceed the sum of the monthly limitations for coverage months during such taxable year.
Monthly limitation.--The monthly limitation for each coverage month during the taxable year is an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(i) 50 percent of the amount paid for qualified health insurance for such month, or ``(ii) an amount equal to \1/12\ of-- ``(I) in the case of self-only coverage, $1,320, and ``(II) in the case of family coverage, $3,480.
9-month limitation.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the total number of coverage months taken into account with respect to each qualifying event of the individual shall not exceed 9.
Inflation adjustment.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of any taxable year beginning after 2002, each of the dollar amounts referred to in paragraph (1)(B) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (1)(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting `2001' for `1992'.
Rounding.--If any amount as adjusted under subparagraph (A) is not a multiple of $50, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Coverage month.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `coverage month' means, with respect to an individual, any month if-- ``(i) as of the first day of such month such individual is covered by qualified health insurance, and ``(ii) the premium for coverage under such insurance, or any portion of the premium, for such month is paid by the taxpayer.
Exclusion of months in which individual is eligible for coverage under certain health programs.-- Such term shall not include any month during a taxable year with respect to an individual if, as of the first day of such month, such individual is eligible-- ``(i) for any benefits under title XVIII of the Social Security Act, ``(ii) to participate in the program under title XIX or XXI of such Act, ``(iii) for benefits under chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, ``(iv) for benefits under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, ``(v) to participate in the program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, or any similar program for State or local government employees, or ``(vi) for benefits under any medical care program under the Indian Health Care Improvement Act or any other provision of law.
Exclusion of months in which individual is imprisoned.--Such term shall not include any month with respect to an individual if, as of the first day of such month, such individual is imprisoned under Federal, State, or local authority.
Eligible individual.--The term `eligible individual' means an individual who is-- ``(A) a covered employee (as defined in section 4980B(f)) of the plan sponsor of the qualified health insurance, and ``(B) eligible for continuation coverage by reason of a qualifying event.
Qualified health insurance.--The term `qualified health insurance' means health insurance coverage under-- ``(A) a COBRA continuation provision (as defined in section 9832(d)(1)), or ``(B) section 8905a of title 5, United States Code.
Qualifying event.--The term `qualifying event' means an event described in section 4980B(f)(3)(B).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Coordination with medical expense deduction.--The amount which would (but for this paragraph) be taken into account by the taxpayer under section 213 for the taxable year shall be reduced by the credit (if any) allowed by this section to the taxpayer for such year.
Coordination with advance payment.--Rules similar to the rules of section 32(g) shall apply to any credit to which this section applies.
Expenses Must Be Substantiated.--A payment for insurance to which subsection (a) applies may be taken into account under this section only if the taxpayer substantiates such payment in such form as the Secretary may prescribe.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any amount paid after December 31, 2003.''.
Information Reporting.-- (1) In general.--Subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information concerning transactions with other persons) is amended by inserting after section 6050S the following: ``SEC.
RETURNS RELATING TO PAYMENTS FOR QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE.
In General.--Any person who, in connection with a trade or business conducted by such person, receives payments during any calendar year from any individual for coverage of such individual or any other individual under creditable health insurance, shall make the return described in subsection (b) (at such time as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe) with respect to each individual from whom such payments were received.
Form and Manner of Returns.--A return is described in this subsection if such return-- ``(1) is in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, and ``(2) contains-- ``(A) the name, address, and TIN of the individual from whom payments described in subsection (a) were received, ``(B) the name, address, and TIN of each individual who was provided by such person with coverage under creditable health insurance by reason of such payments and the period of such coverage, ``(C) the aggregate amount of payments described in subsection (a), ``(D) the qualified health insurance credit advance amount (as defined in section 7527(e)) received by such person with respect to the individual described in subparagraph (A), and ``(E) such other information as the Secretary may reasonably prescribe.
Creditable Health Insurance.--For purposes of this section, the term `creditable health insurance' means qualified health insurance (as defined in section 35(c)).
Statements To Be Furnished to Individuals With Respect to Whom Information Is Required.--Every person required to make a return under subsection (a) shall furnish to each individual whose name is required under subsection (b)(2)(A) to be set forth in such return a written statement showing-- ``(1) the name and address of the person required to make such return and the phone number of the information contact for such person, ``(2) the aggregate amount of payments described in subsection (a) received by the person required to make such return from the individual to whom the statement is required to be furnished, ``(3) the information required under subsection (b)(2)(B) with respect to such payments, and ``(4) the qualified health insurance credit advance amount (as defined in section 7527(e)) received by such person with respect to the individual described in paragraph (2).
The written statement required under the preceding sentence shall be furnished on or before January 31 of the year following the calendar year for which the return under subsection (a) is required to be made.
Returns Which Would Be Required To Be Made by 2 or More Persons.--Except to the extent provided in regulations prescribed by the Secretary, in the case of any amount received by any person on behalf of another person, only the person first receiving such amount shall be required to make the return under subsection (a).''.
Assessable penalties.-- (A) Subparagraph (B) of section 6724(d)(1) of such Code (relating to definitions) is amended by redesignating clauses (xi) through (xvii) as clauses (xii) through (xviii), respectively, and by inserting after clause (x) the following: ``(xi) section 6050T (relating to returns relating to payments for qualified health insurance),''.
Paragraph (2) of section 6724(d) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of the next to last subparagraph, by striking the period at the end of the last subparagraph and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(BB) section 6050T(d) (relating to returns relating to payments for qualified health insurance).''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 6050S the following: ``Sec.
Returns relating to payments for qualified health insurance.''.
Criminal Penalty for Fraud.--Subchapter B of chapter 75 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other offenses) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PENALTIES FOR OFFENSES RELATING TO HEALTH INSURANCE TAX CREDIT.
``Any person who knowingly misuses Department of the Treasury names, symbols, titles, or initials to convey the false impression of association with, or approval or endorsement by, the Department of the Treasury of any insurance products or group health coverage in connection with the credit for health insurance costs under section 35 shall on conviction thereof be fined not more than $10,000, or imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 162(l) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) Election to have subsection apply.--No deduction shall be allowed under paragraph (1) for a taxable year unless the taxpayer elects to have this subsection apply for such year.''.
Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``, or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Sec.
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 75 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Penalties for offenses relating to health insurance tax credit.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
Penalties.--The amendments made by subsections (c) and (d)(4) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
ADVANCE PAYMENT OF CREDIT TO ISSUERS OF QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE.
In General.--Chapter 77 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to miscellaneous provisions) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ADVANCE PAYMENT OF HEALTH INSURANCE CREDIT FOR PURCHASERS OF QUALIFIED HEALTH INSURANCE.
General Rule.--In the case of an eligible individual, the Secretary shall make payments to the plan sponsor of the group health plan providing, or the qualified health insurance issuer of, such individual's qualified health insurance equal to such individual's qualified health insurance credit advance amount with respect to such sponsor or issuer.
Eligible Individual.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible individual' means any individual-- ``(1) who purchases qualified health insurance (as defined in section 35(c)), and ``(2) for whom a qualified health insurance credit eligibility certificate is in effect.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified health insurance issuer.--The term `qualified health insurance issuer' means a health insurance issuer described in section 9832(b)(2) (determined without regard to the last sentence thereof) offering coverage in connection with a group health plan.
Group health plan.--The term `group health plan' has the meaning given such term by section 5000(b)(1) (determined without regard to subsection (d) thereof).
Qualified Health Insurance Credit Eligibility Certificate.-- For purposes of this section, a qualified health insurance credit eligibility certificate is a statement furnished by an individual to a plan sponsor of a group health plan or qualified health insurance issuer which-- ``(1) certifies that the individual will be eligible to receive the credit provided by section 35 for the taxable year, ``(2) estimates the amount of such credit for such taxable year, and ``(3) provides such other information as the Secretary may require for purposes of this section.
Qualified Health Insurance Credit Advance Amount.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified health insurance credit advance amount' means, with respect to any plan sponsor of a group health plan providing, or qualified health insurance issuer of, qualified health insurance, an estimate of the amount of credit allowable under section 35 to the individual for the taxable year which is attributable to the insurance provided to the individual by such sponsor or issuer.
Required Documentation for Receipt of Payments of Advance Amount.--No payment of a qualified health insurance credit advance amount with respect to any eligible individual may be made under subsection (a) unless the plan sponsor of the group health plan or health insurance issuer provides to the Secretary-- ``(1) the qualified health insurance credit eligibility certificate of such individual, and ``(2) the return relating to such individual under section 6050T.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 77 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Advance payment of health insurance credit for purchasers of qualified health insurance.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 2002.
Not later than January 1, 2003, the Comptroller General of the United States shall-- (1) conduct a study on the effectiveness of the amendments made by this Act in increasing enrollment by eligible individuals (as defined in section 35(c)(2), as added by section 2) in group health plans under COBRA continuation coverage; and (2) submit a report on the study conducted under paragraph (1) to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate.