This Act may be cited as the ``Regional Investments for National Growth Act of 1997''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the economic infrastructure of metropolitan regions assists businesses in those regions in providing quality goods and services at a low cost; (2) maintaining and improving the economic infrastructure of metropolitan regions is essential for the success of the Nation in the world economy; and (3) building efficient transportation links within and between metropolitan regions is critical to that economic infrastructure.
REGIONAL INVESTMENTS FOR NATIONAL GROWTH PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a regional investments for national growth program (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``RING program'') for the purpose of identifying and funding large multi-State and regional transportation projects that are essential to the global competitiveness of the United States.
Eligible Projects.-- (1) In general.--Regional transportation infrastructure investments that include participation by two or more States or public authorities representing two or more States, or improve access to international commerce centers such as ports, commercial aviation facilities, and major rail terminals, and meets the requirements of paragraph (2), shall be eligible for funding under the RING program.
Requirements.--In order to be eligible for funding under the RING program, a project shall-- (A) support the economic growth of the Nation through improved movement of people and goods; (B) improve intermodal connections by increasing access to ports, airports, rail terminals, distribution centers, or other passenger or freight rail hubs; (C) address capacity constraints that hamper the movement of people and goods between States or metropolitan regions; (D) contribute to the global competitiveness of the United States; and (E) not be currently funded for construction.
Selection Process.-- (1) Solicitation of proposals.--Within 6 months of the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall solicit proposals for projects to be carried out under the RING program.
Any State, multi-State region, or multi-State agency may submit a proposal.
Recommended projects.--Within 2 years of such date of enactment, the Secretary shall transmit a report to Congress recommending eligible projects.
Final proposals.--Within 1 year of the date of issuance of the report under paragraph (2), sponsors of those projects recommended as eligible shall submit a final proposal to the Secretary.
Ranking of projects.--Within 6 months of receiving final proposals, the Secretary shall transmit a report to Congress ranking the projects in priority order.
Selection Criteria.--In considering projects for inclusion in the report required by subsection (c)(2), the Secretary shall consider the following criteria: (1) Time savings for both goods and people.
Volume of goods and number of users affected.
Reduction in costs of goods movement.
Relief the project provides to capacity limitations of existing infrastructure.
Benefits for multi-State facilities and operations.
Promotion of efficient multi-modal usage.
Level of State, local, and regional financial support for the project.
Private sector funding opportunities.
Funding Eligibility.-- (1) Project proposal funding.--Those projects included by the Secretary in the report required by subsection (c)(2) shall be eligible to receive project proposal funding under the RING program.
Design and engineering funding.--Those projects included by the Secretary in the report required by subsection (c)(4) shall be eligible to receive design and engineering funding under the RING program.
Reimbursement for Planning and Design.--Projects included by the Secretary in the report required by subsection (c)(2) shall also be eligible for reimbursement of funds for planning and design which have been expended prior to the issuance of such report.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the eligible costs of a project under the RING program shall not exceed 75 percent.
Relationship to Other Laws.--All projects receiving assistance under this section shall comply with other laws governing transportation projects and programs, including the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.