This Act may be cited as the ``Personal Responsibility in Food Consumption Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to allow Congress, State legislatures, and regulatory agencies to determine appropriate laws, rules, and regulations to address the problems of weight gain, obesity, and health conditions associated with weight gain or obesity.
PRESERVATION OF SEPARATION OF POWERS.
In General.--A qualified civil liability action may not be brought in any Federal or State court.
Dismissal of Pending Actions.--A qualified civil liability action that is pending on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be dismissed immediately by the court in which the action was brought or is currently pending.
Discovery.-- (1) Stay.--In any action of the type described in clause (i) or (ii) of section 4(5)(B), all discovery and other proceedings shall be stayed during the pendency of any motion to dismiss unless the court finds upon motion of any party that particularized discovery is necessary to preserve evidence or to prevent undue prejudice to that party.
Responsibility of parties.--During the pendency of any stay of discovery under paragraph (1), unless otherwise ordered by the court, any party to the action with actual notice of the allegations contained in the complaint shall treat all documents, data compilations (including electronically recorded or stored data), and tangible objects that are in the custody or control of such person and that are relevant to the allegations, as if they were the subject of a continuing request for production of documents from an opposing party under applicable Federal or State rules of civil procedure, as the case may be.
A party aggrieved by the willful failure of an opposing party to comply with this paragraph may apply to the court for an order awarding appropriate sanctions.
Pleadings.--In any action of the type described in section 4(5)(B)(i), the complaint initiating such action shall state with particularity the Federal and State statutes that were allegedly violated and the facts that are alleged to have proximately caused the injury claimed.
In this Act: (1) Engaged in the business.--The term ``engaged in the business'' means a person who manufactures, markets, distributes, advertises, or sells a qualified product in the person's regular course of trade or business.
Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means, with respect to a qualified product, a person who is lawfully engaged in the business of manufacturing the product in interstate or foreign commerce.
Person.--The term ``person'' means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity, including any governmental entity.
Qualified product.--The term ``qualified product'' means a food (as defined in section 201(f) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 321(f))).
Qualified civil liability action.--(A) Subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), the term ``qualified civil liability action'' means a civil action brought by any person against a manufacturer or seller of a qualified product, or a trade association, for damages, penalties, declaratory judgment, injunctive or declaratory relief, restitution, or other relief arising out of, related to, or resulting in injury or potential injury resulting from a person's consumption of a qualified product and weight gain, obesity, or any health condition that is associated with a person's weight gain or obesity, including an action brought by a person other than the person on whose weight gain, obesity, or health condition the action is based, and any derivative action brought by or on behalf of any person or any representative, spouse, parent, child, or other relative of any person.
Such term shall not include-- (i) an action in which a manufacturer or seller of a qualified product knowingly and willfully violated a Federal or State statute applicable to the manufacturing, marketing, distribution, advertisement, labeling, or sale of the product, and the violation was a proximate cause of injury related to a person's weight gain, obesity, or any health condition associated with a person's weight gain or obesity; or (ii) an action for breach of express contract or express warranty in connection with the purchase of a qualified product.
Such term shall not be construed to include an action brought under the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et seq.)
or the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 301 et sequentes).
Seller.--The term ``seller'' means, with respect to a qualified product, a person lawfully engaged in the business of marketing, distributing, advertising, or selling a qualified product in interstate or foreign commerce.
State.--The term ``State'' includes each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States, and any political subdivision of any such place.
Trade association.--The term ``trade association'' means any association or business organization (whether or not incorporated under Federal or State law) that is not operated for profit, and 2 or more members of which are manufacturers, mar- keters, distributors, advertisers, or sellers of a qualified product.
Passed the House of Representatives March 10, 2004.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.