This Act may be cited as the ``Pharmaceutical Aid to Older Americans Act''.
AMENDMENT TO OLDER AMERICANS ACT OF 1965.
Part B of title IV of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3034 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
GRANTS FOR STATE PHARMACY ASSISTANCE PROGRAMS.
Program Authorized.--The Assistant Secretary may award grants to States to provide and administer State pharmacy assistance programs.
Preference.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Assistant Secretary shall give preference to States that propose to develop and implement State pharmacy assistance programs, or to provide assistance to State pharmacy assistance programs in existence on the date of enactment of this section, that provide services for underserved populations or for populations residing in rural areas.
Use of Funds.--A State that receives a grant under subsection (a) shall use funds made available through the grant to-- ``(1) develop and implement a State pharmacy assistance program, or to provide assistance to a State pharmacy assistance program in existence on the date of enactment of this section; and ``(2) prepare and submit an evaluation to the Assistant Secretary on the implementation of, or provision of, or assistance to a program described in paragraph (1).
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a State shall submit to the Assistant Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Assistant Secretary may require, including-- ``(1) a description of a State pharmacy assistance program that such State plans to develop and implement, including information on the anticipated number of individuals to be served, eligibility criteria of individuals to be served, such as the age and income level of such individuals, drugs to be covered by the program, and performance measures to be used to evaluate the program; or ``(2) a description of a State pharmacy assistance program in existence on the date of enactment of this section that such State plans to assist with funds received under subsection (a), including information on the number of individuals served, eligibility criteria of individuals served, such as the age and income level of such individuals, drugs covered by the program, and performance measures used to evaluate the program.
Minimum Amount.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), from the amount appropriated under subsection (l)(1) for each fiscal year, the Assistant Secretary shall award, to each eligible State, an amount that is not less than $250,000.
Duration of Grant.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Assistant Secretary shall award such grants for periods of 2 years.
Matching Requirement.--The Assistant Secretary shall not award a grant to a State under subsection (a) unless that State agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the State in carrying out the program for which the grant was awarded, the State will make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions in an amount that is not less than 30 percent of Federal funds provided under the grant.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, any other Federal, State, or local funds expended by a State to provide the services for programs described in this section.
Evaluations and Report.-- ``(1) Program evaluations.--Not later than 6 months after the end of the period for which the grant is awarded under subsection (a), the State shall prepare an evaluation of the effectiveness of programs carried out with funds received under this section.
Not later than 6 months after the end of such period, the State shall submit to the Assistant Secretary a report containing the results of the evaluation, in such form and containing such information as the Assistant Secretary may require.
Report to congress.--Not later than 36 months after the date of enactment of this section, the Assistant Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate a report that describes the effectiveness of the programs carried out with funds received under this section.
Sunset Provision.--This section shall not apply beginning on the date of enactment of legislation that provides comprehensive health care coverage for prescription drugs under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) for all medicare beneficiaries.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Medication management.--The term `medication management program' means a program of services for older individuals, including pharmacy counseling, medicine screening, or patient and health care provider education programs, that-- ``(A) provides information and counseling on the prescription drug purchases that are currently the most economical, and safe and effective; ``(B) provides services to minimize unnecessary or inappropriate use of prescription drugs; and ``(C) provides services to minimize adverse events due to unintended prescription drug-to-drug interactions.
State pharmacy assistance programs.--The term `State pharmacy assistance program' means a program that provides coverage for prescription drugs and medication management programs for individuals who-- ``(A) are not less than 65 years of age; ``(B) are not eligible for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et seq.
); ``(C) are from families with incomes at or below 200 percent of the poverty line; and ``(D) have no coverage for prescription drugs other than coverage provided by a State pharmacy assistance program.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005.
Reservation.--From the amount appropriated under paragraph (1), for each fiscal year, the Assistant Secretary shall reserve not less than 33.3 percent of such amount to enable States to assist State pharmacy assistance programs in existence on the date of enactment of this section.
GRANTS FOR MEDICATION MANAGEMENT PROGRAMS.
Program Authorized.--The Assistant Secretary may award grants to State agencies to assist such agencies or area agencies on aging in providing and administering medication management programs.
Use of Funds.--A State agency or area agency on aging that receives funds through a grant awarded under subsection (a) shall use such funds to-- ``(1) develop and implement a medication management program, or to provide assistance to a medication management program in existence on the date of enactment of this section; and ``(2) prepare an evaluation on the implementation of or provision of assistance to a program described in paragraph (1), and, in the case of an area agency on aging, submit the evaluation to the appropriate State agency.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), a State agency shall submit to the Assistant Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Assistant Secretary may require.
Minimum Amount.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), from the amount appropriated under subsection (j) for each fiscal year, the Assistant Secretary shall award, to each eligible State agency, an amount that is not less than $50,000.
Duration of Grant.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Assistant Secretary shall award such grants for a period of 2 years.
Matching Requirement.--The Assistant Secretary shall not award a grant to a State agency under subsection (a) unless that State agency agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred in carrying out programs for which the grant was awarded, the State agency will make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions in an amount that is not less than 30 percent of Federal funds provided under the grant.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, any other Federal, State, or local funds expended by a State agency or area agency on aging to provide the services for programs described in this section.
Reports.-- ``(1) Report to assistant secretary.--Not later than 24 months after receipt of a grant under subsection (a), a State agency shall prepare and submit to the Assistant Secretary a report on the medication management programs carried out by the State agency or area agencies on aging in the State in such form and containing such information as the Assistant Secretary may require, including an analysis of the effectiveness of the programs.
Such report shall in part be based on evaluations submitted under subsection (b)(2).
Report to congress.--Not later than 36 months after grants have been awarded under subsection (a), the Assistant Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate a report that describes the effectiveness of the programs carried out with funds received under this section.
Medication Management Programs.--In this section, the term `medication management program' means a program of services for older individuals, including pharmacy counseling, medicine screening, or patient and health care provider education programs, that-- ``(1) provides information and counseling on the prescription drug purchases that are currently the most economical, and safe and effective; ``(2) provides services to minimize unnecessary or inappropriate use of prescription drugs; and ``(3) provides services to minimize adverse events due to unintended prescription drug-to-drug interactions.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005.