TITLE I--NICODEMUS NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE SEC.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the town of Nicodemus, in Kansas, has national significance as the only remaining western town established by African-Americans during the Reconstruction period following the Civil War; (2) the town of Nicodemus is symbolic of the pioneer spirit of African-Americans who dared to leave the only region they had been familiar with to seek personal freedom and the opportunity to develop their talents and capabilities; and (3) the town of Nicodemus continues to be a viable African- American community.
Purposes.--The purposes of this title are-- (1) to preserve, protect, and interpret for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations, the remaining structures and locations that represent the history (including the settlement and growth) of the town of Nicodemus, Kansas; and (2) to interpret the historical role of the town of Nicodemus in the Reconstruction period in the context of the experience of westward expansion in the United States.
In this title: (1) Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Nicodemus National Historic Site established by section 103.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NICODEMUS NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Establishment.--There is established the Nicodemus National Historic Site in Nicodemus, Kansas.
Description.-- (1) In general.--The historic site shall consist of the First Baptist Church, the St. Francis Hotel, the Nicodemus School District Number 1, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, and the Township Hall located within the approximately 161.35 acres designated as the Nicodemus National Landmark in the Township of Nicodemus, Graham County, Kansas, as registered on the National Register of Historic Places pursuant to section 101 of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470a), and depicted on a map entitled ``Nicodemus National Historic Site'', numbered 80,000 and dated August 1994.
Map and boundary description.--The map referred to in paragraph (1) and an accompanying boundary description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the National Park Service and any other office of the National Park Service that the Secretary determines to be an appropriate location for filing the map and boundary description.
ADMINISTRATION OF THE HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with-- (1) this title; and (2) the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666, chapter 593; 16 United States Code 461 et seq.).
Cooperative Agreements.--To further the purposes specified in section 101(b), the Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with any interested individual, public or private agency, organization, or institution.
Technical and Preservation Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may provide to any eligible person described in paragraph (2) technical assistance for the preservation of historic structures of, the maintenance of the cultural landscape of, and local preservation planning for, the historic site.
Eligible persons.--The eligible persons described in this paragraph are-- (A) an owner of real property within the boundary of the historic site, as described in section 103(b); and (B) any interested individual, agency, organization, or institution that has entered into an agreement with the Secretary pursuant to subsection (b).
ACQUISITION OF REAL PROPERTY.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary is authorized to acquire by donation, exchange, or purchase with funds made available by donation or appropriation, such lands or interests in lands as may be necessary to allow for the interpretation, preservation, or restoration of the First Baptist Church, the St. Francis Hotel, the Nicodemus School District Number 1, the African Methodist Episcopal Church, or the Township Hall, as described in section 103(b)(1), or any combination thereof.
Limitations.-- (1) Acquisition of property owned by the state of kansas.-- Real property that is owned by the State of Kansas or a political subdivision of the State of Kansas that is acquired pursuant to subsection (a) may only be acquired by donation.
Consent of owner required.--No real property may be acquired under this section without the consent of the owner of the real property.
In General.--Not later than the last day of the third full fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the officials described in subsection (b), prepare a general management plan for the historic site.
Consultation.--In preparing the general management plan, the Secretary shall consult with an appropriate official of each of the following: (1) The Nicodemus Historical Society.
The Kansas Historical Society.
Appropriate political subdivisions of the State of Kansas that have jurisdiction over all or a portion of the historic site.
Submission of Plan to Congress.--Upon the completion of the general management plan, the Secretary shall submit a copy of the plan to-- (1) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior such sums as are necessary to carry out this title.
TITLE II--NEW BEDFORD NATIONAL HISTORIC LANDMARK DISTRICT SEC.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the New Bedford National Historic Landmark District and associated historic sites as described in section 203(b) of this title, including the Schooner Ernestina, are National Historic Landmarks and are listed on the National Register of Historic Places as historic sites associated with the history of whaling in the United States; (2) the city of New Bedford was the 19th century capital of the world's whaling industry and retains significant architectural features, archival materials, and museum collections illustrative of this period; (3) New Bedford's historic resources provide unique opportunities for illustrating and interpreting the whaling industry's contribution to the economic, social, and environmental history of the United States and provide opportunities for public use and enjoyment; and (4) the National Park System presently contains no sites commemorating whaling and its contribution to American history.
Purposes.--The purposes of this title are-- (1) to help preserve, protect, and interpret the resources within the areas described in section 203(b) of this title, including architecture, setting, and associated archival and museum collections; (2) to collaborate with the city of New Bedford and with local historical, cultural, and preservation organizations to further the purposes of the park established under this title; and (3) to provide opportunities for the inspirational benefit and education of the American people.
For the purposes of this title: (1) The term ``park'' means the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park established by section 203.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
NEW BEDFORD WHALING NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--In order to preserve for the benefit and inspiration of the people of the United States as a national historical park certain districts structures, and relics located in New Bedford, Massachusetts, and associated with the history of whaling and related social and economic themes in America, there is established the New Bedford Whaling National Historical Park.
Boundaries.--(1) The boundaries of the park shall be those generally depicted on the map numbered NAR-P49-80000-4 and dated June 1994.
Such map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
In case of any conflict between the descriptions set forth in subparagraphs (A) through (D) and such map, such map shall govern.
The park shall include the following: (A) The area included within the New Bedford National Historic Landmark District, known as the Bedford Landing Waterfront Historic District, as listed within the National Register of Historic Places and in the Massachusetts State Register of Historic Places.
The National Historic Landmark Schooner Ernestina, with its home port in New Bedford.
The land along the eastern boundary of the New Bedford National Historic Landmark District over to the east side of MacArthur Drive from the Route 6 overpass on the north to an extension of School Street on the south.
The land north of Elm Street in New Bedford, bounded by Acushnet Avenue on the west, Route 6 (ramps) on the north, MacArthur Drive on the east, and Elm Street on the south.
In addition to the sites, areas and relics referred to in paragraph (1) , the Secretary may assist in the interpretation and preservation of each of the following: (A) The southwest corner of the State Pier.
Waterfront Park, immediately south of land adjacent to the State Pier.
The Rotch-Jones-Duff House and Garden Museum, located at 396 County Street.
The Wharfinger Building, located on Piers 3 and 4.
The Bourne Counting House, located on Merrill's Wharf.
In General.--The park shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with this title and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the national park system, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461- 467).
Cooperative Agreements.--(1) The Secretary may consult and enter into cooperative agreements with interested entities and individuals to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the park.
Any payment made by the Secretary pursuant to a cooperative agreement under this subsection shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purposes of this title, as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States to reimbursement of all funds made available to such project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such funds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
Non-Federal Matching Requirements.--(1) Funds authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for the purposes of-- (A) cooperative agreements under subsection (b) shall be expended in the ratio of one dollar of Federal funds for each four dollars of funds contributed by non-Federal sources; and (B) construction, restoration, and rehabilitation of visitor and interpretive facilities (other than annual operation and maintenance costs) shall be expended in the ratio of one dollar of Federal funds for each one dollar of funds contributed by non-Federal sources.
For the purposes of this subsection, the Secretary is authorized to accept from non-Federal sources, and to utilize for purposes of this title, any money so contributed.
With the approval of the Secretary, any donation of property, services, or goods from a non- Federal source may be considered as a contribution of funds from a non- Federal source for the purposes of this subsection.
Acquisition of Real Property.--For the purposes of the park, the Secretary may acquire only by donation lands, interests in lands, and improvements thereon within the park.
Other Property, Funds, and Services.--The Secretary may accept donated funds, property, and services to carry out this title.
Not later than the end of the second fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a general management plan for the park and shall implement such plan as soon as practically possible.
The plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 12(b) of the Act of August 18, 1970 (16 United States Code 1a-7(b)) and other applicable law.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out annual operations and maintenance with respect to the park.
Exceptions.--In carrying out this title-- (1) not more than $2,000,000 may be appropriated for construction, restoration, and rehabilitation of visitor and interpretive facilities, and directional and visitor orientation signage; (2) none of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this title may be used for the operation or maintenance of the Schooner Ernestina; and (3) not more than $50,000 annually of Federal funds may be used for interpretive and educational programs for the Schooner Ernestina pursuant to cooperative grants under section 204(b).
Passed the Senate May 2, 1996.
Attest: KELLY D. JOHNSTON, Secretary.