This Act may be cited as the ``Addiction Free Treatment Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Heroin use in the United States continues to increase.
Drug use among teenagers in the United States is increasing and the number of teenagers that are using heroin for the first time is higher than at any previous time in history.
Between 1992 and 1996 heroin use among college-age students increased an estimated 10 percent.
There are an estimated 810,000 chronic heroin users in the United States, with an estimated 115,000 heroin addicts in the United States currently participating in methadone programs.
Methadone is a synthetic opiate and the use of methadone in the treatment of heroin addiction results in the transfer of addiction from 1 narcotic to another.
Methadone addicts attempting detoxification experience the same difficult withdrawal process as would be experienced with heroin detoxification.
The Federal Government should adopt a zero-tolerance, non-pharmacological policy that has as its defined objective independence from drug addiction.
The approach of the Federal Government should be to address a range of human needs and conditions that contribute to recidivism among recovering heroin addicts and that should be designed to provide opportunities for former heroin addicts to become drug-free, self-sufficient, productive members of society.
PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF MEDICAID FUNDS FOR CERTAIN METHADONE MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS.
Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(i)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (18), by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(19) with respect to any amount expended for any drug treatment or rehabilitation program that utilizes methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol unless the program-- ``(A) has as its primary objective the elimination of drug addiction, including addiction to methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol; ``(B) has a specifically defined timetable (not to exceed 6 months from the date of an individual's enrollment as a patient in the program) for achieving complete termination of methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl- Methadol treatment; davis ``(C) conducts random and frequent comprehensive drug testing for all narcotics; ``(D) provides documentation of the results of such testing; ``(E) requires that patients who are participating in the program be drug-free for the duration of their methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol treatment; and ``(F) terminates the methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol treatment of any patient who tests positive for any other illegal narcotic during the duration of their methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl- Methadol treatment.''.
PROHIBITION ON THE USE OF CERTAIN PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT FUNDS FOR CERTAIN METHADONE MAINTENANCE PROGRAMS.
Section 501 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290aa) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n) Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, amounts appropriated under this title or title XIX and administered by the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration may not be expended for any drug treatment or rehabilitation program that utilizes methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol unless the program-- ``(1) has as its primary objective the elimination of drug addiction, including addiction to methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol; ``(2) has a specifically defined timetable (not to exceed 6 months from the date of an individual's enrollment as a patient in the program) for achieving complete termination of methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol treatment; ``(3) conducts random and frequent comprehensive drug testing for all narcotics; ``(4) provides documentation of the results of such testing; ``(5) requires that patients who are participating in the program be drug-free for the duration of their methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol treatment; and ``(6) terminates the methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl- Methadol treatment of any patient who tests positive for any other illegal narcotic during the duration of their methadone or Levo-Alpha Acetyl-Methadol treatment.''.
STUDY OF TREATMENT PROGRAMS.
Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Institute of Drug Abuse shall have conducted and completed a study concerning-- (1) the methods and effectiveness of nonpharmacological heroin rehabilitation programs; and (2) the methods and effectiveness of methadone-to- abstinence programs.
ANNUAL REPORT ON EFFECTIVENESS OF HEROIN REHABILITATION PROGRAMS.
In General.--Not later than January 1, 2000, and each January 1 thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services acting through the Center for Substance Abuse Treatment shall prepare and submit to Congress a report concerning the effectiveness of heroin rehabilitation programs.
Each such report shall focus on both nonpharmacological and methadone-to-abstinence based approaches to heroin rehabilitation.
Termination.--The requirement under subsection (a) shall terminate after the Secretary of Health and Human Services submits the 5th annual report under such subsection.
The amendments made by this Act apply to amounts expended on and after the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.