This Act may be cited as the ``Ethanol and Biodiesel Promotion Act of 2001''.
CREDIT FOR PROPERTY USED IN THE RETAIL SALE, OR BUSINESS USE, OF E85 ETHANOL AND NEAT BIODIESEL.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROPERTY USED IN THE RETAIL SALE, OR BUSINESS USE, OF E85 ETHANOL AND NEAT BIODIESEL.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the E85 ethanol and biodiesel credit is an amount equal to 50 percent of the basis of qualified fuel property placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitation.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed $50,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified fuel property.--The term `qualified fuel property' means-- ``(A) qualified vehicle refueling property, and ``(B) qualified business use property.
Qualified vehicle refueling property.--The term `qualified vehicle refueling property' means any property which would be qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property, as defined in section 179A(d), if the only clean-burning fuel referred to in such section were E85 ethanol and neat biodiesel.
Qualified business use property.--The term `qualified business use property' means any property (not including a building and its structural components) if-- ``(A) such property is of a character subject to the allowance for depreciation, ``(B) the original use of such property begins with the taxpayer, and ``(C) such property is used by the taxpayer in the consumption of E85 ethanol or neat biodiesel in a trade of business of the taxpayer.
E85 ethanol.--The term `E85 ethanol' means any fuel at least 85 percent of which is ethanol.
Neat biodiesel.--The term `neat biodiesel' means diesel fuel at least 85 percent of which is produced from a substance other than petroleum.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any property placed in service after December 31, 2007.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 38(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(16) the E85 ethanol and biodiesel credit determined under section 45G.''.
Section 39(d) of such Code (relating to transitional rules) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(11) No carryback of section 45g credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit determined under section 45G(a) may be carried back to a taxable year ending before January 1, 2001.''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Property used in the retail sale, or business use, of E85 ethanol and neat biodiesel.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
CREDIT FOR RETAIL SALE OF E85 ETHANOL AND NEAT BIODIESEL AS MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
RETAIL SALE OF E85 ETHANOL AND NEAT BIODIESEL AS MOTOR VEHICLE FUEL.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the E85 ethanol and biodiesel retail sales credit of any taxpayer for any taxable year is the credit amount for each gasoline gallon equivalent of E85 ethanol and neat biodiesel sold at retail by the taxpayer during such year as a fuel to propel any qualified motor vehicle.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Credit amount.--The term `credit amount' means-- ``(A) in the case of E85 ethanol, the excess of 60 cents over the blender amount applicable under section 40(h) for the calendar year in which the sale occurs, and ``(B) in the case of neat biodiesel, 25 cents.
E85 ethanol and neat biodiesel.--The terms `E85 ethanol' and `neat biodiesel' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 45G.
Gasoline gallon equivalent.--The term `gasoline gallon equivalent' means, with respect to any alternative fuel, the amount (determined by the Secretary) of such fuel having a Btu content of 114,000.
Qualified motor vehicle.--The term `qualified motor vehicle' means any motor vehicle (as defined in section 179A(e)(2)) which meets any applicable Federal or State emissions standards with respect to each fuel by which such vehicle is designed to be propelled.
Sold at retail.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `sold at retail' means the sale, for a purpose other than resale, after manufacture, production, or importation.
Use treated as sale.--If any person uses E85 ethanol or neat biodiesel as a fuel to propel any qualified motor vehicle (including any use after importation) before such fuel is sold at retail, then such use shall be treated in the same manner as if such fuel were sold at retail as a fuel to propel such a vehicle by such person.
No Double Benefit.--The amount of any deduction or credit allowable under this chapter for any fuel taken into account in computing the amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit attributable to such fuel.
Pass-Thru in the Case of Estates and Trusts.--Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, rules similar to the rules of subsection (d) of section 52 shall apply.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to any fuel sold at retail after December 31, 2007.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 38(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (15), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (16) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(17) the E85 ethanol and biodiesel retail sales credit determined under section 45H.''.
Section 39(d) of such Code (relating to transitional rules) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(12) No carryback of section 45h credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit determined under section 45H(a) may be carried back to a taxable year ending before January 1, 2001.''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Retail sale of E85 ethanol and neat biodiesel as motor vehicle fuel.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to fuel sold at retail after December 31, 2001, in taxable years ending after such date.
SMALL ETHANOL PRODUCER CREDIT.
Allocation of Alcohol Fuels Credit to Patrons of a Cooperative.--Section 40(g) Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definitions and special rules for eligible small ethanol producer credit) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(6) Allocation of small ethanol producer credit to patrons of cooperative.-- ``(A) Election to allocate.-- ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (4), in the case of a cooperative organization described in section 1381(a), any portion of the credit determined under subsection (a)(3) for the taxable year may, at the election of the organization, be apportioned pro rata among patrons of the organization on the basis of the quantity or value of business done with or for such patrons for the taxable year.
Form and effect of election.--An election under clause (i) for any taxable year shall be made on a timely filed return for such year.
Such election, once made, shall be irrevocable for such taxable year.
Special rule for taxable years prior to enactment of paragraph.-- Notwithstanding clause (ii), an election for any taxable year ending prior to the date of the enactment of this paragraph may be made at any time before the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the last date prescribed by law for filing the return of the taxpayer for such taxable year (determined without regard to extensions) by filing an amended return for such year.
Treatment of organizations and patrons.--The amount of the credit apportioned to patrons under subparagraph (A)-- ``(i) shall not be included in the amount determined under subsection (a) with respect to the organization for the taxable year, ``(ii) shall be included in the amount determined under subsection (a) for the taxable year of each patron for which the patronage dividends for the taxable year described in subparagraph (A) are included in gross income, and ``(iii) shall be included in gross income of such patrons for the taxable year in the manner and to the extent provided in section 87.
Special rules for decrease in credits for taxable year.--If the amount of the credit of a cooperative organization (as so defined) determined under subsection (a)(3) for a taxable year is less than the amount of such credit shown on the return of the cooperative organization for such year, an amount equal to the excess of-- ``(i) such reduction, over ``(ii) the amount not apportioned to such patrons under subparagraph (A) for the taxable year, shall be treated as an increase in tax imposed by this chapter on the organization.
Such increase shall not be treated as tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit under this subpart or subpart A, B, E, or G.''.
Definition of Small Ethanol Producer; Improvements to Small Ethanol Producer Credit.-- (1) Definition of small ethanol producer.--Section 40(g)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to eligible small ethanol producer) is amended by striking ``30,000,000'' and inserting ``60,000,000''.
Small ethanol producer credit not a passive activity credit.--Clause (i) of section 469(d)(2)(A) of such Code (relating to passive activity credit) is amended by striking ``subpart D'' and inserting ``subpart D, other than section 40(a)(3),''.
Allowing credit against minimum tax.-- (A) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 38 of such Code (relating to limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Special rules for small ethanol producer credit.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of the small ethanol producer credit-- ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be applied separately with respect to the credit, and ``(ii) in applying paragraph (1) to the credit-- ``(I) subparagraphs (A) and (B) thereof shall not apply, and ``(II) the limitation under paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause (I)) shall be reduced by the credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year (other than the small ethanol producer credit).
Small ethanol producer credit.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `small ethanol producer credit' means the credit allowable under subsection (a) by reason of section 40(a)(3).''.
Conforming amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 38(c)(2)(A)(ii) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or the small ethanol producer credit'' after ``employment credit''.
Small ethanol producer credit not added back to income under section 87.--Section 87 of such Code (relating to income inclusion of alcohol fuel credit is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``Gross income includes an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(1) the amount of the alcohol mixture credit determined with respect to the taxpayer for the taxable year under section 40(a)(1), and ``(2) the alcohol credit determined with respect to the taxpayer for the taxable year under section 40(a)(2).''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1388 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definitions and special rules for cooperative organizations) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Cross Reference.--For provisions relating to the apportionment of the alcohol fuels credit between cooperative organizations and their patrons, see section 40(d)(6).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
EXTENSION OF EXPENSING OF VEHICLE REFUELING PROPERTY FOR E85 ETHANOL.
Subsection (f) of section 179A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to termination) is amended by inserting before the period ``(December 31, 2007, for property which is qualified clean-fuel vehicle refueling property with respect to fuel at least 85 percent of which is ethanol)''.
REPEAL OF LIMITATION ON DEPOSITS INTO HIGHWAY TRUST FUND WITH RESPECT TO ALCOHOL FUELS.
In General.--Paragraph (4) of section 9503(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain taxes not transferred to Highway Trust Fund) is amended by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the comma at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting a period, and by striking subparagraphs (E) and (F).
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxes received in the Treasury after December 31, 2001.