REDUCTION IN LOAN RATES FOR PEANUTS.
Section 155(a) of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7271(a)(2)) is amended by striking paragraph (2) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(2) Loan rate.--The national average quota loan rate for quota peanuts shall be as follows: ``(A) $610 per ton for the 1997 crop.
$550 per ton for the 1998 crop.
$515 per ton for the 1999 crop.
$480 per ton for the 2000 crop.
$445 per ton for the 2001 crop.''.
FUTURE TERMINATION OF PRICE SUPPORT AND MARKETING QUOTA PROGRAMS FOR PEANUTS.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect October 1, 2001, and shall apply with respect to the 2002 and subsequent crops of peanuts.
Price Support.--Section 155 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7271) is repealed.
Marketing Quota.--Part VI of subtitle B of title III of the Agricultural Adjustment Act of 1938 (7 United States Code 1357-1359a), relating to peanuts, is repealed.
Conforming Amendments.--The Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 United States Code 1441 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 101(b) (7 United States Code 1441(b)), by striking ``and peanuts''; and (2) in section 408(c) (7 United States Code 1428(c)), by striking ``peanuts,''.
Prohibition on Subsequent Provision of Price Support.-- (1) Prohibition.--After the effective date of this section, except as provided in section 3, the Secretary of Agriculture may not make price support available, whether in the form of loans, purchases, or other operations, to peanut producers for the 2002 and subsequent crops of peanuts by using the funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation or under the authority of any law.
Outstanding loans.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Secretary shall settle any outstanding loans under section 155 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (title I of Public Law 104-127; 7 United States Code 7271) made before the effective date of this section with regard to the 2001 and previous crops of peanuts.
Continued Liability of Producers.--An amendment made by this section shall not affect the liability of any person under any provision of law as in effect before the effective date of this section.
NONRECOURSE LOANS FOR PEANUT PRODUCERS.
Nonrecourse Loans Available.--For each of the 2002 and subsequent crops of peanuts produced in the United States, the Secretary of Agriculture shall make available to producers on a farm a nonrecourse loan for peanuts produced on the farm.
The loans shall be made under terms and conditions that are prescribed by the Secretary and at the loan rate established under subsection (b).
Loan Rate.--The loan rate for a nonrecourse loan under this section for peanuts shall be-- (1) not less than 85 percent of the simple average price received by producers of peanuts, as determined by the Secretary, during the marketing years for the immediately preceding five crops of peanuts, excluding the year in which the average price was the highest and the year in which the average price was the lowest in the period; but (2) not more than $350 per ton.
Term of Loan.--A nonrecourse loan for peanuts under this section shall have a term of 9 months beginning on the first day of the first month after the month in which the loan is made.
The Secretary may not extend the term of the loan.
Repayment Rates.--The Secretary shall permit a producer to repay a nonrecourse loan for peanuts under this section at a rate that is the lesser of-- (1) the loan rate established under subsection (b), plus interest (as determined by the Secretary); or (2) a rate that the Secretary determines will-- (A) minimize potential loan forfeitures; (B) minimize the accumulation of stocks of peanuts by the Federal Government; (C) minimize the cost incurred by the Federal Government in storing the peanuts; and (D) allow peanuts produced in the United States to be marketed freely and competitively, both domestically and internationally.
Loan Deficiency Payments.-- (1) Availability.--The Secretary may make loan deficiency payments available to peanut producers who, although eligible to obtain a nonrecourse loan under this section, agree to forgo obtaining the loan for the commodity in return for payments under this subsection.
Computation.--A loan deficiency payment under this subsection shall be computed by multiplying-- (A) the loan payment rate determined under paragraph (3); by (B) the quantity of peanuts that the producers on a farm are eligible to place under loan but for which the producers forgo obtaining the loan in return for payments under this subsection.
Loan payment rate.--For purposes of this subsection, the loan payment rate shall be the amount by which-- (A) the loan rate established under subsection (b); exceeds (B) the rate at which a loan for the peanuts may be repaid under subsection (d).