This Act may be cited as the ``Urban Recreation and At-Risk Youth Act of 1994''.
Section 1002 of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subsection (d), by striking the period at the end of subsection (e) and inserting ``;'' and by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(f) the quality of life in urban areas has suffered because of decline in the availability of park and recreation and systems, including land, facilities, and services; ``(g) the deterioration of urban park and recreation facilities is due in part to the underfunding of Federal grant programs intended to assist in the revitalization of urban recreation facilities and allow us to take back our parks from crime, vandalism, and dilapidation; ``(h) the urban neighborhoods eligible for assistance under this title have deteriorated, in part, due to the rapid increase in violent crime among youth; ``(i) accessible, well-maintained recreational facilities and services have been shown to significantly decrease the incidence of violent crime among youth and can be an effective tool in efforts to prevent crime, increase public safety and improve the quality of life of urban residents; and ``(j) urban sport and recreation programs teach important values and life skills including teamwork, individual responsibility, respect, leadership, and self-esteem which help prevent young people from engaging in criminal behavior.''.
Section 1003 of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``It is further the purpose of this title to improve recreation facilities and expand recreation services in urban areas with a high incidence of crime and to help deter crime through the expansion of recreation opportunities for at-risk youth.
It is the further purpose of this section to increase the security of urban parks and to promote collaboration between local agencies involved in parks and recreation, law enforcement, youth social services, and the juvenile justice system.''.
Section 1004 of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by inserting the following new subsection after subsection (c) and by redesignating subsections (d) through (j) as (e) through (k) respectively: ``(d) `at-risk youth recreation grants' means-- ``(1) rehabilitation grants, ``(2) innovation grants, or ``(3) matching grants for continuing program support for programs of demonstrated value or success in providing constructive alternatives to youth at risk for engaging in criminal behavior, including grants for operating, or coordinating recreation programs and services; in neighborhoods and communities with a high prevalence of crime, particularly violent crime or crime committed by youthful offenders; in addition to the purposes specified in subsection (b), rehabilitation grants referred to in paragraph (1) of this subsection may be used for the provision of lighting, emergency phones or other capital improvements which will improve the security of urban parks;''.
Section 1005(c) of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (6), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (7) and inserting ``; and'' and by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(8) in the case of at-risk youth recreation grants, the Secretary shall give a priority to each of the following criteria: ``(A) Programs which are targeted to youth who are at the greatest risk of becoming involved in violence and crime.
Programs which teach important values and life skills, including teamwork, respect, leadership, and self-esteem.
Programs which offer tutoring, remedial education, mentoring, and counseling in addition to recreation opportunities.
Programs which offer services during late night or other nonschool hours.
Programs which demonstrate collaboration between local park and recreation, juvenile justice, law enforcement, and youth social service agencies and nongovernmental entities, including the private sector and community and nonprofit organizations.
Programs which leverage public or private recreation investments in the form of services, materials, or cash.
Programs which show the greatest potential of being continued with non-Federal funds or which can serve as models for other communities.''.
PARK AND RECREATION ACTION RECOVERY PROGRAMS.
Section 1007(b) of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``In order to be eligible to receive `at-risk youth recreation grants' a local government shall amend its 5-year action program to incorporate the goal of reducing crime and juvenile delinquency and to provide a description of the implementation strategies to achieve this goal.
The plan shall also address how the local government is coordinating its recreation programs with crime prevention efforts of law enforcement, juvenile corrections, and youth social service agencies.''.
MISCELLANEOUS AND TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS.
Program Support.--Section 1013 of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' after ``1013.''
and by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof: ``(b) Program Support.--Not more than 25 percent of the amounts made available under this title to any local government may be used for program support.''.
Extension.--Section 1003 of the Urban Park and Recreation Recovery Act of 1978 is amended by striking ``for a period of five years'' and by striking ``short-term''.
Passed the House of Representatives March 22, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.