This Act may be cited as the ``Education Technology Equity Act of 2001''.
EQUITABLE ACCESS OF TECHNOLOGY.
Title III of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6101 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART F--EDUCATION TECHNOLOGY EQUITY ``SEC.
``The Congress finds the following: ``(1) Having access and being able to effectively use new technologies, such as computers and the Internet, will be critical to the economic and overall success of American businesses, communities, and individuals in the 21st century.
It is estimated that every 3 out of 5 jobs created during the next 5 years will have relatively high skills requirements.
The information technology industry indicates that it will be unable to fill more than 800,000 this year.
The E-Rate program has connected 95 percent of all public schools to the Internet.
A digital divide exists and has grown and for the poorest Americans has grown by 29 percent since 1997.
White families are more than twice as likely to have access to a computer and the Internet than Black and Hispanic families.
4 to 5 students per computer is the ratio that many experts consider to represent a reasonable level for the effective use of computers within schools.
The national average student to computer ratio is 6 to 1.
In schools with the highest concentrations of poverty, the average student to computer ratio is 16 to 1.
According to a number of experts, a baseline model for Internet connection that provides students and teachers with the ability to fully engage in telecommunications opportunities would cost between $9,350,000,000 to $22,050,000,000 with an additional annual cost of $1,750,000,000 to $4,600,000,000.
``The purpose of this part is to enable every child in America to cross the digital divide by ensuring that all children, especially those who are disadvantaged and from low-income and minority families, have access to the most advanced and effective technology and technology education.
Reservation.--From the amount made available under section 3607 to carry out this part for each fiscal year, the Secretary-- ``(1) shall reserve 0.5 percent of such amount for grants to Guam, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of Palau, the Marshall Islands, and the Federated States of Micronesia; and ``(2) shall reserve 1 percent of such amount for the Secretary of the Interior to carry out programs under this part for Indian children.
State Educational Agency Allotments.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), and after making the reservations in subsection (a), the Secretary shall, for each fiscal year, allocate among the States the remainder according to the ratio between the amount each State received under part A of title I for the preceding year and the sum of such amounts received by all the States.
Minimum.--For any fiscal year, the Secretary shall not allot to a State an amount under this subsection that is less than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the total amount allotted to all the States under this subsection.
Reallotment.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), The Secretary may reallot any amount of any allotment to a State if the Secretary determines that the State will be unable to use such amount within 2 years of such allotment.
Such reallotments shall be made on the same basis as allotments are made under paragraph (1).
Within-State Distribution of Funds.--Each State educational agency having an approved application pursuant to section 3604 and receiving an allocation under subsection (b), shall allocate-- ``(1) not less than 95 percent of such allocation to local educational agencies in accordance with the provisions of section 1125; and ``(2) not more than 5 percent for State level activities, including technical assistance, and evaluation, of which not more than 40 percent may be used for administration.
Local Distribution.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this part shall-- ``(1) annually rank such agency's schools from highest to lowest based on-- ``(A) the percentage of children eligible for participation in the school lunch program under the Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act; and ``(B) the need of each school for computers as determined by the agency; and ``(2) serve such schools in rank order.
State Application.--Each State educational agency seeking a grant under this part shall submit an application in such form, and containing such information, as the Secretary may reasonably require.
At a minimum, the application shall provide an assurance that the State will provide technical assistance to local educational agencies in developing a comprehensive system for the acquisition and use of technology and technology-enhanced curricula, instruction, and administrative support resources.
Local Educational Agency Application.--Each local educational agency seeking a grant under this part shall submit an application to the State educational agency that includes, at a minimum-- ``(1) the student to computer ratios; ``(2) the Internet connectivity of schools to be served; ``(3) an assurance that the agency will report annually to the State regarding the student to computer ratio and Internet connectivity of schools to be served; and ``(4) a plan for a comprehensive system for the acquisition and use of technology and technology-enhanced curricula, instruction, and administrative support services.
LOCAL USES OF FUNDS.
Required Uses.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this part shall use such grant to purchase computers.
Permissible Use.-- ``(1) Special rule.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this part may use such funds for purposes described in paragraph (2) if all schools in the local educational agency have a student to computer ratio equal to or less than 6 to 1.
Such ratio shall be certified by the State educational agency prior to any such use of funds.
Additional uses.--If the condition in paragraph (1) is met, a local educational agency may use funds reserved under this part for-- ``(A) teacher training; ``(B) integrating technology into curriculum; ``(C) maintenance and support; and ``(D) computers for home use by students and teachers.
State Reporting.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant award under this part shall submit an annual report to the Secretary regarding the student to computer ratios and Internet connectivity of schools provided assistance under this part.
Local Reporting.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant award under this part shall submit an annual report to the State educational agency regarding the student to computer ratios and Internet connectivity of schools provided assistance under this part.
``There are authorized to be appropriated $1,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2002 and such sums as may be necessary for the 4 succeeding fiscal years to carry out the purposes of this part.