This Act may be cited as the ``Information Technology Worker Shortage Commission Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) information technology is one of the fastest growing areas in the United States economy; (2) the United States is a world leader in the information technology industry; (3) the continued growth and prosperity of the information technology industry is important to the continued prosperity of the United States economy; (4) an adequate supply of information technology workers is essential for the success of information technology and other business entities that use information technology; (5) as of the date of enactment of this Act, there is a shortage of information technology workers; and (6) in the absence of a concerted effort by business entities, the Federal Government, the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof, and educational institutions, the shortage of information technology workers will continue to be a problem.
In this Act: (1) Business entity.--The term ``business entity'' means a firm, corporation, association, partnership, consortium, joint venture, or other form of enterprise.
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Information Technology Worker Shortage Commission established under section 4.
Information technology.--The term ``information technology'' has the meaning given that term in section 5002 of the Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 (110 United States Statutes at Large 679).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States and the District of Columbia.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Information Technology Worker Shortage Commission.
Membership.-- (1) Composition.-- (A) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 21 members, of which-- (i) 7 members shall be appointed by the President; (ii) 7 members shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; and (iii) 7 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Governmental representatives.--Of the members appointed under this subsection-- (i) 1 member shall be an officer or employee of the Department of Labor, who shall be appointed by the President; (ii) 1 member shall be an officer or employee of the Department of Education, who shall be appointed by the President; and (iii) 2 members shall be representatives of the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof.
Educators.--Of the members appointed under this subsection, 6 shall be educators who are selected from among elementary, secondary, vocational, and postsecondary educators.
Business representatives.--Of the members appointed under this subsection, at least 4 shall be individuals who are employed in information technology business entities of a size that is small or average for that type of business entity (as determined by the appropriate appointing authority under this subsection).
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made by the later of-- (A) September 1, 1997; or (B) the date that is 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--No later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a chairperson and vice chairperson from among its members.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to the shortage of information technology workers in the United States.
Matters studied.--The matters studied by the Commission shall include an examination of-- (A) the causes of the shortage of information technology workers in the United States; (B) possible solutions to address the shortage referred to in subparagraph (A); and (C) the relative efficacy of programs in the United States and foreign countries to provide for an increase in the number of information technology workers, with special emphasis on programs that provide for secondary education or postsecondary education in a program other than a 4-year baccalaureate program (including associate degree programs and graduate degree programs).
Public hearings.--As part of the study conducted under this subsection, the Commission shall hold public hearings in each region of the United States concerning the issues referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2).
Existing information.--To the extent practicable, in carrying out the study under this subsection, the Commission shall identify and use existing information related to the issues referred to in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (2).
Consultation with chief information officers council.-- In carrying out the study under this subsection, the Commission shall consult with the Chief Information Officers Council established under Executive Order No.
Report.--Not later than July 1, 1998, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and the Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as it considers appropriate.
Facilitation of Exchange of Information.--In carrying out the study under subsection (a), the Commission shall, to the extent practicable, facilitate the exchange of information concerning the issues that are the subject of the study among-- (1) officials of the Federal Government and the governments of States and political subdivisions thereof; and (2) educators from Federal, State, and local institutions of higher education and secondary schools.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Compensation of Members.--Except as provided in subsection (b), each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits its report under section 5(b).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $750,000 for fiscal year 1998 to the Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.