This Act may be cited as the ``Alternative Dispute Resolution and Settlement Encouragement Act''.
ARBITRATION IN DISTRICT COURTS.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 905 of the Judicial Improvements and Access to Justice Act (28 United States Code 651 note) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1997''.
Arbitration To Be Ordered in All District Courts.-- (1) Authorization of arbitration.--Section 651(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Authority.--Each United States district court shall authorize by local rule the use of arbitration in civil actions, including adversary proceedings in bankruptcy, in accordance with this chapter.''.
Actions referred to arbitration.--Section 652(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) by striking ``and section 901(c)'' and all that follows through ``651'' and inserting ``a district court''; and (ii) in subparagraph (B) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$150,000''; and (B) in paragraph (2) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$150,000''.
Certification of arbitrators.--Section 656(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``listed in section 658''.
Removal of limitation.--Section 658 of title 28, United States Code, and the item relating to such section in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 44 of title 28, United States Code, are repealed.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 901 of the Judicial Improvements and Access to Justice Act (28 United States Code 652 note) is amended by striking subsection (c).
AWARD OF REASONABLE COSTS AND ATTORNEY'S FEES IN FEDERAL CIVIL DIVERSITY LITIGATION AFTER AN OFFER OF SETTLEMENT.
Section 1332 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) In any action over which the court has jurisdiction under this section, any party may, at any time not less than 10 days before trial, serve upon any adverse party a written offer to settle a claim or claims for money or property or to the effect specified in the offer, including a motion to dismiss all claims, and to enter into a stipulation dismissing the claim or claims or allowing judgment to be entered according to the terms of the offer.
Any such offer, together with proof of service thereof, shall be filed with the clerk of the court.
If the party receiving an offer under paragraph (1) serves written notice on the offeror that the offer is accepted, either party may then file with the clerk of the court the notice of acceptance, together with proof of service thereof.
The fact that an offer under paragraph (1) is made but not accepted does not preclude a subsequent offer under paragraph (1).
Evidence of an offer is not admissible for any purpose except in proceedings to enforce a settlement, or to determine costs and expenses under this subsection.
At any time before judgment is entered, the court, upon its own motion or upon the motion of any party, may exempt from this subsection any claim that the court finds presents a question of law or fact that is novel and important and that substantially affects nonparties.
If a claim is exempted from this subsection, all offers made by any party under paragraph (1) with respect to that claim shall be void and have no effect.
If all offers made by a party under paragraph (1) with respect to a claim or claims, including any motion to dismiss all claims, are not accepted and the judgment, verdict, or order finally issued (exclusive of costs, expenses, and attorneys' fees incurred after judgment or trial) in the action under this section is not more favorable to the offeree with respect to the claim or claims than the last such offer, the offeror may file with the court, within 10 days after the final judgment, verdict, or order is issued, a petition for payment of costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred with respect to the claim or claims from the date the last such offer was made or, if the offeree made an offer under this subsection, from the date the last such offer by the offeree was made.
If the court finds, pursuant to a petition filed under paragraph (5) with respect to a claim or claims, that the judgment, verdict, or order finally obtained is not more favorable to the offeree with respect to the claim or claims than the last offer, the court shall order the offeree to pay the offeror's costs and expenses, including attorneys' fees, incurred with respect to the claim or claims from the date the last offer was made or, if the offeree made an offer under this subsection, from the date the last such offer by the offeree was made, unless the court finds that requiring the payment of such costs and expenses would be manifestly unjust.
Attorney's fees under paragraph (6) shall be a reasonable attorney's fee attributable to the claim or claims involved, calculated on the basis of an hourly rate which may not exceed that which the court considers acceptable in the community in which the attorney practices law, taking into account the attorney's qualifications and experience and the complexity of the case, except that the attorney's fees under paragraph (6) may not exceed-- ``(A) the actual cost incurred by the offeree for an attorney's fee payable to an attorney for services in connection with the claim or claims; or ``(B) if no such cost was incurred by the offeree due to a contingency fee agreement, a reasonable cost that would have been incurred by the offeree for an attorney's noncontingent fee payable to an attorney for services in connection with the claim or claims.
This subsection does not apply to any claim seeking an equitable remedy.''.
Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of Evidence (28 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In general.--'' before ``If'', and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Adequate basis for opinion.--Testimony in the form of an opinion by a witness that is based on scientific knowledge shall be inadmissible in evidence unless the court determines that such opinion-- ``(1) is scientifically valid and reliable; ``(2) has a valid scientific connection to the fact it is offered to prove; and ``(3) is sufficiently reliable so that the probative value of such evidence outweighs the dangers specified in rule 403.
Disqualification.--Testimony by a witness who is qualified as described in subdivision (a) is inadmissible in evidence if the witness is entitled to receive any compensation contingent on the legal disposition of any claim with respect to which the testimony is offered.
Scope.--Subdivision (b) does not apply to criminal proceedings.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS.
Section 2.--The amendments made by section 2 shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sections 3 and 4.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the amendments made by sections 3 and 4 shall take effect on the first day of the first month beginning more than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Application of amendments.--(A) The amendment made by section 3 shall apply only with respect to civil actions commenced after the effective date set forth in paragraph (1).
The amendments made by section 4 shall apply only with respect to cases in which a trial begins after the effective date set forth in paragraph (1).