This Act may be cited as the ``Chesapeake Bay Gateways and Watertrails Act of 1997''.
In this Act: (1) Chesapeake bay gateways sites.--The term ``Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites'' means the Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites identified under section 5(a)(2).
Chesapeake bay gateways and watertrails network.--The term ``Chesapeake Bay Gateways and Watertrails Network'' means the network of Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites and Chesapeake Bay Watertrails created under section 5(a)(5).
Chesapeake bay watershed.--The term ``Chesapeake Bay Watershed'' shall have the meaning determined by the Secretary.
Chesapeake bay watertrails.--The term ``Chesapeake Bay Watertrails'' means the Chesapeake Bay Watertrails established under section 5(a)(4).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior (acting through the Director of the National Park Service).
Congress finds that-- (1) the Chesapeake Bay is a national treasure and a resource of international significance; (2) the region within the Chesapeake Bay watershed possesses outstanding natural, cultural, historical, and recreational resources that combine to form nationally distinctive and linked waterway and terrestrial landscapes; (3) there is a need to study and interpret the connection between the unique cultural heritage of human settlements throughout the Chesapeake Bay Watershed and the waterways and other natural resources that led to the settlements and on which the settlements depend; and (4) as a formal partner in the Chesapeake Bay Program, the Secretary has an important responsibility-- (A) to further assist regional, State, and local partners in efforts to increase public awareness of and access to the Chesapeake Bay; (B) to help communities and private landowners conserve important regional resources; and (C) to study, interpret, and link the regional resources with each other and with Chesapeake Bay Watershed conservation, restoration, and education efforts.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to identify opportunities for increased public access to and education about the Chesapeake Bay; (2) to provide financial and technical assistance to communities for conserving important natural, cultural, historical, and recreational resources within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed; and (3) to link appropriate national parks, waterways, monuments, parkways, wildlife refuges, other national historic sites, and regional or local heritage areas into a network of Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites and Chesapeake Bay Watertrails.
CHESAPEAKE BAY GATEWAYS AND WATERTRAILS NETWORK.
In General.--The Secretary shall provide technical and financial assistance, in cooperation with other Federal agencies, State and local governments, nonprofit organizations, and the private sector-- (1) to identify, conserve, restore, and interpret natural, recreational, historical, and cultural resources within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed; (2) to identify and utilize the collective resources as Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites for enhancing public education of and access to the Chesapeake Bay; (3) to link the Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites with trails, tour roads, scenic byways, and other connections as determined by the Secretary; (4) to develop and establish Chesapeake Bay Watertrails comprising water routes and connections to Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites and other land resources within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed; and (5) to create a network of Chesapeake Bay Gateways sites and Chesapeake Bay Watertrails.
Components.--Components of the Chesapeake Bay Gateways and Watertrails Network may include-- (1) State or Federal parks or refuges; (2) historic seaports; (3) archaeological, cultural, historical, or recreational sites; or (4) other public access and interpretive sites as selected by the Secretary.
CHESAPEAKE BAY GATEWAYS GRANTS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary shall establish a Chesapeake Bay Gateways Grants Assistance Program to aid State and local governments, local communities, nonprofit organizations, and the private sector in conserving, restoring, and interpreting important historic, cultural, recreational, and natural resources within the Chesapeake Bay Watershed.
Criteria.--The Secretary shall develop appropriate eligibility, prioritization, and review criteria for grants under this section.
Matching Funds and Administrative Expenses.--A grant under this section-- (1) shall not exceed 50 percent of eligible project costs; (2) shall be made on the condition that non-Federal sources, including in-kind contributions of services or materials, provide the remainder of eligible project costs; and (3) shall be made on the condition that not more than 10 percent of all eligible project costs be used for administrative expenses.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $3,000,000 for each fiscal year.