This Act may be cited as the ``HIV Partner Protection Act''.
PROGRAM FOR HIV HEALTH CARE SERVICES; AMENDMENT REGARDING STATE PROGRAMS OF PARTNER NOTIFICATION.
Subpart I of part B of title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300ff-21 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 2616 the following section: ``SEC.
In General.--Subject to subsection (d), for fiscal year 2000 and subsequent fiscal years the Secretary shall not make a grant to a State under this part unless the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the law or regulations of the State are in accordance with the following: ``(1) The State requires that the public health officer of the State carry out a program of partner notification to inform partners of individuals with HIV disease that the partners may have been exposed to the disease.
In the case of a health entity that provides for the performance on an individual of a test for HIV disease, the State requires that the entity confidentially report positive test results to the State public health officer, including the name of the individual, together with any additional information necessary for carrying out such program.
The program is carried out in accordance with the following: ``(A) Partners are provided with an appropriate opportunity to learn that the partners have been exposed to HIV disease, subject to subparagraph (B).
The State does not inform partners of the identity of the infected individuals involved.
Counseling and testing on HIV disease are made available to the partners and to infected individuals, and such counseling includes information on modes of transmission for the disease, including information on prenatal and perinatal transmission and preventing transmission.
Counseling for infected individuals includes the provision of information regarding therapeutic measures for preventing and treating the deterioration of the immune system and conditions arising from the disease, and providing other prevention information.
Referrals for appropriate services are provided to partners and infected individuals.
Notifications under subparagraph (A) are provided in person, unless doing so is an unreasonable burden on the State.
There is no criminal or civil penalty on, or civil liability for, an infected individual if the individual chooses not to identify the partners of the individual, or if the individual does not otherwise cooperate with such program.
There is no criminal or civil penalty on, or civil liability for, a person who in good faith makes errors in submitting reports or making disclosures under such program.
The failure of the State to notify partners is not a basis for the civil liability of any health entity who under the program reported to the State the identity of the infected individual involved.
The State provides that the provisions of the program may not be construed as prohibiting the State from providing a notification under subparagraph (A) without the consent of the infected individual involved.
State Insurance Laws With Respect to Undergoing Testing.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to subsection (d), for fiscal year 2000 and subsequent fiscal years the Secretary shall not make a grant to a State under this part unless the State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, with respect to an individual who learns that the individual has been exposed to HIV disease and then undergoes testing for such disease, State insurance laws prohibit an insurer from taking any action against the individual solely on the basis that the individual has been tested for the disease.
Rule of construction.--A statute or regulation shall be deemed to regulate insurance for purposes of paragraph (1) only to the extent that such statute or regulation is treated as regulating insurance for purposes of section 514(b)(2) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `infected individual' means an individual with HIV disease.
The term `partner' includes the spouses or other sexual partners of infected individuals; the partners of such individuals in the sharing of hypodermic needles for the intravenous injection of drugs; the partners of such individuals in the sharing of any drug-related paraphernalia determined by the Secretary to place such partners at risk of HIV disease; and any other individual whom the infected individual exposed to HIV disease.
Delayed Applicability for Certain States.--In the case of a State whose legislature does not convene a regular session in fiscal year 1999, and in the case of a State whose legislature does not convene a regular session in fiscal year 2000, the requirements described in subsections (a) and (b) as a condition of the receipt of a grant under this part applies only for fiscal year 2001 and subsequent fiscal years.''.
GRANTS TO STATES TO ASSIST WITH COSTS OF REQUIRED LAW.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants to States to assist the States with the costs of carrying out the program of partner notification with respect to the human immunodeficiency virus that is required in section 2616A of the Public Health Service Act (as added by section 2 of this Act).
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out subsection (a), there is authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.