This Act may be cited as the ``Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge Expansion Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Cahaba River is recognized nationally for its unique biological diversity, which includes habitat for more than 131 species of fish (more than any other river its size in North America).
The Cahaba River is home to 64 rare and imperiled species of aquatic plants and animals, including fishes, freshwater turtles, mussels, and snails.
The Cahaba River is home to 12 aquatic animal species (fish, mussels, and snails) listed as endangered species or threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1331 et sequentes).
The Cahaba River harbors the largest population in the world of the imperiled shoals lily, known locally as the Cahaba Lily.
The Cahaba River watershed contains extremely rare plant communities, including mountain longleaf pine woodlands, and dolomite glades that are home to 8 plant species recently discovered as new to science, and known to exist nowhere else in the world, as well as more than 70 other rare and imperiled species of plants.
The Cahaba River is home to at least a dozen endemic aquatic animals that are found nowhere else in the world.
The Cahaba River is the longest remaining free-flowing river in Alabama, flowing through five counties in central Alabama.
The Cahaba River is recognized as an Outstanding Alabama Water by the Alabama Department of Environmental Management.
The Cahaba River has high recreational value for hunters, anglers, birdwatchers, canoeists, nature photographers, and others.
The Cahaba River watershed supports large populations of game species, including deer, turkey, quail, and various species of ducks.
The Cahaba River was recognized by the 106th Congress as deserving of inclusion in the National Wildlife Refuge System by the establishment of the Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge.
Significant additional recreational, natural resource conservation and management, and other public benefits would be realized by the expansion of the existing Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge.
In this Act: (1) Refuge.--The term ``Refuge'' means the Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Expansion.-- (1) In general.--The Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge, located in Bibb County, Alabama, is expanded to include approximately 30,000 acres of lands and waters, and interests in lands and waters, within the boundaries depicted upon the map entitled ``Cahaba River National Wildlife Refuge Proposed Expansion'', and dated June 2, 2003.
Boundary revisions.--The Secretary may make such minor revisions to the boundaries of the Refuge as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of the Refuge or to facilitate the acquisition of property within the Refuge.
Availability of map.--The Secretary shall keep the map referred to in paragraph (1) on file for inspection in appropriate offices of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Effective Date.--The expansion of the Refuge under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
ACQUISITION OF LANDS AND WATERS.
In General.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of appropriations, may acquire up to 30,000 acres of lands and waters, or interests therein, within the boundaries of the Refuge described in section 4(a)(1).
Inclusion in Refuge.--Any lands, waters, or interests acquired by the Secretary under this section shall be a part of the Refuge.
In administering the Refuge, the Secretary shall-- (1) conserve, enhance, and restore the native aquatic and terrestrial community characteristics of the Cahaba River (including associated fish, wildlife, and plant species); (2) conserve, enhance, and restore habitat to maintain and assist in the recovery of animals and plants that are listed as endangered species or threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1331 et sequentes); (3) in providing opportunities for compatible use (as that term is defined in section 5 of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668ee)), ensure that hunting, fishing, wildlife observation and photography, and environmental education interpretation are the priority general public uses of the Refuge, in accordance with paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 4(a) of the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 668ee(a)(3), (4)); and (4) encourage the use of volunteers and facilitate partnerships among the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, local communities, conservation organizations, and other non- Federal entities, to-- (A) promote public awareness of the resources of the Refuge and the National Wildlife Refuge System; and (B) public participation in the conservation of those resources.