This Act may be cited as the ``Multi-Cultural Domestic Violence Minority Education Campaigns Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Nearly one-third of women in the United States report being physically or sexually abused by a husband or boyfriend at some point in their lives.
Family violence costs the Nation between $5,000,000,000 and $10,000,000,000 each year in medical expenses, police and court costs, shelters and foster care, sick leave, absenteeism, and non-productivity.
The United States is becoming increasingly multicultural, and minorities are expected to constitute approximately 50 percent of the population of the United States by 2050.
Minority women face unique challenges to reporting and getting help for domestic violence.
Structural inequalities experienced by minorities, including poverty and discrimination, may contribute to higher rates of violence.
Many immigrant women refuse to leave a violent relationship because of fears related to their immigration status.
Many minority women face cultural barriers to reporting abuse or seeking help for domestic violence, including but not limited to strong religious beliefs that stress the importance of keeping family intact, fear of dishonor, and a belief that negative events occur regardless of attempts to prevent them.
Many minority women also face institutional barriers to reporting abuse or seeking help for domestic violence, including but not limited to a lack of translators or bilingual professionals, little reading material in the woman's native language, treatment programs that do not take into account ethnic and cultural differences, prohibitive fee structures, and inflexible or inconvenient hours of operation.
GRANTS FOR PUBLIC INFORMATION CAMPAIGNS TO EDUCATE RACIAL AND ETHNIC MINORITIES ABOUT DOMESTIC VIOLENCE.
In General.--The Attorney General may make grants to States and public or private nonprofit entities to carry out public information campaigns for the purpose of educating racial and ethnic minorities about domestic violence, including the effects of domestic violence, methods of preventing or reducing domestic violence, and services available to victims of domestic violence.
Use of Grant Amounts.--Grant amounts under this section may be used only to carry out public information campaigns for the purpose specified in subsection (a).
Elements of Campaigns.--Each public information campaign carried out under this section shall consist of one or more of the following elements: (1) Public service announcements.
Paid educational messages for print media.
Any other mode of conveying information that the Attorney General determines to be appropriate.
Requirements for Grant.--The Attorney General may award a grant under this section to an entity only if the Attorney General determines that-- (1) the campaign will be carried out in consultation with local domestic violence advocates or State domestic violence coalitions; (2) the campaign is designed to be conducted in a culturally sensitive manner using one or more culturally appropriate languages; (3) the media organizations and other groups through which the campaign will be carried out will continue to provide public service announcements at current frequencies, without considering the informational messages of the campaign as public service announcements; (4) the applicant has an adequate plan to test-market the campaign with a relevant community or group in the relevant geographic area, and will carry out that plan; and (5) the applicant will use effectiveness criteria in carrying out the campaign and an evaluation component to measure the effectiveness of the campaign.
Award Criteria.--In awarding grants under this section, the Attorney General shall consider the following criteria: (1) Whether the applicant has, or will be partnering with an entity that has, a record of high quality campaigns of a comparable type.
Whether the applicant has, or will be partnering with an entity that has, a record of high quality campaigns that educate the communities and groups at greatest risk of domestic violence.
Application.-- (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a State or entity must submit to the Attorney General an application that meets the requirements of paragraph (2).
Requirements.--An application submitted under this subsection shall be in such form, and submitted in such manner, as the Attorney General may prescribe, and shall include the following matters: (A) A complete description of applicant's plan for the proposed public information campaign.
An identification of the specific communities and groups to be educated by the campaign, and a description of how the campaign will educate the communities and groups at greatest risk of domestic violence.
The plans of the applicant with respect to working with organizations that have expertise in developing culturally appropriate informational messages.
A description of the geographic distribution of the campaign.
An identification of the media organizations and other groups through which the campaign will be carried out.
A description of the nature, amount, distribution, and timing of informational messages to be used in the campaign.
Such information and assurances as the Attorney General may require to determine whether the requirements specified in subsection (d) will be satisfied, and whether the criteria specified in subsection (e) apply.
Such other information and assurances as the Attorney General may require.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``public or private nonprofit entity'' includes an ``Indian tribe'' or ``tribal organization'', as such terms are defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.