This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Medical Services Efficiency Act of 1998''.
TITLE I--MEDICARE COVERAGE OF CERTAIN AMBULANCE SERVICES SEC.
MEDICARE COVERAGE OF CERTAIN AMBULANCE SERVICES.
Coverage.--Section 1861(s)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(7)) is amended by striking ``regulations;'' and inserting ``regulations, except that such regulations shall not fail to treat ambulance services as medical and other health services solely because the ultimate diagnosis of the individual receiving the ambulance services results in the conclusion that ambulance services were not necessary, as long as the request for ambulance services is made after the sudden onset of a medical condition that is manifested by symptoms of such sufficient severity, including severe pain, that a prudent layperson, who possesses an average knowledge of health and medicine, could reasonably expect to result, without immediate medical attention, in-- ``(A) placing the individual's health in serious jeopardy; ``(B) serious impairment to the individual's bodily functions; or ``(C) serious dysfunction of any bodily organ or part of the individual;''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to items and services provided on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--STATE EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES AGENCY PARTICIPATION IN CERTAIN FEDERAL PROGRAMS SEC.
TELEMEDICINE AND DISTANCE LEARNING SERVICES IN RURAL AREAS.
In General.--Section 2333(c)(1) of chapter 1 of subtitle D of title XXIII of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 950aaa-2(c)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following flush sentence: ``For purposes of this paragraph, the term `entities' shall include State emergency medical services agencies.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
INFORMATICS, TELEMEDICINE, AND EDUCATION DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
In General.--Section 4207(c) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (42 United States Code 1395b-1(c) note.)
is amended by adding at the end the following flush sentence: ``A State emergency medical services agency may participate in the consortium under this section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--FEDERAL COMMISSION FOR EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICES SEC.
DEFINITION OF EMERGENCY AMBULANCE SERVICES.
In this title, the term ``emergency ambulance services''-- (1) means resources used by a qualified public, private, or nonprofit entity to deliver medical care under emergency conditions-- (A) that occur as a result of the condition of a patient; or (B) that occur as a result of a natural disaster or similar situation; and (2) includes services delivered by an emergency ambulance employee that is licensed or certified by a State as an emergency medical technician, a paramedic, a registered nurse, a physician assistant, or a physician.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Federal Commission for Emergency Ambulance Services (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 21 members, of whom-- (A) 1 shall be an individual who is appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; (B) 1 shall be an individual who is appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate; (C) 1 shall be an individual who is appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives; (D) 1 shall be an individual who is appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives; (E) 1 shall be a member of the American Academy of Pediatrics, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the American Academy of Pediatrics; (F) 1 shall be a member of the American Ambulance Association, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the American Ambulance Association; (G) 1 shall be a member of the American College of Emergency Physicians, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the American College of Emergency Physicians; (H) 1 shall be a member of the Committee on Trauma within the American College of Surgeons, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the American College of Surgeons; (I) 1 shall be a member of the American Hospital Association, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the American Hospital Association; (J) 1 shall be a member of the Committee on EMS-F30 within the American Society for Testing and Material, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the American Society for Testing and Material; (K) 1 shall be a member of the Associated Public Safety Communications Officials International, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the Associated Public Safety Communications Officials International; (L) 1 shall be a member of the Association of Air Medical Services, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the Association of Air Medical Services; (M) 1 shall be a member of the Emergency Nurses Association, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the Emergency Nurses Association; (N) 1 shall be a member of the International Association of Fire Chiefs, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the International Association of Fire Chiefs; (O) 1 shall be a member of the International Association of Fire Fighters, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the International Association of Fire Fighters; (P) 1 shall each be a member of a governing body of an Indian tribe (as that term is defined in section 4(e) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(e)), appointed by the President; (Q) 1 shall be a member of the National Association of Emergency Medical Services Physicians, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the National Association of Emergency Medical Services Physicians; (R) 1 shall be a member of the National Association of State Emergency Medical Services Directors, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the National Association of State Emergency Medical Services Directors; (S) 1 shall be a member of the National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the National Association of Emergency Medical Technicians; (T) 1 shall be a member of the National Rural Health Association, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the National Rural Health Association; and (U) 1 shall be a member of the National Volunteer Fire Council, appointed by the President from a list of nominations submitted by the National Volunteer Fire Council.
Additional requirements.-- (A) Geographical representation and urban and rural representation.--In making appointments of members under paragraph (1), the appointing officials described in such paragraph shall, through consultation and collaboration with each other, select-- (i) members who are geographically representative of the United States; and (ii) members who are representative of rural areas and urban areas.
Special rule.--The appointing officials described paragraph (1) shall ensure that, of the members appointed-- (i) 11 shall be representative of rural areas; and (ii) 11 shall be representative of urban areas.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made not later than January 1, 1999.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.-- (1) Period of appointment.--Members shall be appointed for a term of 4 years.
Vacancy.-- (A) In general.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect the powers of the Commission, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Filling unexpired terms.--An individual chosen to fill a vacancy under this paragraph shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member replaced.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to emergency ambulance services, including any existing or proposed Federal department or agency rules that impact such services.
Recommendations.--The Commission shall develop recommendations regarding the improvement of all matters relating to emergency ambulance services, including any existing or proposed Federal department or agency rules that impact such services.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and Congress containing a detailed statement of the results of the matters studied by the Commission pursuant to subsection (a), together with the Commission's recommendations formulated pursuant to subsection (b).
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the purposes of this title.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this title.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Compensation of Members.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of the service of the members on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the homes or regular places of business of the members in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform the duties of the Commission.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without compensation in addition to that received for service as an employee of the United States, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals that do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
The Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Commerce, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall equally provide to the Commission, out of funds otherwise available to such Secretaries, such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of the Commission under this title.
APPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL ADVISORY COMMITTEE ACT.
Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission.
TITLE IV--STUDY AND REPORT REGARDING CONSOLIDATION OF FEDERAL AUTHORITY OVER EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES SEC.
STUDY AND REPORT REGARDING CONSOLIDATION OF FEDERAL AUTHORITY OVER EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES.
Study and Recommendations.-- (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a thorough study and make recommendations on all matters relating to the transfer of all functions (other than the functions referred to in paragraph (2)) of Federal agencies relating to emergency medical services to a single Federal agency (and if appropriate, to a specific office within such agency), including the transfer of appropriations and personnel associated with such services to such agency.
Exceptions.--The recommendations formulated pursuant to paragraph (1) shall not provide for the transfer of any function-- (A) of the Department of Defense; or (B) related to a Federal health care program (as defined in section 1128B(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7b(f))).
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to the President and Congress containing a detailed statement of the results of the matters studied and recommendations formulated by the Comptroller General pursuant to subsection (b), together with any legislative recommendations that the Comptroller General determines to be appropriate for carrying out the recommendations.