This Act may be cited as the ``American Innovation Act of 2010''.
GRANTEE REPORTS ON COMMERCIALIZATION STRATEGY AND RESULTS.
In General.--Any institution of higher education (as such term is defined in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a))) that receives 1 or more grants of financial assistance from the National Science Foundation for research shall submit a report to the Foundation at the end of the first year of the grants, and at the end of each subsequent year in which funds are received pursuant to such grants, describing-- (1) the institution's strategy for commercializing the results of research supported by such grants; (2) the implementation of the strategy with respect to research supported by the grants; and (3) the results of its efforts to realize the commercial potential of the research supported by those grants.
Web Site.--The Foundation shall post reports received under this section on a Web site accessible to and searchable by the public.
Trade Secret Information.--An institution of higher education that submits reports to the Foundation under this section shall not reveal confidential, trade secret, or proprietary information in such reports.
NSF GRANTS IN SUPPORT OF SPONSORED POST-DOCTORAL FELLOWSHIP PROGRAMS.
The Director of the National Science Foundation may utilize funds appropriated to carry out grants to institutions of higher education (as such term is defined in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a))) to provide financial support for post- graduate research in fields with potential commercial applications to match, in whole or in part, any private sector grant of financial assistance to any post-doctoral program in such a field of study.
STEM INDUSTRY INTERNSHIP PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Director may award grants, on a competitive, merit-reviewed basis, to institutions of higher education, or consortia thereof, to establish or expand partnerships with local or regional private sector entities, for the purpose of providing undergraduate students with integrated internship experiences that connect private sector internship experiences with the students' STEM coursework.
The partnerships may also include industry or professional associations.
Internship Program.--The grants awarded under section (a) may include internship programs in the manufacturing sector.
Use of Grant Funds.--Grants under this section may be used-- (1) to develop and implement hands-on learning opportunities; (2) to develop curricula and instructional materials related to industry, including the manufacturing sector; (3) to perform outreach to secondary schools; (4) to develop mentorship programs for students with partner organizations; and (5) to conduct activities to support awareness of career opportunities and skill requirements.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Director shall give priority to institutions of higher education or consortia thereof that demonstrate significant outreach to and coordination with local or regional private sector entities and Regional Centers for the Transfer of Manufacturing Technology established by section 25(a) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k(a)) in developing academic courses designed to provide students with the skills or certifications necessary for employment in local or regional companies.
Outreach to Rural Communities.--The Foundation shall conduct outreach to institutions of higher education and private sector entities in rural areas to encourage those entities to participate in partnerships under this section.
Cost-Share.--The Director shall require a 50 percent non- Federal cost-share from partnerships established or expanded under this section.
Restriction.--No Federal funds provided under this section may be used-- (1) for the purpose of providing stipends or compensation to students for private sector internships unless private sector entities match 75 percent of such funding; or (2) as payment or reimbursement to private sector entities, except for institutions of higher education.
Report.--Not less than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit a report to Congress on the number and total value of awards made under this section, the number of students affected by those awards, any evidence of the effect of those awards on workforce preparation and jobs placement for participating students, and an economic and ethnic breakdown of the participating students.
STUDY TO DEVELOP IMPROVED IMPACT-ON-SOCIETY METRICS.
In General.--Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President of the National Academy of Sciences shall initiate a study to evaluate, develop, or improve metrics for measuring the potential impact-on-society, including-- (1) the potential for commercial applications of research studies funded in whole or in part by grants of financial assistance from the National Science Foundation or other Federal agencies; (2) the manner in which research conducted at, and individuals graduating from, an institution of higher education contribute to the development of new intellectual property and the success of commercial activities; (3) the quality of relevant scientific and international publications; and (4) the ability of such institutions to attract external research funding.
Report.--Within 1 year after initiating the study required by subsection (a), the Director shall submit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Science and Technology setting forth the Director's findings, conclusions, and recommendations.
SIMPLIFICATION OF TAX CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO UNIVERSITIES FOR RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PURPOSES.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 41(e)(7) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining basic research) is amended by striking ``not having a specific commercial objective''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
FEDERAL LOAN GUARANTEES FOR BUSINESSES COMMERCIALIZING NSF GRANT-FUNDED RESEARCH IDEAS.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Commerce shall establish a program to provide loan guarantees for obligations to small- or medium- sized businesses to assist them in making commercial use of products, processes, or ideas generated by research grants funded by the National Science Foundation.
Eligible Projects.--A loan guarantee may be made under the program only for a project that enables a small- or medium-sized business in the United States-- (1) to use an innovative product, process, or idea that was developed by research funded in whole or in part by a grant from the National Science Foundation; and (2) to develop, implement, market, or otherwise make use of that product, process, or idea for commercial purposes.
Eligible Borrower.--A loan guarantee may be made under the program only for a borrower who is a small- or medium-sized business, as determined by the Secretary under the criteria established pursuant to subsection (m).
Limitation on Amount.--A loan guarantee shall not exceed an amount equal to 80 percent of the obligation, as estimated at the time at which the loan guarantee is issued.
Limitations on Loan Guarantee.--No loan guarantee shall be made unless the Secretary determines that-- (1) there is a reasonable prospect of repayment of the principal and interest on the obligation by the borrower; (2) the amount of the obligation (when combined with amounts available to the borrower from other sources) is sufficient to carry out the project; (3) the obligation is not subordinate to other financing; (4) the obligation bears interest at a rate that does not exceed a level that the Secretary determines appropriate, taking into account the prevailing rate of interest in the private sector for similar loans and risks; and (5) the term of an obligation requires full repayment over a period not to exceed the lesser of-- (A) 30 years; or (B) 90 percent of the projected useful life, as determined by the Secretary, of the asset to be financed by the obligation.
Penalty for Relocation Outside of United States.--The loan agreement shall contain a provison that requires that, if the recipient of the loan relocates more than 25 percent of the business activities for which the loan was received outside the United States during the term of the loan, the recipient is required to repay the remainder of such loan-- (1) with interest at a penalty rate determined by the Secretary before the issuance of the loan and in consultation with the lender to deter the recipient of the loan from relocating such activities outside the United States; and (2) for a duration determined by the Secretary in consultation with the lender.
Defaults.-- (1) Payment by secretary.-- (A) In general.--If a borrower defaults (as defined in regulations promulgated by the Secretary and specified in the loan guarantee) on the obligation, the holder of the loan guarantee shall have the right to demand payment of the unpaid amount from the Secretary.
Payment required.--Within such period as may be specified in the loan guarantee or related agreements, the Secretary shall pay to the holder of the loan guarantee the unpaid interest on and unpaid principal of the obligation as to which the borrower has defaulted, unless the Secretary finds that there was no default by the borrower in the payment of interest or principal or that the default has been remedied.
Forbearance.--Nothing in this subsection precludes any forbearance by the holder of the obligation for the benefit of the borrower which may be agreed upon by the parties to the obligation and approved by the Secretary.
Subrogation.-- (A) In general.--If the Secretary makes a payment under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall be subrogated to the rights, as specified in the loan guarantee, of the recipient of the payment or related agreements including, if appropriate, the authority (notwithstanding any other provision of law)-- (i) to complete, maintain, operate, lease, or otherwise dispose of any property acquired pursuant to such loan guarantee or related agreement; or (ii) to permit the borrower, pursuant to an agreement with the Secretary, to continue to pursue the purposes of the project if the Secretary determines that such an agreement is in the public interest.
Superiority of rights.--The rights of the Secretary, with respect to any property acquired pursuant to a loan guarantee or related agreements, shall be superior to the rights of any other person with respect to the property.
Notification.--If the borrower defaults on an obligation, the Secretary shall notify the Attorney General of the default.
Terms and Conditions.--A loan guarantee under this section shall include such detailed terms and conditions as the Secretary determines appropriate-- (1) to protect the interests of the United States in the case of default; and (2) to have available all the patents and technology necessary for any person selected, including the Secretary, to complete and operate the project.
Consultation.--In establishing the terms and conditions of a loan guarantee under this section, the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of the Treasury.
Fees.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall charge and collect fees for loan guarantees in amounts the Secretary determines are sufficient to cover applicable administrative expenses.
Availability.--Fees collected under this subsection shall-- (A) be deposited by the Secretary into the Treasury of the United States; and (B) remain available until expended, subject to such other conditions as are contained in annual appropriations Acts.
Limitation.--In charging and collecting fees under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall take into consideration the amount of the obligation.
Records.-- (1) In general.--With respect to a loan guarantee under this section, the borrower, the lender, and any other appropriate party shall keep such records and other pertinent documents as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulation, including such records as the Secretary may require to facilitate an effective audit.
Access.--The Secretary and the Comptroller General of the United States, or their duly authorized representatives, shall have access to records and other pertinent documents for the purpose of conducting an audit.
Full Faith and Credit.--The full faith and credit of the United States is pledged to the payment of all loan guarantees issued under this section with respect to principal and interest.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue final regulations before making any loan guarantees under the program.
The regulations shall include-- (1) criteria that the Secretary shall use to determine eligibility for loan guarantees under this section, including-- (A) whether a borrower is a small- or medium-sized business; and (B) whether a borrower demonstrates that a market exists for the product or that the process will prove commercially successful; (2) criteria that the Secretary shall use to determine the amount of any fees charged under subsection (j), including criteria related to the amount of the obligation; (3) policies and procedures for selecting and monitoring lenders and loan performance; and (4) any other policies, procedures, or information necessary to implement this section.
Audit.-- (1) Annual independent audits.--The Secretary shall enter into an arrangement with an independent auditor for annual evaluations of the program under this section.
Comptroller general review.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a biennial review of the Secretary's execution of the program under this section.
Report.--The results of the independent audit under paragraph (1) and the Comptroller General's review under paragraph (2) shall be provided directly to the Committee on Science and Technology of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
Report to Congress.--Concurrent with the submission to Congress of the President's annual budget request in each year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Committee on Science and Technology of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report containing a summary of all activities carried out under this section.
Coordination and Nonduplication.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall ensure that the activities carried out under this section are coordinated with, and do not duplicate the efforts of, other loan guarantee programs within the Federal Government.
Minimizing Risk.--The Secretary shall promulgate regulations and policies to carry out this section in accordance with Office of Management and Budget Circular No.
129, entitled ``Policies for Federal Credit Programs and Non-Tax Receivables'', as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Cost.--The term ``cost'' has the meaning given such term under section 502 of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 (2 United States Code 661a).
Loan guarantee.--The term ``loan guarantee'' has the meaning given such term in section 502 of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 (2 United States Code 661a).
The term includes a loan guarantee commitment (as defined in section 502 of such Act (2 United States Code 661a)).
Obligation.--The term ``obligation'' means the loan or other debt obligation that is guaranteed under this section.
Program.--The term ``program'' means the loan guarantee program established in subsection (a).
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Cost of loan guarantees.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2015 to provide the cost of loan guarantees under this section.
Principal and interest.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out subsection (g).