Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign, carried out by the Armed Forces of the United States in the Ia Drang Valley of Vietnam from October 23, 1965, to November 26, 1965, pitted forces of the United States Army against North Vietnamese Army regulars in vicious battles in which many United States soldiers displayed extraordinary heroism, sacrifice, and bravery which has not yet been officially recognized through award of appropriate decorations.
One of those battles, a running 4-day battle fought from November 14 to November 18, 1965, encompassed the first battalion-sized Army engagement with North Vietnamese Army regulars.
The soldiers of the United States Army units engaged in the battle encountered and fought valiantly against an overwhelming force of more than 2,000 North Vietnamese Army regulars for an extended period under notably difficult conditions.
Historical literature published in the early 1990s authoritatively documents repeated acts of extraordinary heroism, sacrifice, and bravery on the part of many of the United States Army soldiers who were engaged in the battles of the Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign, many of whom have never been officially recognized for those acts.
United States Army units involved in combat in the Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign suffered substantial losses, including casualties in excess of 90 percent of strength in the case of some companies.
The incidence of heavy casualties throughout the campaign has inhibited the timely collection of comprehensive and detailed information to support recommendations for awards for the acts of heroism, sacrifice, and bravery performed in the Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign engagements.
Requests to the Secretary of the Army for review of award recommendations for those acts have been denied because of restrictions in law and Army regulations that relate to timely filing of recommendations and requirements for documented justification.
Acts of heroism, sacrifice, and bravery performed in combat by members of the Armed Forces of the United States deserve appropriate and timely recognition by the people of the United States.
It is inappropriate for United States policy to restrict recognition of military personnel for acts of extraordinary heroism, sacrifice, or bravery that are belatedly, but properly, documented by persons who witnessed those acts.
IA DRANG VALLEY (PLEIKU) CAMPAIGN DEFINED.
For the purposes of this Act, the Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign is the campaign of military operations carried out by the Armed Forces of the United States in the Ia Drang Valley of Vietnam during the period beginning on October 23, 1965, and ending on November 26, 1965, and includes the activities of Army units and Army personnel in providing direct support in or for such operations during that period.
Award Authorized.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of the Army may award a decoration to any person for an act, an achievement, or service that the person performed in the Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign while serving on active duty in the Army.
Decorations Covered.--Subsection (a) applies to any decoration (including any device in lieu of a decoration) that, during or after the period of the Ia Drang Valley (Pleiku) campaign and before the date of the enactment of this Act, was authorized by Congress or under regulations of the Department of Defense or the Department of the Army to be awarded to a person for an act, an achievement, or service performed by that person while serving on active duty in the Army.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``active duty'' has the meaning given such term in section 101(d)(1) of title 10, United States Code.
REVIEW OF AWARD RECOMMENDATIONS.
Review Required.--The Secretary of the Army shall review all recommendations for awards for acts, achievements, or service described in section 3(a) that have been received by the Secretary before the end of the period of the review, including recommendations received before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Period of Review.--The Secretary shall begin the review within 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall complete the review within one year after such date.
Process.--The Secretary may use the same process for carrying out the review as the Secretary uses for reviewing other recommendations for awarding decorations to members of the Army for acts, achievements, or service.
Report to Congress.--(1) Upon completing the review, the Secretary shall submit a report on the review to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on National Security of the House of Representatives.
The report shall contain the following information on each recommendation for award reviewed: (A) A summary of the recommendation.
The findings resulting from the review.
The final action taken on the recommendation.