FRAUD AND RELATED ACTIVITY IN CONNECTION WITH COMPUTERS.
Increase in Criminal Penalties for Computer Crimes.--Section 1030 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(4), by striking all beginning with ``, unless'' through the semicolon and inserting ``or causes damage;''; and (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``10 years''; (B) in paragraph (2)(C), by striking ``ten years'' and inserting ``20 years''; (C) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``five years'' and inserting ``10 years''; and (D) in paragraph (3)(B), by striking ``ten years'' and inserting ``20 years''.
Improved Damage Threshold.--Section 1030(e)(8) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) as subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following: ``(B) causes loss or interruption of service to the general public;''.
NATIONAL COMMISSION ON CYBERSECURITY.
Establishment of National Commission on Cybersecurity.--There is established the National Commission on Cybersecurity (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership of Commission.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members as follows: (A) Three individuals shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One individual shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Three individuals shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
One individual shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Four individuals shall be appointed by the President of the United States.
Qualifications.--Each of the individuals appointed under paragraph (1) shall be-- (A) individuals with a background in Federal, State, or local law enforcement; (B) individuals from the technology industry; or (C) individuals with expertise in security in the technology industry.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall elect a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson.
In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice Chairperson shall assume the duties of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Appointments.--All appointments under paragraph (1) shall be made within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Voting.--Each member of the Commission shall be entitled to 1 vote, which shall be equal to the vote of every other member of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy on the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Prohibition of additional pay.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Members appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem, in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the Government service to the extent funds are available for such expenses.
Initial meeting.--The initial meeting of the Commission shall occur within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Functions of Commission.-- (1) Specific findings and recommendations.--The Commission shall study the incidents of computer crimes and the need for enhanced methods of combating computer crimes.
The Commission shall make findings and specific recommendations relating to-- (A) improved coordination among all Federal agencies in combating computer crimes, including a central information sharing mechanism; (B) the need for criminal laws designed to deter computer crimes; (C) development of a strategic plan for improved international coordination to combat computer crimes targeted at the United States from foreign countries; (D) the need for additional Federal resources, as well as State and local resources to combat computer crimes; and (E) the enhancement of overall computer security in the United States without creating legal or regulatory burdens on the private sector.
Final report.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the Commission shall submit to the President and Congress, not later than 1 year after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, a report that shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, including the Commission's recommendations for administrative and legislative action that the Commission considers advisable.
Majority vote required for recommendations.-- Any recommendation described in subparagraph (A) shall be made by the Commission to the President and Congress only if such recommendation is adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Commission who are present and voting.
Powers of Commission.-- (1) Hearings.--For the purpose of carrying out this Act, the Commission may hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places as the Commission may find advisable.
Rules and regulations.--The Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to establish the Commission's procedures and to govern the manner of the Commission's operations, organization, and personnel.
Assistance from federal agencies.-- (A) Information.--The Commission may request from the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality such information as the Commission may require for the purpose of this Act.
Each such agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent permitted by law and subject to the exceptions set forth in section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Freedom of Information Act), furnish such information to the Commission, upon request made by the Chairperson of the Commission.
Facilities and services; personnel detail authorized.--Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent possible and subject to the discretion of such head-- (i) make any of the facilities and services of such agency or instrumentality available to the Commission; and (ii) detail any of the personnel of such agency or instrumentality to the Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, to assist the Commission in carrying out the Commission's duties under this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contracting.--The Commission, to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, may enter into contracts with State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to discharge the Commission's duties under this Act.
Staff.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Commission, and to such extent and in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts, the Chairperson of the Commission shall have the power to appoint, terminate, and fix the compensation (without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, or of any other provision of law, relating to the number, classification, and General Schedule rates) of an executive director, and of such additional staff as the Chairperson determines advisable to assist the Commission, at rates not to exceed a rate equal to the maximum rate for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
Expenses of Commission.--There are authorized to be appropriated to pay any expenses of the Commission such sums as may be necessary not to exceed $500,000.
Any sums appropriated for such purposes are authorized to remain available until expended, or until 1 year after the termination of the Commission under subsection (f), whichever occurs first.
Termination of Commission.--The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 60 days after the date on which the Commission is required to submit its final report in accordance with section (c)(2).