This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Training and Employment Bill of Rights Act of 1996''.
VETERANS' TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Chapter 42 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Veterans' Employment and Training Bill of Rights ``(a) For the purposes of this section, an individual is a covered person if the individual is-- ``(1) a veteran who has a service-connected disability; ``(2) a veteran who served on active duty in the armed forces during a war, in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized; or ``(3) the spouse of-- ``(A) any person who died of a service-connected disability; ``(B) any member of the Armed Forces serving on active duty who, at the time of application for assistance under this section, is listed, pursuant to section 556 of title 37 and regulations issued thereunder, by the Secretary concerned in one or more of the following categories and has been so listed for a total of more than 90 days: (i) missing in action, (ii) captured in line of duty by a hostile force, or (iii) forcibly detained or interned in line of duty by a foreign government or power; ``(C) any person who has a total disability permanent in nature resulting from a service-connected disability; or ``(D) a veteran who died while a disability so evaluated was in existence.
A covered person is entitled to priority of services under any federally-funded (in whole or in part) work-force preparation, development, or delivery program or service if the person otherwise meets the eligibility requirements for participating in such program or service, including a program or service that uses technology to assist individuals to access workforce development programs (such as job and training opportunities, labor market information, career assessment tools, and related support services).
In addition to subsection (b), the entities at the State and local levels that administer or deliver services under a program described in subsection (b) shall be responsible for the following: ``(1) Providing information and effective referral assistance to covered persons regarding benefits and services that may be obtained through other entities or service providers.
Ensuring that each covered person who applies or is assisted by a program referred to in subsection (b) is informed of the employment-related rights, and benefits to which the person is entitled under this section.
Each State or local council, board, or advisory body established in support of a program described in subsection (b) shall include adequate representation from the veterans' community, particularly from veterans' service organizations.
The Secretary of Labor, following review and comment by the Advisory Committee on Veterans Employment and Training, shall submit an annual report to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives which shall include the information necessary to (1) evaluate whether covered persons are receiving priority in services and are being fully served by programs described in subsection (b), and (2) that the levels of service of such programs are in proportion to the incidence of representation of veterans in the labor market, including within groups targeted by such programs, if any.
The Secretary of Labor may promulgate such regulations and procedures as may be necessary to ensure that such reports are provided.
For the purposes of this section, a federally-funded (in whole or in part) work-force preparation, development, or delivery program includes (1) programs within the public employment service system, one-stop career centers, the Job Training Partnership Act, a demonstration or other temporary program, and those programs implemented by States or local service providers based on Federal block grants, and (2) workforce development programs targeted to specific groups.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 42 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4214 the following new item: ``4215.
Veterans' Employment and Training Bill of Rights.''.
EMPLOYMENT OF VETERANS WITH RESPECT TO FEDERAL CONTRACTS.
In General.--Section 4212 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out subsections (a) and (b) and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``(a) For the purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `covered contract' means a contract in the amount of $100,000 or more entered into by any department or agency for the procurement of personal property and nonpersonal services (including construction) for the United States Government; ``(2) the term `covered grant' means a grant in the amount of $100,000 or more made by any department or agency under which the principal purpose is to transfer a thing of value to the State or local government or other recipient to carry out a public purpose of support or stimulation authorized by a law of the United States instead of acquiring (by purchase, lease, or barter) property or services for the direct benefit or use of the United States Government; and ``(3) the term `qualified', with respect to an employment position, means having the ability to perform the essential tasks of the position, with reasonable accommodation.
(1) Any covered contract or grant shall contain a provision requiring that the party contracting with, or receiving a grant from, the United States shall take affirmative action to employ and advance in employment-- ``(A) qualified disabled veterans, ``(B) qualified veterans who served on active duty in the Armed Forces during a war, in a campaign or expedition for which a campaign badge has been authorized, and ``(C) qualified veterans who, while serving on active duty in the Armed Forces, participated in a United States military operation for which an Armed Forces service medal was awarded pursuant to Executive Order 12985 (61 Fed.
The provisions of this section shall apply-- ``(A) in the case of a covered contract, to any subcontract entered into by a prime contractor; and ``(B) in the case of a covered grant, to any subgrantee.
In addition to requiring affirmative action to employ such veterans under such contracts and subcontracts and with respect to such grants and subgrants, and in order to promote the implementation of such requirement, the President shall implement the provisions of this section by promulgating regulations which shall require that-- ``(A) each such contractor or grantee undertake in such contract or grant agreement to list all of its employment openings immediately with the appropriate local employment service office, other appropriate service delivery points, or America's Job Bank (or any additional or subsequent national computerized job bank established by the Department of Labor), except that the contractor or grantor may exclude openings for positions which are to be filled from within the contractor's or grantee's organization and positions lasting three days or less; and ``(B) each such local office or other service delivery point shall give such veterans priority in referral to such employment openings.''.
Additional and Conforming Amendments.--Section 4212 of such title is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking out ``filed pursuant to subsection (b) of this section'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``relating to this section filed pursuant to section 4216 of this title''; (B) by striking out ``suitable''; and (C) by striking out ``subsection (a)(2)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsection (a)(3)(B)''; and (2) in subsection (d)-- (A) by amending subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) to read as follows: ``(A) the number of employees in the work force of such contractor or grantee, by job category and hiring location, and the number of such employees, by job category and hiring location, who are veterans described in subsection (a); and ``(B) the total number of new employees hired by the contractor during the period covered by the report and the number of such employees who are veterans described in subsection (a).
''; and (B) by inserting ``or grantee'' after ``contractor''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to contracts entered into and grants made on or after 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EMPLOYMENT WITHIN THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
Section 4214 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by amending the second sentence of subsection (a) to read as follows: ``The Federal Government is also continuously concerned with building an effective, competent work force, and veterans constitute a uniquely qualified recruiting source.
''; (2) in subsection (b)(1), by striking out ``readjustment'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``recruitment''; and (3) in subsection (g), by striking out ``qualified'' the first place it occurs and all that follows through ``era'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``those veterans described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) of section 4212(b)(1) of this title''.
ENFORCEMENT OF VETERANS' EMPLOYMENT RIGHTS AND BENEFITS.
In General.--Chapter 42 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Enforcement of veterans' employment rights and benefits ``(a) The Secretary of Labor (through the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment and Training) shall provide assistance to any person or entity with respect to the requirements of sections 4212 and 4215.
In providing such assistance, the Secretary may request the assistance of existing Federal and State agencies engaged in similar or related activities and utilize the assistance of volunteers.
(1) An individual described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 4212(b)(1) or in section 4215(a) of this title who believes that-- ``(A) such individual is entitled to rights or benefits under section 4212 (relating to United States Government contracts and grants), or 4215 (relating to federally-funded work-force programs and services), respectively, and ``(B) an entity with obligations under either of such sections has failed to comply or refuses to comply with the provisions of such sections, may file a complaint with the Secretary of Labor.
Such complaint shall be in writing, be in such form as the Secretary may prescribe, include the name and address of the party against whom the complaint is filed, and contain a summary of the allegations that form the basis for the complaint.
A complaint may only be filed under paragraph (1) within 90 days after the date of the failure or refusal described in subsection (b).
The Secretary of Labor shall promptly investigate the complaint.
If the Secretary of Labor determines as a result of the investigation that the action alleged in such complaint occurred, the Secretary shall attempt to resolve the complaint by making reasonable efforts to ensure that the party named in the complaint complies with the provisions of section 4212 or 4215, as appropriate.
If, within 90 days after the date on which such complaint is filed, the efforts to resolve the complaint are unsuccessful, the Secretary of Labor shall notify the individual who submitted the complaint of-- ``(1) the results of the investigation; and ``(2) the individual's rights.
(1) An individual who receives from the Secretary a notification under subsection (c) relating to a complaint may request that the Secretary refer the complaint to the Attorney General of the United States.
If the Attorney General is reasonably satisfied that the person on whose behalf the complaint is referred is entitled to the rights or benefits sought, the Attorney General may appear on behalf of, and act as attorney for, the person on whose behalf the complaint is submitted and commence an action for appropriate relief for such person in an appropriate United States district court.
An individual may commence an action for relief with respect to a complaint if that individual-- ``(A) has chosen not to file a complaint under subsection (b); ``(B) has chosen not to request that the Secretary refer the complaint to the Attorney General under paragraph (1); or ``(C) has been refused representation by the Attorney General with respect to the complaint under such paragraph.
(1)(A) The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction, upon the filing of a complaint, motion, petition, or other appropriate pleading by or on behalf of the person claiming a right or benefit pursuant to this section-- ``(i) to require an entity to comply with the provisions of section 4212 or 4215, as appropriate, of this title; ``(ii) to require the entity to compensate the individual for any loss of wages or benefits suffered by reason of such entity's failure to comply with the provisions of such section; and ``(iii) to require the entity to pay the individual an amount equal to the amount referred to in clause (ii) as liquidated damages, if the court determines that the entity's failure to comply with the provisions of such section was willful.
Any compensation under clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (A) shall be in addition to, and shall not diminish, any of the other rights and benefits provided for in such sections.
In any action or proceeding to enforce a provision of section 4212 or 4215 of this title by an individual under subsection (d)(2) who obtained private counsel for such action or proceeding, the court may award any such individual who prevails in such action or proceeding reasonable attorney fees, expert witness fees, and other litigation expenses.
The court may use its full equity powers, including temporary or permanent injunctions, temporary restraining orders, and contempt orders, to vindicate fully the rights or benefits of individuals pursuant to this section.
An action under this section may be initiated only by an individual claiming rights or benefits under section 4212 or 4215 of this title, not by any other entity with obligations under such sections.
In any such action, only an entity with obligations under section 4212 or 4215, as the case may be, shall be a necessary party respondent.
No State statute of limitations shall apply to any proceeding pursuant to this section.
The United States and a State shall be subject to the same remedies, including prejudgment interest, as may be imposed upon any private entity under this section.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 42 of such title, as amended by section 2, is further amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4215 the following new item: ``4216.
Enforcement of veterans' employment rights and benefits.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to complaints filed on or after 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Labor is authorized to allocate an additional 10 full-time equivalent positions from the Employment and Training Administration to the Veterans' Employment and Training Service to carry out chapters 41 and 42 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by this Act.