NATIONAL HEALTH MUSEUM PROPERTY.
Short Title and Purpose.-- (1) Short title.--This section may be cited as the ``National Health Museum Site Selection Act''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to further section 703 of the National Health Museum Development Act (20 United States Code 50 note; Public Law 105-78), which provides that the National Health Museum shall be located on or near the Mall on land owned by the Federal Government or the District of Columbia.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of General Services.
Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the National Health Museum, Inc., a District of Columbia nonprofit corporation exempt from Federal income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Property.--The term ``property'' means-- (A) a parcel of land identified as Lot 24 and a closed interior alley in Square 579 in the District of Columbia, generally bounded by 2nd, 3rd, C, and D Streets, S.W.
; and (B) all improvements on and appurtenances to the land and alley.
Conveyance of Property.-- (1) In general.--The Administrator shall convey to the Museum all rights, title, and interest of the United States in and to the property.
Purpose of conveyance.--The purpose of the conveyance is to provide a site for the construction and operation of a new building to serve as the National Health Museum, including associated office, educational, conference center, visitor and community services, and other space and facilities appropriate to promote knowledge and understanding of health issues.
Date of conveyance.-- (A) Notification.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Museum shall notify the Administrator in writing of the date on which the Museum will accept conveyance of the property.
Date.--The date of conveyance shall be-- (i) not less than 270 days and not more than 1 year after the date of the notice; but (ii) not earlier than April 1, 2001, unless the Administrator and the Museum agree to an earlier date.
Effect of failure to notify.--If the Museum fails to provide the notice to the Administrator by the date described in subparagraph (A), the Museum shall have no further right to the property.
Quitclaim deed.--The property shall be conveyed to the Museum vacant and by quitclaim deed.
Purchase price.-- (A) In general.--The purchase price for the property shall be the fair market value of the property as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Timing; appraisers.--The determination of fair market value shall be made not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act by qualified appraisers jointly selected by the Administrator and the Museum.
Report to congress.--Promptly upon the determination of the purchase price, and in any event at least sixty days in advance of the conveyance of the property, the Administrator shall report to Congress as to the purchase price.
Deposit of purchase price.--The Administrator shall deposit the purchase price into the Federal Buildings Fund established by section 210(f) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 490(f)).
Reversionary Interest in the United States.-- (1) In general.--The property shall revert to the United States if-- (A) during the 50-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the property is used for a purpose not authorized by subsection (c)(2); (B) during the 3-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the Museum does not commence construction on the property, other than for a reason not within the control of the Museum; or (C) the Museum ceases to be exempt from Federal income taxation as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Repayment.--If the property reverts to the United States, the United States shall repay the Museum the full purchase price for the property, without interest.
Authority of Museum Over Property.--The Museum may-- (1) demolish or renovate any existing or future improvement on the property; (2) build, own, operate, and maintain new improvements on the property; (3) finance and mortgage the property on customary terms and conditions; and (4) manage the property in furtherance of this section.
Land Use Approvals.-- (1) Effect on other authority.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the authority of the National Capital Planning Commission or the Commission of Fine Arts.
Cooperation concerning zoning.-- (A) In general.--The United States shall cooperate with the Museum with respect to any zoning or other matter relating to-- (i) the development or improvement of the property; or (ii) the demolition of any improvement on the property as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Zoning applications.--Cooperation under subparagraph (A) shall include making, joining in, or consenting to any application required to facilitate the zoning of the property.
Environmental Hazards.--Costs of remediation of any environmental hazards existing on the property, including all asbestos- containing materials, shall be borne by the United States.
Environmental remediation shall commence immediately upon the vacancy of the building and shall be completed not later than 270 days from the date of the notice to the Administrator described in subsection (c)(3)(A).
Reports.--Following the date of enactment of this Act and ending on the date that the National Health Museum opens to the public, the Museum shall submit annual reports to the Administrator and Congress, regarding the status of planning, development, and construction of the National Health Museum.