This Act may be cited as the ``Diabetes Research Amendments of 1997''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Approximately 16,000,000 Americans suffer from diabetes, and another 650,000 will be newly diagnosed during 1997.
Diabetes and its complications are a leading cause of death by disease in America, and reduce life expectancy by up to 30 percent.
During 1997 diabetes and its complications will contribute to the deaths of more than 170,000 Americans.
The total health-care-related costs of diabetes, consisting of hospital stays, nursing home services, physician care, laboratory tests, and pharmaceutical products, total over $130,000,000,000 per year.
Diabetes is the leading cause of new cases of blindness in the United States, with 24,000 new cases resulting from diabetes each year.
One-third of all kidney dialysis patients have diabetes-related kidney failure.
Diabetes is a leading risk factor for coronary artery disease overall, and in particular for women between the ages of 30 and 55.
Women with either Type I or Type II diabetes have almost a two-fold risk of developing coronary artery disease.
Diabetic neuropathy affects 90 percent of people with long-term diabetes and is a major contributor to lower extremity amputations.
Patients with diabetes account for more than half of all leg amputations in the United States.
Sixty to 65 percent of people with diabetes are affected by hypertension.
African Americans, Hispanic Americans, and Native Americans are at 1\1/2\ to 2\1/2\ times greater risk of developing diabetes.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PLAN FOR DIABETES-RELATED ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
In General.--Subpart 3 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285c et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 432 the following section: ``plan regarding diabetes ``Sec.
With respect to activities of the National Institutes of Health that relate to diabetes, the Director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and the Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee established under section 429, shall-- ``(1) establish a comprehensive plan for the conduct and support of such activities of the Institute, and of each other agency of the National Institutes of Health that has responsibilities regarding diabetes, which plan shall have the goal of developing future diabetes research initiatives and direction; ``(2) ensure that such plan establishes priorities among such activities; and ``(3) review the plan not less than annually, and revise the plan as appropriate.
Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of the Diabetes Research Amendments of 1997, the Director of the Institute and the Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee shall establish the initial plan under subsection (a) and shall submit the plan to the Congress.''.
Diabetes Research-Plan Working Group.-- (1) Establishment.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall establish a Diabetes Research-Plan Working Group (in this subsection referred to as the ``Working Group'').
Duties.--The Working Group shall consult with the Director of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and the Diabetes Mellitus Interagency Coordinating Committee, for the purpose of providing advice to the Director and the Coordinating Committee on the development of the initial plan referred to in section 432A(b) of the Public Health Service Act (as added by subsection (a) of this section).
Composition.-- (A) In general.--The Working Group shall in accordance with this paragraph be composed of not more than 30 members appointed by the Director of the National Institutes of Health or selected by such Director as ex officio members.
Participation of certain agencies.--The members of the Working Group shall include one or more representatives from each of the following agencies: (i) The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases.
The National Eye Institute.
The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.
The National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.
The National Institute of Child Health and Human Development.
The National Institute of Dental Research.
The National Institute of General Medical Sciences.
The National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke.
The National Center for Research Resources.
The National Center for Human Genome Research.
Participation of private sector.--The appointed members of the Working Group shall include individuals appointed from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Federal Government, which individuals shall include leading diabetes researchers, leaders from the health care industry, and leaders of organizations that represent individuals with diabetes.
Chair.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall select a member of the Working Group to serve as the chair of the Group.
The chair shall be an individual who was appointed to the Group from among individuals who were not officers or employees of the Federal Government.
Date certain for appointments.--The Director of the National Institutes of Health shall complete appointments to the Working Group not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Termination.--The Working Group terminates upon the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date on which the plan referred to in paragraph (2) is submitted to the Congress.
Conforming Amendment Regarding Biennial Report to Congress.-- Section 433(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285c-7(1)) is amended by striking ``current diabetes plan'' and all that follows through the semicolon at the end and inserting ``diabetes plan under section 432A;''.