This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Patient Appeals Act of 1999''.
REVISION OF APPEALS PROCESS.
Deadlines for Consideration of Appeals.--Section 1869 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ff) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``consistent with subsections (c) and (d)'' before the period; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(c) Deadlines for Reconsiderations and Appeals Under Part A.-- Reconsideration and appeals under subsections (a) and (b) with respect to matters under part A shall be conducted consistent with the following: ``(1) Deadlines for administrative action.-- ``(A) Reconsidered determination.--The Secretary shall conduct and conclude a reconsideration of an initial determination, and mail the notice of reconsidered determination, by not later than the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date a request for reconsideration has been timely filed.
Hearing by administrative law judge.-- ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in clause (ii), an administrative law judge shall conduct and conclude a hearing and render a decision on such hearing by not later than the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date a request for hearing has been timely filed.
Waiver of deadline by party seeking hearing.--The 90-day period under clause (i) shall not apply in the case of a motion or stipulation by the party requesting the hearing to waive such period.
Departmental appeals board review.--The Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services shall conduct and conclude a review of the decision on a hearing described in subparagraph (B) and make a decision or remand the case to the administrative law judge for reconsideration by not later than the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date a request for review has been timely filed.
Consequences of failure to meet deadlines.-- ``(A) In general.--(i) In the case of a failure by the Secretary to mail the notice of reconsidered determination by the end of the period described in paragraph (1)(A), the party requesting the reconsideration may request a hearing before an administrative law judge, notwithstanding any requirements for a reconsidered determination for purposes of the party's right to such hearing.
In the case of a failure by an administrative law judge to render a decision by the end of the period described in paragraph (1)(B), the party requesting the hearing may request a review by the Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services, notwithstanding any requirements for a hearing for purposes of the party's right to such a review.
DAB hearing procedure.--In the case of a request described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the Departmental Appeals Board shall review the case de novo.
Deadlines for Reviews and Appeals Under Part B.--Reviews and appeals under subsections (a) and (b) with respect to matters under part B shall be conducted consistent with the following: ``(1) Deadlines.-- ``(A) Review of initial determination.--A carrier shall conduct and conclude a review of an initial determination, and mail the notice of review determination, by not later than the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date a request for review has been timely filed.
Carrier hearing.-- ``(i) Deadline for decision.--A carrier shall conduct and conclude a hearing, and mail the notice of the decision, by not later than the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date a request for a carrier hearing has been timely filed.
Option to proceed to hearing by administrative law judge.--No carrier hearing shall be held, and no requirement for a carrier hearing shall apply with respect to rights to a hearing before an administrative law judge, if the party to the carrier review elects a hearing before an administrative law judge in lieu of a carrier hearing.
Hearing by administrative law judge.-- ``(i) In general.--Except as provided in clause (ii), an administrative law judge shall conduct and conclude a hearing and render a decision on such hearing by not later than the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date a request for hearing has been timely filed.
Waiver of deadline by party seeking hearing.--The 90-day period under clause (i) shall not apply in the case of a motion or stipulation by the party requesting the hearing to waive such period.
Departmental appeals board review.--The Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services shall conduct and conclude a review of the decision on a hearing described in subparagraph (C) and make a decision or remand the case to the administrative law judge for reconsideration by not later than the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date a request for review has been timely filed.
Consequences of failure to meet deadlines.-- ``(A) In general.--(i) In the case of a failure by a carrier to mail notice within the time period described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1), the party requesting the review or carrier hearing (as the case may be) may request a hearing before an administrative law judge, notwithstanding any requirements for a carrier review or a carrier hearing for purposes of the party's right to a hearing before such judge.
In the case of a failure by an administrative law judge to render a decision by the end of the period described in paragraph (1)(C), the party requesting the hearing may request a review by the Departmental Appeals Board, notwithstanding any requirements for a hearing for purposes of the party's right to such a review.
DAB hearing procedure.--In the case of a request described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the Departmental Appeals Board shall review the case de novo.''.
Review of National and Local Coverage Decisions.-- (1) In general.--Section 1869(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ff(b)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Review of any coverage determination respecting whether or not a particular type or class of items or services is covered under this title shall be subject to the following limitations: ``(A) In the case of any national coverage determination under section 1862(a)(1), the following limitations apply: ``(i) Such a determination shall not be reviewed by any administrative law judge.
Such a determination shall not be held unlawful or set aside on the ground that a requirement of section 553 of title 5, United States Code, or section 1871(b), relating to publication in the Federal Register or opportunity for public comment, was not satisfied.
Upon the filing of a complaint by an aggrieved party, such a determination shall be reviewed by the Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services.
In conducting such a review, the Departmental Appeals Board shall review the record and shall permit discovery and the taking of evidence to evaluate the reasonableness of the determination.
In reviewing such a determination, the Departmental Appeals Board shall defer only to the reasonable findings of fact, reasonable interpretations of law, and reasonable applications of fact to law by the Secretary.
A decision of the Departmental Appeals Board constitutes a final agency action and is subject to judicial review.
In the case of a local coverage determination made by a fiscal intermediary or a carrier under this title, the following limitations apply: ``(i) Upon the filing of a complaint by an aggrieved party, such a determination shall be reviewed by an administrative law judge of the Department of Health and Human Services.
The administrative law judge shall review the record and shall permit discovery and the taking of evidence to evaluate the reasonableness of the determination.
In reviewing such a determination, the judge shall defer only to the reasonable findings of fact, reasonable interpretations of law, and reasonable applications of fact to law by the Secretary.
Such a determination may be reviewed by the Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services.
A decision of the Departmental Appeals Board constitutes a final agency action and is subject to judicial review.
In the case of review of a determination under subparagraph (A)(iii) or (B)(i) where the moving party alleges that there are no material issues of fact in dispute, and alleges that the only issue is the constitutionality of a provision of this title, or that a regulation, determination, or ruling by the Secretary is invalid, the moving party may seek review by a court of competent jurisdiction.''.
Pending national coverage determinations.--Section 1869(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395ff(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6)(A) In the event the Secretary has not issued a national coverage or noncoverage determination with respect to a particular type or class of items or services, an affected party may submit to the Secretary a request to make such a determination with respect to such items or services.
By not later than the end of the 90-day period beginning on the date the Secretary receives such a request, the Secretary shall take one of the following actions: ``(i) Issue a national coverage determination, with or without limitations.
Issue a national noncoverage determination.
Issue a determination that no national coverage or noncoverage determination is appropriate as of the end of such 90-day period with respect to national coverage of such items or services.
When issuing a determination under subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall include a explanation of the basis for the determination.
An action taken under subparagraph (A) is deemed to be a national coverage determination for purposes of review under paragraph (3)(A).''.
Standing.--Section 1869 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395ff), as amended in subsection (a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) An action under this section may only be initiated by an aggrieved person, or class of persons, with respect to claims for rights to, or payments for, items and services under this title, or coverage of items and services under this title.
Such a person, or class of persons, includes the following: ``(1) Individuals entitled to benefits under part A, or enrolled under part B, or both.
Other health care professionals entitled to payment for services furnished under this title.
Suppliers and manufacturers of items and services covered, or seeking to be covered, under this title.''.
Elimination of Sua Sponte Motions by the Secretary on Decisions of the Provider Reimbursement Review Board.--Section 1878(f)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395oo(f)(1)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``unless the Secretary, on his own motion, and within 60 days after the provider of services is notified of the Board's decision, reverses, affirms, or modifies the Board's decision''; (2) in the second sentence, by striking ``, or of any reversal, affirmance, or modification by the Secretary,'' and ``or of any reversal, affirmance, or modification by the Secretary is received''; and (3) in the fifth sentence, by striking `` and not subject to review by the Secretary''.
Conforming Regulations.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promptly publish notice of revisions in the process under section 1869 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ff), in order to reflect the modifications to such process made by this section.
References.--For purposes of this section and the notice published under paragraph (1), reference to-- (A) a reconsideration of an initial determination in subsection (c)(1)(A) of section 1869 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ff), as added under subsection (a)(2), is a reference to a reconsideration of an initial determination under section 405.715 of title 42 of the Code of Federal Regulations; (B) the requirement to mail the notice of reconsidered determination in such subsection, as so added, is a reference to such requirement under section 405.716 of such title; (C) a hearing conducted by an administrative law judge in subsection (c)(1)(B)(i) of such section, as so added, is a reference to such a hearing under section 405.720 of such title; (D) review conducted by the Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services in paragraphs (1)(C) and (2)(A)(ii) of subsection (c) of such section 1869, as so added, is a reference to such review conducted under section 405.724 of such title; (E) a review of an initial determination in subsection (d)(1)(A) of such section, as so added, is a reference to such review conducted under section 405.807 of such title; (F) the requirement to mail the notice of review determination in such subsection, as so added, is a reference to such requirement under section 405.811 of such title; (G) a hearing in subsection (d)(1)(B)(i) of such section, as so added, is a reference to such a hearing under section 405.830 of such title; (H) a hearing before an administrative law judge in subparagraphs (B)(ii) and (C)(i) of subsection (d)(1) of such section, as so added, is a reference to such a hearing under section 405.855 of such title; and (I) review conducted by the Departmental Appeals Board of the Department of Health and Human Services in paragraphs (1)(D) and (2)(A)(ii) of subsection (d) of such section, as so added, is a reference to such review conducted under section 405.856 of such title.
Effective Date.--This section, and the amendments made by this section, apply as of the date that is 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and apply to reconsiderations, reviews, motions, and determinations pending before, on, or after such date.