SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Black Hills Charter Forest Act of 2002''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Demonstration forest management project, Black Hills National Forest, South Dakota and Wyoming.
Independent scientific review and monitoring.
Predecisional review process for demonstration project.
Retention of demonstration project receipts.
Relation to National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
In this Act: (1) The term ``council'' means the community management council appointed under section 7.
The term ``demonstration project'' means the demonstration forest management project for the Black Hills National Forest in the States of South Dakota and Wyoming required by this Act.
The term ``panel'' means the panel of non-Federal scientists assembled by the Secretary under section 6.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service.
Congress finds the following: (1) The administrative body for the National Forest System, the Forest Service, is plagued by ineffective public involvement, management inefficiency, and protracted, superfluous analyses.
The debilitations of the Forest Service have cultivated an environment of mistrust and divisiveness in forest policy, begetting a cumbersome, enfeebled process of resource management in the Black Hills National Forest.
This state of affairs represents a grievous disservice to the public and the environment and are indicative of an administrative process in need of repair; and (4) it is in the public interest to explore a broad spectrum of progressive solutions to improve forest management for, and the condition of forests in, the Black Hills National Forest.
The purpose of this Act is-- (1) to increase community involvement in decisionmaking regarding the management of the Black Hills National Forest; (2) to evaluate alternatives in reforming the current Forest Service administrative appeals process for projects in the Black Hills National Forest; (3) to provide the Black Hills National Forest with more efficient and dynamic contracting mechanisms to accomplish land and resource management plan objectives; and (4) to evaluate and implement procedural reform in the Forest Service's administration of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4331 et sequentes) on forest projects in the Black Hills National Forest, in keeping with the law's substantive intent.
DEMONSTRATION FOREST MANAGEMENT PROJECT, BLACK HILLS NATIONAL FOREST, SOUTH DAKOTA AND WYOMING.
Demonstration Project Required.--The Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service, shall conduct a demonstration project in the Black Hills National Forest for the purpose of increasing community involvement in decisionmaking regarding the management of the Black Hills National Forest and evaluating various methods, described in this Act, to improve the management and condition of the Black Hills National Forest.
Commencement of Demonstration Project.--The Secretary shall commence the demonstration project upon the completion of the phase 2 amendment, pending as of the date of the enactment of this Act, to the land and resource management plan for the Black Hills National Forest.
Duration.--The Secretary shall terminate the demonstration project at the end of the 10-year period beginning on the date the demonstration project is commenced pursuant to subsection (b).
Relation to Other National Forest System Laws.--Except as provided in this Act, during the term of the demonstration project, the Secretary shall continue to manage the Black Hills National Forest under all of the laws and regulations governing occupancy, use, and management of the National Forest System.
INDEPENDENT SCIENTIFIC REVIEW AND MONITORING.
Review of Ecological, Social, and Economic Sustainability of Forest.-- (1) Initial review.--The Secretary shall assemble an independent panel of non-Federal scientists to conduct an assessment, using accepted measures and indicators, of the ecological, social, and economic sustainability of the Black Hills National Forest, taking into consideration such factors as forest health, susceptibility to catastrophic fire, biological diversity, and the capability of the forest to sustain communities and economies.
Submission of results.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the panel shall submit to the Secretary and Congress a report containing the results of the assessment conducted under this subsection.
Monitoring Plan for Demonstration Project.--The panel shall prepare a monitoring plan to be used to track the implementation of the demonstration project.
Revised Review; Resubmission of Results.--At the end of the first five years of the demonstration project and upon the completion of the demonstration project, the panel shall revise the assessment conducted under subsection (a) and resubmit it to the Secretary and Congress.
Effects of Demonstration Project.--Using the information collected from the monitoring plan, the panel shall include in each revised assessment an evaluation of the positive and negative impacts of the demonstration project on changes in the ecological, social, and economic sustainability of the Black Hills National Forest.
Establishment and Purposes.--The Secretary shall establish a community management council as part of the demonstration project for the purpose of-- (1) advising the Secretary and the Supervisor of the Black Hills National Forest on the broad array of environmental, economic, and social issues related to the management, occupancy, and use of the Black Hills National Forest; and (2) advising the Secretary and the Supervisor in the development of binding priorities for management activities on the Black Hills National Forest.
Appointment and Members.--The council shall consist of 13 members, appointed by the Secretary in consultation with the Governors and congressional delegations of the States of South Dakota and Wyoming.
Members shall meet the following criteria: (1) Members shall represent an equitable cross-section of forest policy stakeholders.
Members shall reside in the seven counties that encompass the Black Hills National Forest: (A) Pennington, Lawrence, Meade, Custer, and Fall River Counties of South Dakota.
Crook and Weston Counties of Wyoming.
Members shall have demonstrated a willingness to seek compromise on complex forest issues through respectful and reasonable discourse.
Members shall have demonstrated an ability to respect values, cultures, and points of view other than their own.
Forest Supervisor.--The Supervisor of the Black Hills National Forest shall serve as an ex officio member of the council.
Vacancies; Geographic Representation.--Vacancies on the council shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Compensation.--Members of the council who are not Federal employees shall serve without compensation.
Other Council Authorities and Requirements.-- (1) Staff assistance.--The council may request the Secretary to provide staff assistance to the council from Federal employees under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.
Meetings.--All meetings of the council shall be announced at least one week in advance in a local newspaper of record and shall be open to the public.
Records.--The council shall maintain records of the meetings of the council and make the records available for public inspection.
Relation to other law.--The council shall be exempt from the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
PREDECISIONAL REVIEW PROCESS FOR DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
In General.--The Secretary shall promulgate rules to establish a predecisional review process that would be used during the term of the demonstration project in connection with site-specific projects in the Black Hills National Forest that require approval by a Forest Service official in a decision notice or record of decision.
Relation to Required Environmental Analysis.--The predecisional review process shall not be construed to alter or waive any environmental analysis otherwise required as part of the planning or implementation of a project in the Black Hills National Forest.
Required Elements of Predecisional Review.-- (1) Notice.--The rules required by subsection (a) shall provide for notice of a proposed decision and an opportunity to request review before a final decision on a site-specific project is made.
Right to request a predecisional review.--For a period not to exceed 30 days from the date notice is provided pursuant to paragraph (1), review of a proposed decision may be requested by any individual or entity, but only if the individual or entity submitted written comments during the preparation stage of the project on the issue or issues for which predecisional review is sought.
Completion of review.--The review of a request for predecisional review shall be completed before issuance of a final decision regarding the project at issue.
The review shall be completed within 30 days after the date the request was submitted.
Exemption.--The Secretary may exempt a proposed decision responding to an unexpected or serious event that would provide relief from hazards threatening human health and safety or natural resources, or provide for rehabilitation and recovery of forest resources, from the predecisional review rules prescribed under this section.
Exhaustion of Predecisional Review Process.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an individual or entity must exhaust the predecisional review process before the individual or entity may bring an action in court challenging a site-specific project under the demonstration project.
Presumption.--In any predecisional review or litigation of a management activity under the demonstration project, the responsible official, administrative entity, or court shall give deference to the expert judgment of the Secretary in identifying and interpreting the scientific data that is the basis for the management activity.
Relation to Forest Service Decisionmaking and Appeals Reform.-- Section 322 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1993 (Public Law 102-381; 16 United States Code 1612 note), shall not apply to activities conducted under the demonstration project.
Use of Existing Demonstration Authority.--During the term of the demonstration project, the Secretary may enter into stewardship and end result contracts for the Black Hills National Forest in accordance with section 347 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (as contained in section 101(e) of division A of Public Law 105-277; 16 United States Code 2104 note), to accomplish the land management goals specified in subsection (b) of such section.
Additional Contracts.--The contracts entered into under the authority of subsection (a) shall be in addition to the contracts authorized under such section 347 or under section 338 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (Public Law 106-291; 16 United States Code 2104 note).
RETENTION OF DEMONSTRATION PROJECT RECEIPTS.
Retention.--During the term of the demonstration project, the Secretary shall retain the monetary proceeds from commercial timber sales and special use permit fees derived from the Black Hills National Forest.
The retained receipts shall be in addition to such other funds appropriated or otherwise made available for the operation of the Black Hills National Forest, and the receipts shall not be subject to overhead assessment.
Use.--The Secretary shall use the retained receipts for projects in the Black Hills National Forest, with priority placed on projects related to forest health, restoration, hazardous fuels reduction, and disease and invasive species control.
Role of Council.--The Secretary shall consult with the council in selecting projects under this section.
RELATION TO NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT OF 1969.
In conducting the demonstration project, the Secretary shall continue to comply with the substantive requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4331 et sequentes) and its implementing rules.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate rules regarding implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 in the Black Hills National Forest during the demonstration project, being careful to provide maximum latitude to line officers and the council consistent with the substantive requirements of that Act.