This Act may be cited as the ``Cancer Survivorship Research and Quality of Life Act of 2002''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) There are more than 9,000,000 individuals in the United States today who are cancer survivors (living with, through, and beyond cancer).
60 percent of cancer survivors are 65 years of age and older.
62 percent of adults diagnosed with cancer today will be alive 5 years from now.
In 1960, 4 percent of children with cancer survived more than 5 years.
77 percent of children (age 0 through 14) diagnosed with cancer today will be living five years from now.
Three out of every four American families will have at least one family member diagnosed with cancer.
24 percent of adults with cancer are parents who have a child 18 years or younger living in the home.
One of every four deaths in the United States is from cancer.
In 2002, 555,500 Americans will die of cancer--more than 1,500 people a day.
The annual cost of cancer in the United States is $180,000,000,000 in direct and indirect costs.
In fiscal year 2001 the National Institutes of Health invested $38,000,000 in survivorship--less than $4.25 per survivor.
Section 412 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285a-1) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by inserting ``, for survivorship,'' after ``treatment of cancer''; (2) in paragraph (1)(B), by striking ``cancer patients'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``cancer patients, families of cancer patients, and cancer survivors, and''; and (3) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``and concerning cancer survivorship programs,'' after ``control of cancer''.
EXPANSION AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH WITH RESPECT TO CANCER SURVIVORSHIP RESEARCH.
In General.--Subpart 1 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end following section: ``SEC.
EXPANSION AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES WITH RESPECT TO CANCER SURVIVORSHIP RESEARCH.
In General.-- ``(1) Expansion of activities.--The Director of NIH shall expand and coordinate the activities of the National Institutes of Health with respect to cancer survivorship research.
Administration of program; collaboration among agencies.--The Director of NIH shall carry out this section acting through the Director of the Institute and in collaboration with any other agencies that the Director determines appropriate.
Office on Survivorship.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of NIH shall establish an Office on Survivorship within the Institute through which the activities under subsection (a)(1) shall be implemented and directed.
Associate director for survivorship; appointment; function.-- ``(A) There shall be in the Institute an Associate Director for Survivorship to coordinate and promote the programs in the Institute concerning cancer survivorship research.
The Associate Director shall be appointed by the Director of the Institute from among individuals who, because of their professional training or experience, are equipped to address the breadth of needs associated with cancer survivorship.
Not later than February 1, 2003, the Associate Director for Survivorship shall prepare and submit to the Congress report providing a description of the survivorship activities of the Office and strategies for future activities.''.
Funding.--Section 417B(d)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285a-8(d)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``each'' and all that follows and inserting ``each fiscal year through 2002; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) 13 percent, in the case of fiscal year 2003 and each subsequent fiscal year, of which not less than 3 percent shall be for the Office on Survivorship under section 417D.''.
EXPANSION OF CDC COMPREHENSIVE CANCER PROGRAMS; PROGRAMS TO IMPROVE CANCER SURVIVORSHIP.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall study the unique health challenges associated with cancer survivorship and carry out projects and interventions to improve the long-term health status of cancer survivors.
Such projects shall be carried out directly and through the awards of grants or contracts.
Certain Activities.--Activities under subsection (a) include-- (1) the expansion of current cancer surveillance systems to track the health status of cancer survivors and determine whether cancer survivors are at-risk for other chronic and disabling conditions; (2) assess the unique challenges associated with cancer survivorship; (3) the development of a national cancer survivorship action plan, in partnership with health organizations focused on cancer survivorship, to be carried out in coordination with the state-based comprehensive cancer control program of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to-- (A) develop unique and innovative post-treatment programs, services and demonstrations designed to support and advance cancer survivorship through-- (i) promotion of physical activity and healthy lifestyles; (ii) educational outreach programs for health care providers; (iii) support for innovative programs to improve the quality of life among cancer survivors; (iv) home and community-based interventions; (v) peer support and mentor programs; (vi) public awareness and outreach campaigns; and (vii) information dissemination to inform health care providers and cancer survivors of their health care options and available survivorship programs; and (B) develop unique cancer survivorship demonstration programs designed to address the needs of underserved populations, including minorities, children, and persons residing in rural areas.
Coordination of Activities.--The Secretary shall assure that activities under this section are coordinated as appropriate with other agencies of the Public Health Service.
Report to Congress.--Not later than October 1, 2003, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report describing the results of the evaluation under subsection (a), and as applicable, the strategies developed under such subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 through 2006.
MONITORING AND EVALUATING QUALITY CANCER CARE AND CANCER SURVIVORSHIP.
In General.--Part M of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 280e et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 399E the following section: ``SEC.
MONITORING AND EVALUATING QUALITY CANCER CARE AND CANCER SURVIVORSHIP.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and in consultation with the National Cancer Institute, shall make grants to eligible entities for the purpose of enabling such entities to monitor and evaluate quality cancer care, develop information concerning quality cancer care, and monitor cancer survivorship.
Eligible Entities.--For purposes of this section, an entity is an eligible entity for a fiscal year if the entity-- ``(1) operates a statewide cancer registry with funds from a grant made under section 399B for such fiscal year; and ``(2) is certified by the North American Association of Central Cancer Registries or another similar certification organization.
Contracting Authority.--In carrying out the purpose described in subsection (a), an eligible entity may expend a grant under such subsection to enter into contracts with academic institutions, cancer centers, and other entities, when determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Application for Grant.--A grant may be made under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Authority of Secretary Regarding Use of Grant.--The Secretary shall determine the appropriate uses of grants under subsection (a) to achieve the purpose described in such subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007.''.
Conforming Amendment Regarding Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 399F(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 280e-4(a)) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``this part,'' and inserting ``this part (other than section 399E-1),''.