This Act may be cited as the ``Filipino Veterans' Benefits Improvements Act of 2001''.
RATE OF PAYMENT OF CERTAIN BENEFITS FOR NEW PHILIPPINE SCOUTS RESIDING IN THE UNITED STATES.
Redesignation of Provisions.--Section 107 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a), by striking ``subsection (c)'' and inserting ``subsections (c) and (d)''; and (2) by designating subsection (c), as added by section 332(a)(2) of the Veterans Benefits and Health Care Improvement Act of 2000 (Public Law 106-419; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1856), as subsection (d).
Rate of Payment.--That section is further amended-- (1) in the second sentence of subsection (b), by striking ``Payments'' and inserting ``Except as provided in subsection (c), payments''; and (2) in subsection (c), as added by section 501(a) of H.R.
5482 of the 106th Congress (as enacted by Public Law 106-377 (114 United States Statutes at Large 1441A-55))-- (A) by inserting ``or (b)'' after ``subsection (a)'' the first place it appears; and (B) by striking ``subsection (a)'' the second place it appears and inserting ``the applicable subsection''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, and shall apply to benefits paid for months beginning on or after that date.
RATE OF PAYMENT OF DEPENDENCY AND INDEMNITY COMPENSATION FOR SURVIVING SPOUSES OF CERTAIN FILIPINO VETERANS.
Rate of Payment.--Subsection (c) of section 107 of title 38, United States Code, as added by section 501(a) of H.R.
5482 of the 106th Congress (as enacted by Public Law 106-377 (114 United States Statutes at Large 1441A-55)) and amended by section 2 of this Act, is further amended by inserting ``, and under chapter 13 of this title,'' after ``chapter 11 of this title''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, and shall apply to benefits paid for months beginning on or after that date.
ELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN FILIPINO VETERANS FOR DISABILITY PENSION.
Eligibility.--Section 107 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by this Act, is further amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (3) of the first sentence, by inserting ``15,'' before ``23,''; and (B) in the second sentence, by striking ``subsections (c) and (d)'' and inserting ``subsections (c), (d), and (e)''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking paragraph (2) of the first sentence and inserting the following new paragraph (2): ``(2) chapters 11, 13 (except section 1312(a)), and 15 of this title.
''; and (B) in the second sentence, by striking ``subsection (c)'' and inserting ``subsections (c) and (e)''.
Rate of Payment.--That section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) In the case of benefits under chapter 15 of this title paid by reason of service described in subsection (a) or (b), if-- ``(1) the benefits are paid to an individual residing in the United States who is a citizen of, or an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence in, the United States, the second sentence of the applicable subsection shall not apply; and ``(2) the benefits are paid to an individual residing in the Republic of the Philippines, the benefits shall be paid (notwithstanding any other provision of law) at the rate of $100 per month.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, and shall apply to benefits for months beginning on or after that date.
ELIGIBILITY OF FILIPINO VETERANS FOR HEALTH CARE IN THE UNITED STATES.
The text of section 1734 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``The Secretary, within the limits of Department facilities, shall furnish hospital and nursing home care and medical services to Commonwealth Army veterans and new Philippine Scouts in the same manner as provided for under section 1710 of this title.''.
OUTPATIENT HEALTH CARE FOR VETERANS RESIDING IN THE PHILIPPINES.
In General.--Subchapter IV of chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 1735 as section 1736; and (2) by inserting after section 1734 the following new section 1735: ``Sec.
Outpatient care and services for World War II veterans residing in the Philippines ``(a) Outpatient Health Care.--The Secretary shall furnish care and services to veterans of World War II, Commonwealth Army veterans, and new Philippine Scouts for the treatment of the service-connected disabilities and nonservice-connected disabilities of such veterans and scouts residing in the Republic of the Philippines on an outpatient basis at the Manila VA Outpatient Clinic.
Limitations.--(1) The amount expended by the Secretary for the purpose of subsection (a) in any fiscal year may not exceed $500,000.
The authority of the Secretary to furnish care and services under subsection (a) is effective in any fiscal year only to the extent that appropriations are available for that purpose.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 17 of such title is amended by striking the item relating to section 1735 and inserting after the item relating to section 1734 the following new items: ``1735.
Outpatient care and services for World War II veterans residing in the Philippines.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.