This Act may be cited as the ``Gulf Coast Protection and Restoration Act of 2006''.
OFFSHORE OIL AND GAS LEASING IN 181 AREA OF GULF OF MEXICO.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) 181 area.--The term ``181 Area'' means the area identified in map 15, page 58, of the Proposed Final Outer Continental Shelf Oil and Gas Leasing Program for 1997-2002 of the Minerals Management Service.
Military mission line.--The term ``Military Mission Line'' means the north-south line at 86_x000F_41' W. longitude.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Minerals Management Service.
Lease Sale.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Secretary shall offer the 181 Area for oil and gas leasing pursuant to the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes) as soon as practicable, but not later than 1 year, after the date of enactment of this Act.
Excluded Areas.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Secretary shall not offer for oil and gas leasing-- (1) any area east of the Military Mission Line, unless the Secretary of Defense agrees in writing before the area is offered for lease that the area can be developed in a manner that will not interfere with military activities; or (2) any area that is within 100 miles of the coastline of the State of Florida.
Leasing Program.--The 181 Area shall be offered for lease under this section notwithstanding the omission of the 181 Area from any outer Continental Shelf leasing program under section 18 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1344).
Disposition of Revenues.-- (1) Definitions.--In this subsection: (A) Coastal political subdivision.--The term ``coastal political subdivision'' has the meaning given the term in section 31(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(a)).
Producing state.-- (i) In general.--The term ``producing State'' means a State that has a coastal seaward boundary on the Gulf of Mexico and within 200 nautical miles of the geographic center of a leased tract within the 181 Area.
Exclusion.--The term ``producing State'' does not include a producing State described in section 31(a)(9)(B) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(a)(9)(B))).
Qualified outer continental shelf revenues.-- The term ``qualified outer Continental Shelf revenues'' has the meaning given the term in section 31(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(a)).
Disbursement.--Of the qualified outer Continental Shelf revenues that are generated from leases entered into in the 181 Area under this section, the Secretary shall, without further appropriation, disburse to producing States and coastal political subdivisions 50 percent of the qualified outer Continental Shelf revenues that are generated from the 181 Area during each fiscal year.
Allocation.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall disburse and allocate funds made available under this subsection to producing States and coastal political subdivisions in accordance with section 31(b) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(b)).
Relation to other disbursements.--Funds disbursed under subparagraph (A) are in addition to funds disbursed under paragraphs (1) and (3)(B) of section 31(b) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(b)).
Authorized uses.-- (A) In general.--A producing State or coastal political subdivision shall use all amounts received under this subsection in accordance with all applicable Federal and State laws, only for 1 or more of the following purposes: (i) Any of the purposes described in section 31(d)(1) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(d)(1)).
Funding of onshore infrastructure projects and public service needs.
Projects and activities for the mitigation of hazards, the production of energy, or conservation, including educational or training programs or facilities.
Payment of the non-Federal share of the cost of any project or activity authorized to be carried out under section 31 of that Act.
Coastal impact assistance plan.--If a producing State or coastal political subdivision of a producing State intends to use the amounts provided under this subsection in a manner other than the manner specified in the coastal impact assistance plan submitted by the producing State under section 31(c) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a(d)(1)(B)), the Governor of the producing State shall submit to the Secretary an amendment to the coastal impact assistance plan.
Limitation.--Subsections (b)(4)(D) and (d)(3) of section 31 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1356a) shall not apply to revenue generated from a leased tract located in the 181 Area.