SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Small Property and Casualty Insurance Company Equity Act of 1993''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Section 832(c) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (13) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(14) the small insurance company deduction allowed by subsection (h).''
Section 832 is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections: ``(h) Small Insurance Company Deduction.--In the case of taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992-- ``(1) In general.--There shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year 60 percent of so much of the tentative taxable income for such taxable year as does not exceed $3,000,000 (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `small insurance company deduction').
Phaseout between $3,000,000 and $15,000,000.--The amount of the small insurance company deduction determined under paragraph (1) for any taxable year shall be reduced (but not below zero) by 15 percent of so much of the tentative taxable income for such taxable year as exceeds $3,000,000.
Small insurance company deduction not allowable to company with assets of $500,000,000 or more.-- ``(A) In general.--The small insurance company deduction shall not be allowed for any taxable year to any insurance company which, at the close of such taxable year, has assets equal to or greater than $500,000,000.
Assets.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `assets' means all assets of the company.
Valuation of assets.--For purposes of this paragraph, the amount attributable to-- ``(i) real property and stock shall be the fair market value thereof, and ``(ii) any other asset shall be the adjusted basis of such asset for purposes of determining gain on sale or other disposition.
Special rule for interests in partnerships and trusts.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) an interest in a partnership or trust shall not be treated as an asset of the company, but ``(ii) the company shall be treated as actually owning its proportionate share of the assets held by the partnership or trust (as the case may be).
Tentative Taxable Income.--For purposes of subsection (h)-- ``(1) In general.--The term `tentative taxable income' means taxable income determined without regard to the small insurance company deduction.
Exclusion of items attributable to noninsurance businesses.--The amount of the tentative taxable income for any taxable year shall be determined without regard to all items attributable to noninsurance businesses.
Noninsurance businesses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term ``noninsurance business'' means any activity which is not an insurance business.
Certain activities treated as insurance businesses.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), any activity which is not an insurance business shall be treated as an insurance business if-- ``(i) it is of a type traditionally carried on by insurance companies for investment purposes, but only if the carrying on of such activity (other than in the case of real estate) does not constitute the active conduct of a trade or business, or ``(ii) it involves the performance of administrative services in connection with plans providing property or casualty insurance benefits.
Limitation of amount of loss from noninsurance business which may offset income from insurance business.--In computing the taxable income of any insurance company subject to tax imposed by section 831, any loss from a noninsurance business shall be limited under the principles of section 1503(c).
Special Rule for Controlled Groups.-- ``(1) Small insurance company deduction determined on controlled group basis.--For purposes of subsections (h) and (i)-- ``(A) all insurance companies which are members of the same controlled group shall be treated as 1 insurance company, and ``(B) any small insurance company deduction determined with respect to such group shall be allocated among the insurance companies which are members of such group in proportion to their respective tentative taxable incomes.
Noninsurance members included for asset test.--For purposes of subsection (h)(3), all members of the same controlled group (whether or not insurance companies) shall be treated as 1 company.
Controlled group.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `controlled group' means any controlled group of corporations (as defined in section 1563(a)); except that subsections (a)(4) and (b)(2)(D) of section 1563 shall not apply.
Adjustments to prevent excess detriment or benefit.-- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, proper adjustments shall be made in the application of this subsection to prevent any excess detriment or benefit (whether from year- to-year or otherwise) arising from the application of this subsection.''
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.