This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Competition in Foreign Commerce Act of 1999''.
FINDINGS AND STATEMENT OF PURPOSE.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) The United States makes substantial contributions and provides significant funding for major international development projects through the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the Inter- American Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Investment Corporation, the North American Development Bank, the African Development Fund, and other multilateral lending institutions.
These international development projects are often plagued with fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, and misuse of funding.
Fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, misuse, and abuse are major impediments to competition in foreign commerce throughout the world.
Identifying these impediments after they occur is inadequate and meaningless.
Detection of impediments before they occur helps to ensure that valuable United States resources contributed to important international development projects are used appropriately.
Independent third-party procurement monitoring is an important tool for detecting and preventing such impediments.
Third-party procurement monitoring includes evaluations of each stage of the procurement process and assures the openness and transparency of the process.
Improving transparency and openness in the procurement process helps to minimize fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, and other misuse of funding, and promotes competition, thereby strengthening international trade and foreign commerce.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to build on the excellent progress associated with the Organization on Economic Development and Cooperation Agreement on Bribery and Corruption, by requiring the use of independent third-party procurement monitoring as part of the United States participation in multilateral development banks and other lending institutions and in the disbursement of nonhumanitarian foreign assistance funds.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Appropriate committees.--The term ``appropriate committees'' means the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Technology of the Senate and the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives.
Independent third-party procurement monitoring.--The term ``independent third-party procurement monitoring'' means a program to-- (A) eliminate bias, (B) promote transparency and open competition, and (C) minimize fraud, corruption, waste, inefficiency, and other misuse of funds, in international procurement through independent evaluation of the technical, financial, economic, and legal aspects of the procurement process.
Independent.--The term ``independent'' means that the person monitoring the procurement process does not render any paid services to private industry and is neither owned nor controlled by any government or government agency.
Each stage of procurement.--The term ``each stage of procurement'' means the development and issuance of technical specifications, bidding documents, evaluation reports, contract preparation, and the delivery of goods and services.
Multilateral development banks and other lending institutions.--The term ``multilateral development banks and other lending institutions'' means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, the Inter- American Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund, the Asian Development Bank, the Inter-American Investment Corporation, the North American Development Bank, and the African Development Fund.
REQUIREMENTS FOR FAIR COMPETITION IN FOREIGN COMMERCE.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transmit to the President and to appropriate committees of Congress a strategic plan for requiring the use of independent third-party procurement monitoring and other international procurement reforms relating to the United States participation in multilateral development banks and other lending institutions.
Strategic Plan.--The strategic plan shall include an instruction by the Secretary of the Treasury to the United States Executive Director of each multilateral development bank and lending institution to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose the use of funds appropriated or made available by the United States for any non-humanitarian assistance, until-- (1) the recipient international financial institution has adopted an anticorruption plan that requires the use of independent third-party procurement monitoring services and ensures openness and transparency in government procurement; and (2) the recipient country institutes specific strategies for minimizing corruption and maximizing transparency in each stage of the procurement process.
Annual Reports.--Not later than June 29 of each year, the Secretary of the Treasury shall report to Congress on the progress in implementing procurement reforms made by each multilateral development bank and lending institution and each country that received assistance from a multilateral development bank or lending institution during the preceding year.
Restrictions on Assistance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds appropriated or made available for nonhumanitarian foreign assistance programs, including the activities of the Agency for International Development, may be expended for those programs unless the recipient country, multilateral development bank or lending institution has demonstrated that-- (1) procurement practices are open, transparent, and free of corruption, fraud, inefficiency, and other misuse, and (2) independent third-party procurement monitoring has been adopted and is being used by the recipient.
National Security Interest.--Section 4 shall not apply with respect to a country if the President determines with such respect to such country that making funds available is important to the national security interest of the United States.
Any such determination shall cease to be effective 6 months after being made unless the President determines that its continuation is important to the national security interest of the United States.
Other Exceptions.--Section 4 shall not apply with respect to assistance to-- (1) meet urgent humanitarian needs (including providing food, medicine, disaster, and refugee relief); (2) facilitate democratic political reform and rule of law activities; (3) create private sector and nongovernmental organizations that are independent of government control; and (4) facilitate development of a free market economic system.