ESTABLISHMENT OF SPECIAL ENROLLMENT PERIODS AND WAIVER OF LATE ENROLLMENT PENALTY FOR CERTAIN MILITARY RETIREES AND DEPENDENTS.
Special Medicare Part B Enrollment Period.-- (1) In general.--Section 1837 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395p) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j)(1)(A) There shall be a special enrollment period described in subparagraph (B) in the case of an individual who attained age 65 before the date of the enactment of this subsection and with respect to whom the following conditions are met: ``(i) Since attaining such age and up to such date of enactment, the individual has been a covered beneficiary (as defined in section 1072(5) of title 10, United States Code) under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code.
Since attaining such age and up to the date of the event described in clause (iii), the individual continuously maintained a primary residence within 100 miles of a military hospital that provided inpatient hospital services and was not been enrolled under this part.
Since attaining such age and before such date of enactment, any military hospital that provided inpatient hospital services and that was located within 100 miles of the individual's primary residence either was closed or discontinued the provision of such services.
The special enrollment period under this paragraph shall be the 9-month period beginning with the first month that begins at least 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
(A) There shall be a special enrollment period described in subparagraph (B) in the case of an individual who attains age 65 on or after the date of the enactment of this subsection and with respect to whom the following conditions are met: ``(i) Since attaining such age and until the date of the announcement described in clause (ii), the individual has been a covered beneficiary (as defined in section 1072(5) of title 10, United States Code) under chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, has not been enrolled under this part, and has continuously maintained a primary residence within 100 miles of a military hospital that provided inpatient hospital services.
Since attaining such age, there has been an announcement that any military hospital that provided inpatient hospital services and that was located within 100 miles of the individual's primary residence either will be closed or that the provision of inpatient hospital services at any such facility will be discontinued.
A special enrollment period under this paragraph shall be a 90-day period beginning 45 days before the date of the proposed hospital closure or service discontinuation described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
(A) For purposes of this subsection, if a military hospital is closed (or inpatient hospital services at a military hospital are discontinued) under a base closure law, the closure or discontinuation of services is considered to be `announced' as of the date of the submission to Congress under the base closure law of a report recommending the closure of the military base at which the facility is located.
If the there is a determination (other than under a base closure law) that a military hospital in the United States will be closed or that all inpatient hospital services at a military hospital will be discontinued, there shall be a public announcement of such determination at least 60 days before the date of the closure or discontinuation.
Such announcement shall be made through a posting at the hospital and through other means intended to inform individuals who are 65 years of age or older and who obtain services through the hospital.
For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) The term `base closure law' means any of the following: ``(i) The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Title II of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Section 2687 of title 10, United States Code.
Any other similar law enacted after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
The term `military hospital' means a hospital that is a facility of a uniformed service referred to in section 1074(a) of title 10, United States Code.''.
Coverage period for special enrollments.--Section 1838 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395q) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Notwithstanding subsection (a), in the case of an individual who enrolls under this part pursuant to a special enrollment period provided under section 1837(j), the coverage period shall begin on the first day of the month that begins at least 15 days after the date of such enrollment.''.
Waiver of Medicare Part B Late Enrollment Penalty.--Section 1839 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395r) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) The increase in premiums required under subsection (b) due to late enrollment under this part shall not apply to an individual who enrolls under this part pursuant to a special enrollment period provided under section 1837(j).''.
Medigap Special Open Enrollment Period.--Section 1882 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395ss) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(u) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an issuer of a medicare supplemental policy-- ``(1) may not deny or condition the issuance or effectiveness of a medicare supplemental policy, and ``(2) may not discriminate in the pricing of the policy on the basis of the individual's health status, medical condition (including both physical and mental illnesses), claims experience, receipt of health care, medical history, genetic information, evidence of insurability (including conditions arising out of acts of domestic violence), or disability; in the case of an individual described in paragraph (1) or (2) of section 1839(j) who seeks to enroll during a special enrollment period provided pursuant to such section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.