INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR THE FEDERAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation Act of 2001''.
Establishment of An Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.--The matter following paragraph (3) of section 2 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``subparagraph (B); and'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (A) and (B);''; (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the period and inserting ''; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(C) in the establishment of the Department of the Justice-- ``(i) an Office of Inspector General of the Department of Justice; and ``(ii) an Office of Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.''.
Amendments to Section 8E of the Inspector General Act of 1978.-- (1) Limitation on authority of inspector general.--Section 8E(a) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) shall apply to the Attorney General and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in the same manner and to the same extent as such paragraphs apply to the Attorney General and the Inspector General of the Department of Justice, respectively.''.
Duties of inspector general of the department of justice; relationship to the inspector general for the federal bureau of investigation.--Section 8E(b) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(b)''; (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (3) as subparagraphs (A) through (C), respectively; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) The Inspector General of the Department of Justice shall exercise all duties and responsibilities of an Inspector General for the Department of Justice other than the duties and responsibilities exercised by the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Attorney General shall establish procedures under which the Inspector General of the Department of Justice and the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation will-- ``(A) determine how audits and investigations are allocated in cases of overlapping jurisdiction; and ``(B) provide for coordination, cooperation, and efficiency in the conduct of such audits and investigations.''.
Transmission of reports.--Section 8E(c) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; (B) by striking ``Government Operations'' and inserting ``Government Reform''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(2)(A) Any report made by the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation that is required to be transmitted by the Attorney General to the appropriate committees or subcommittees of Congress under section 5(d) shall also be transmitted, within the 7-day period specified under such subsection, to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any report the subject of which is the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.''.
Inspector general for the federal bureau of investigation.--Section 8E of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) The Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall exercise all duties and responsibilities of an Inspector General of an establishment with respect to the Department of Justice and the Attorney General on all matters relating to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall have sole authority under this Act to conduct an audit or investigation of the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
In addition to the requirements of the first sentence of section 3(a), the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation should have demonstrated ability to lead a large and complex organization.
An individual appointed to the position of Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Assistant Inspector General for Auditing of the Office of the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation under section 3(d)(1), the Assistant Inspector General for Investigations of the Office of the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation under section 3(d)(2), or any position of Deputy Inspector General of the Office of the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation may not be an employee of the Federal Bureau of Investigation-- ``(1) during the 2-year period preceding the date of appointment to such position; or ``(2) during the 5-year period following the date such individual ends service in such position.
(1) The Attorney General or the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation may request, in writing, the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation to conduct an audit or investigation relating to the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
If the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation determines not to conduct such audit or investigation, the Inspector General shall timely provide a written explanation for such determination to the Attorney General or the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
(A) Any final report of an audit conducted by the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall be timely submitted by the Inspector General to the Attorney General and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
The Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall-- ``(i) periodically submit to the Attorney General and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation a list of investigations for which a final report has been completed by the Inspector General; and ``(ii) provide a copy of any such report to-- ``(I) the Attorney General, upon the request of the Attorney General; or ``(II) the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, upon the request of the Director, unless the subject of the report is the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
This paragraph applies regardless of whether the applicable audit or investigation is requested under paragraph (1).''.
Transfer of Functions.-- (1) In general.--Section 9(a)(1) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended in subparagraph (I)-- (A) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(I)''; (B) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(ii) of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, effective 180 days after the date of enactment of the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation Act of 2001, the division of such bureau referred to as the `Inspections Division' and that portion of each of the divisions or offices of such bureau which is engaged in internal audit and investigative activities;''.
Termination of office of the inspections division.-- Effective upon the transfer of functions under the amendment made by paragraph (1), the division of the Federal Bureau of Investigation referred to as the ``Inspections Division'' and the Federal Bureau of Investigation Office of Professional Responsibility are terminated.
Audits and Reports of Agency Financial Statements.--Subject to section 3521(g) of title 31, United States Code-- (1) the Inspector General of the Department of Justice shall, subject to paragraph (2)-- (A) audit each financial statement in accordance with section 3521(e) of such title; and (B) prepare and submit each report required under section 3521(f) of such title; and (2) the Inspector General for the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall-- (A) audit that portion of each financial statement referred to under paragraph (1)(A) that relates to custodial and administrative accounts of the Federal Bureau of Investigation; and (B) prepare that portion of each report referred to under paragraph (1)(B) that relates to custodial and administrative accounts of the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Amendments relating to references to the inspector general of the department of justice.-- (A) Limitation on authority.--Section 8E(a) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (i) in the first sentence of paragraph (1), by inserting ``of the Department of the Justice'' after ``Inspector General''; (ii) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``of the Department of Justice'' after ``prohibit the Inspector General''; and (iii) in paragraph (3)-- (I) in the first sentence, by inserting ``of the Department of Justice'' after ``notify the Inspector General''; and (II) in the second sentence, by inserting ``of the Department of Justice'' after ``notice, the Inspector General''.
Duties.--Section 8E(b) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``the Inspector General'' and inserting ``such Inspector General''; and (ii) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``of the Department of Justice'' after ``Inspector General''.
Employee or contractor complaints.--Section 8H(a)(1)(B) of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended by striking ``Department of Justice'' and inserting ``Federal Bureau of Investigation''.
Executive schedule level iv position.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to the Inspector General, Department of Justice the following: ``Inspector General, Federal Bureau of Investigation.''.
Effective Date.--This Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.