This Act may be cited as the ``Witness Protection and Interstate Relocation Act of 1997''.
TITLE I--GANG-RELATED WITNESS INTIMIDATION AND RETALIATION SEC.
INTERSTATE TRAVEL TO ENGAGE IN WITNESS INTIMIDATION OR OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE.
Section 1952 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Whoever travels in interstate or foreign commerce with intent by bribery, force, intimidation, or threat, directed against any person, to delay or influence the testimony of or prevent from testifying a witness in a State criminal proceeding or by any such means to cause any person to destroy, alter, or conceal a record, document, or other object, with intent to impair the object's integrity or availability for use in such a proceeding, and thereafter engages or endeavors to engage in such conduct, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both; and if serious bodily injury (as defined in section 1365 of this title) results, shall be so fined or imprisoned for not more than 20 years, or both; and if death results, shall be so fined and imprisoned for any term of years or for life, or both, and may be sentenced to death.''.
CONSPIRACY PENALTY FOR OBSTRUCTION OF JUSTICE OFFENSES INVOLVING VICTIMS, WITNESSES, AND INFORMANTS.
Section 1512 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Whoever conspires to commit any offense defined in this section or section 1513 of this title shall be subject to the same penalties as those prescribed for the offense the commission of which was the object of the conspiracy.''.
TITLE II--WITNESS RELOCATION AND SAFETY SEC.
WITNESS RELOCATION SURVEY AND TRAINING PROGRAM.
Survey.--The Attorney General shall survey all State and selected local witness protection and relocation programs to determine the extent and nature of such programs and the training needs of those programs.
Not later than 270 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Attorney General shall report the results of this survey to Congress.
Training.--Based on the results of such survey, the Attorney General shall make available to State and local law enforcement agencies training to assist those law enforcement agencies in developing and managing witness protection and relocation programs.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out subsections (a) and (b) for fiscal year 1998 not to exceed $500,000.
FEDERAL-STATE COORDINATION AND COOPERATION REGARDING NOTIFICATION OF INTERSTATE WITNESS RELOCATION.
Attorney General To Promote Interstate Coordination.--The Attorney General shall engage in activities, including the establishment of a model Memorandum of Understanding under subsection (b), which promote coordination among State and local witness interstate relocation programs.
Model Memorandum of Understanding.--The Attorney General shall establish a model Memorandum of Understanding for States and localities that engage in interstate witness relocation.
Such a model Memorandum of Understanding shall include a requirement that notice be provided to the jurisdiction to which the relocation has been made by the State or local law enforcement agency that relocates a witness to another State who has been arrested for or convicted of a crime of violence as described in section 16 of title 18, United States Code.
Byrne Grant Assistance.--The Attorney General is authorized to expend up to 10 percent of the total amount appropriated under section 511 of subpart 2 of part E of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 for purposes of making grants pursuant to section 510 of that Act to those jurisdictions that have interstate witness relocation programs and that have substantially followed the model Memorandum of Understanding.
Guidelines and Determination of Eligibility.--The Attorney General shall establish guidelines relating to the implementation of subsection (c) and shall determine, consistent with such guidelines, which jurisdictions are eligible for grants under subsection (c).
Section 501(b) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (25); (2) by striking the period at the end paragraph (26) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(27) developing and maintaining witness security and relocation programs, including providing training of personnel in the effective management of such programs.''.
As used in this title, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and any other commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
Passed the House of Representatives February 25, 1998.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.