This Act may be cited as the ``Election Reform Commission Act of 2001''.
There is hereby established a commission to be known as the Bipartisan Commission on Election Reform (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 17 members who shall be appointed as follows: (1) 4 members shall be appointed by the President, of whom not more than 2 may be affiliated with the same political party.
3 members shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
3 members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
3 members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
1 member (who shall serve as the Chair of the Commission) shall be appointed jointly by the President, the majority leader of the Senate, the minority leader of the Senate, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Terms.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Appointments shall be for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Additional meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chair or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--A majority of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall examine issues affecting the conduct and administration of elections for Federal, State, and local offices in the United States and make recommendations on its findings.
Specific Issues To Be Addressed.--Among other issues the Commission determines are relevant, the Commission shall examine and make recommendations on the following issues: (1) Electoral college.--Issues relating to the electoral college, including its impact on voter turnout and alternative methods of allocating electoral votes among candidates.
Voter registration.--Issues relating to voter registration, including the impact and effectiveness of the National Voter Registration Act of 1993, the feasibility and effectiveness of permitting voter registration on the day of an election, and the feasibility and effectiveness of permitting voter registration through the use of the Internet.
Ballot design and technology.--Issues relating to the design of ballots and the technology used to process and count ballots, including whether certain types of voting equipment and technology are more likely to result in undercounted or uncounted votes, the advantages of uniform ballot designs, the need for uniform standards for the design and maintenance of voting equipment and technology, and steps the Federal Government may take to reduce counting errors, including providing need-based grants to enable State and local governments to replace outdated equipment and prohibiting the use or sale of voting equipment which produces disproportionately high error rates.
Polling places.--Issues relating to the timing of elections and the quality of services provided at polling places, including the feasibility and effectiveness of establishing a uniform poll closing time across the United States, establishing Election Day as a Federal public holiday, holding elections over a weekend or over other multiple days, ensuring an appropriate number of accessible polling places, ensuring that workers at polling places have sufficient training, and providing education to voters in the mechanics of voting.
Ballot access.--Issues relating to alternative methods of casting votes in elections, including voting through the use of the mails or the Internet, ensuring the absent military and overseas voters are able to cast votes in an effective and timely manner, and ensuring that election officials are able to verify the legality of votes cast outside of polling places.
Final Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the initial meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to Congress and the President a final report which includes an analysis of the matters discussed under subsection (b) and recommendations for addressing the problems identified as part of the Commission's analysis.
Separate Views.--Any member of the Commission may submit additional findings and recommendations as part of the final report.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission may find advisable to fulfill the requirements of this Act.
The Commission may administer oaths and affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chair of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Chair of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services that are necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter 1 of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.--(1) The Chair of the Commission may appoint and terminate staff of the Commission, request the detail of Federal employees, and accept temporary and intermittent services in accordance with section 3161 of title 5, United States Code.
The employment of an executive director of the Commission shall be subject to the approval of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which it submits its final report under section 4(c).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the Commission to carry out this Act.