This Act may be cited as the ``Great Lakes Fish and Wildlife Restoration Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Great Lakes Fishery Resources Restoration Study, for which a report was submitted to the Congress in 1995, was a comprehensive study of the status, assessment, management, and restoration needs of the fishery resources of the Great Lakes Basin, and was conducted through the joint effort of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, State fish and wildlife resource management agencies, Indian tribes, and the Great Lakes Fishery Commission.
This study found the following: (A) Physical changes to the Great Lakes through dredging, construction of hydroelectric and other dams, stone revetment projects, clearing of shoreline vegetation, and increased agriculture have altered habitats, fish spawning mortality, erosion, sedimentation, oxygen levels, contaminant transport, nutrient loading, and aesthetic character.
Combined effects of overexploitation, habitat impairment, and destabilizing effects of nonindigenous species are responsible for most of the decline of native fishes in the Great Lakes.
Physical changes to the nearshore environments, riverine tributaries, and wetlands by development projects have affected those species relying on these habitats for critical phases of their life histories.
Monitoring of contaminants and analysis of their effects should be coordinated and expanded.
Significant habitats necessary for self- sustaining populations of fish and wildlife are threatened or impaired.
Actions should include identifying and protecting habitats that are used by fish and wildlife for spawning, breeding, nesting, rearing and feeding, and rehabilitating degraded habitats to be utilized by a diverse community.
Working under the cooperatively developed guidance of the Strategic Plan for Management of the Great Lakes Fisheries, published by the Great Lakes Fishery Commission in 1980, and the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, State, Provincial, Native American tribal, and Federal agencies bordering the Great Lakes have made significant progress toward the goal of restoring a healthy fish community to the Great Lakes.
Differences in mandate, perception of priorities, and style of management create major institutional impediments to systematic and comprehensive coordination of ecosystem management.
Many of the current problems are, in fact, the unintended consequences of uncoordinated management of water quality, fisheries, shipping, and human developments in the Great Lakes Basin.
Concepts of responsible resource use and management and biological conservation should not be at odds, but should be integrated via partnerships to meet future needs.
Information exchange and cross-program forums should be established to encourage management.
Setting of specific management goals is central to the coordination of management efforts.
Fishery managers should increase their involvement with the Binational Program, Remedial Action Plans, Lake-Wide Management Plans, and the Environmental Monitoring and Assessment Program planning process.
Whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to that section or other provision of the Great Lakes Fish and Wildlife Restoration Act of 1990 (16 United States Code 941 et sequentes), as set forth in title I of Public Law 101-573.
Section 1003 (16 United States Code 941a) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``this Act'' and inserting ``this title''; (2) by striking paragraph (1); (3) by redesignating paragraphs (2) and (3) in order as paragraphs (1) and (2); (4) by amending paragraph (1), as so redesignated, to read as follows: ``(1) to develop and implement proposals for the restoration of fish and wildlife resources in the Great Lakes Basin; and''; and (5) in paragraph (2), as so redesignated, by striking ``habitat of'' and inserting ``habitat in''.
Section 1004 (16 United States Code 941b) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``this Act'' and inserting ``this title''; (2) in paragraph (8) by striking ``plant or animal'' and inserting ``plant, animal, or microorganism''; (3) in paragraph (9) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end, in paragraph (10) by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon, and by redesignating paragraphs (9) and (10) as paragraphs (10) and (11), respectively; (4) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new paragraph: ``(9) the term `restoration' means to rehabilitate and maintain the structure, function, diversity, and dynamics of a biological system, including the reestablishment of self- sustaining populations of fish and wildlife;''; and (5) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(12) the term `Report' means the United States Fish and Wildlife Service report entitled ``Great Lakes Fishery Resources Restoration Study'', as submitted to the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives on September 13, 1995; ``(13) the term `Committee' means the Great Lakes Fish and Wildlife Restoration Proposal Review Committee established by section 1005(c); and ``(14) the term `non-Federal source' includes State government, local governments, Indian Tribes, other governmental entities, private entities, and individuals.''.
IDENTIFICATION, REVIEW, AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PROPOSALS.
Section 1005 (16 United States Code 941c) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
IDENTIFICATION, REVIEW, AND IMPLEMENTATION OF PROPOSALS.
In General.--The Director, in consultation with the Committee, shall ensure that proposals resulting from recommendations of the Study or identified through an annual request to State and Tribal entities described in subsection (b) are developed and, within available appropriations, the highest priority proposals are implemented.
Identification of Proposals.--The Director shall annually request that State Directors and Indian Tribes, in cooperation or partnership with other interested entities, submit fish and wildlife resources restoration proposals based on the results of the Study or other sources such as recommendations of the Council of Lake Committees sponsored by the Great Lakes Fishery Commission.
These proposals shall be submitted in the manner and form prescribed by the Director.
The proposals shall be consistent with the goals of the Great Lakes Water Quality Agreement, as revised in 1987, the 1954 Convention on Great Lakes Fisheries, State and Tribal fishery management jurisdiction, the Joint Strategic Plan for the Management of Great Lakes Fisheries, the Nonindigenous Aquatic Nuisance Prevention and Control Act of 1990, the North American Waterfowl Management Plan, and various joint ventures established under that plan.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Great Lakes Fishery Commission shall retain authority and responsibility for formulation and implementation of a comprehensive program for eradicating or minimizing sea lamprey populations in the Great Lakes Basin.
The Secretary of the Army may, upon request of the Great Lakes Fishery Commission, construct and improve water resources projects related to sea lamprey management that improve the quality of the environment in the public trust, at any location within the Great Lakes or their tributaries or connecting waters.
Review of Proposals.-- ``(1) Establishment of committee.--There is established the Great Lakes Fish and Wildlife Restoration Proposal Review Committee.
Membership and appointment.--The Committee shall operate under the auspices of the Council of Lake Committees, and consist of representatives of all State Directors and federally recognized Indian Tribes with Great Lakes fish and wildlife management authority in the Basin.
State Directors and Tribal Chairs shall appoint their representatives, who shall serve at the pleasure of the appointing authority.
The Great Lakes Coordinator of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall participate as an observer of the Committee.
Functions.--The Committee shall annually review proposals developed under the process established by subsection (b) to assess their effectiveness and appropriateness in fulfilling the purposes of this title and recommend to the Director priorities for implementing the proposals.
Implementation of Proposals.--Considering the Committee's recommendations and the goals stated in section 1006, the Secretary shall select proposals to be implemented and, within available appropriations, shall fund their implementation.
Cost-Sharing.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director shall require that 25 percent of the cost of implementing any proposal selected under subsection (d), other than those involving the establishment of sea lamprey barriers, must be paid by non-Federal sources on a basis considered by the Director to be timely and appropriate.
In-kind contributions.--In addition to cash outlays, the Director shall consider as financial contributions by a non-Federal source the value of in-kind contributions provided for the purpose of implementing a proposal.
In-kind contributions may consist of, but are not required to be limited to, real or personal property or personal services necessary to implement a proposal that are rendered by volunteers.
The Director shall establish the standards under which the value of in-kind contributions shall be determined.
Valuations made by the Director under this paragraph are final and not subject to judicial review.
Exclusion of federal funds from non-federal share.-- The Director may not consider the expenditure, either directly or indirectly, of Federal funds received by a State or local government to be a contribution by a non-Federal source for purposes of this section.''.
Section 1007 (16 United States Code 941e) is amended-- (1) by amending the section heading to read as follows: ``SEC.
''; (2) in subsection (a) by striking the first sentence and inserting the following: ``The Director shall maintain the functions of the Great Lakes Coordination Office in East Lansing, Michigan, for the purpose of coordinating all United States Fish and Wildlife Service activities in the Great Lakes Basin.
''; (3) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Great Lakes Fishery Resources Offices.--The Director shall maintain the Upper Great Lakes Fishery Resources Office and the Lower Great Lakes Fishery Resources Office.
The Director shall provide each of these offices the necessary administrative and technical support services to carry out all United States Fish and Wildlife Service operational activities related to fishery resource protection, restoration, maintenance, and enhancement in their respective regions.
''; and (4) by striking subsection (c).
Section 1008 (16 United States Code 941f) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``The Director shall submit a report within 6 months after the end of every second fiscal year to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
The first such biennial report shall be submitted by April 1, 1998.
Each such report shall describe-- ``(1) actions taken to implement the process established by section 1005; ``(2) the results of proposals implemented under section 1005; and ``(3) activities undertaken and progress toward the accomplishment of the goals stated in section 1006.''.
Section 1009 (16 United States Code 941g) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director-- ``(1) for the operation of the Great Lakes Coordination Office, the Upper Great Lakes Fishery Resources Office, and the Lower Great Lakes Fishery Resources Office under section 1007, $1,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2002; and ``(2) for implementation of fish and wildlife restoration proposals under section 1005(c), $3,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1996 through 2002.''.
Title II of Public Law 101-646 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4773) is repealed.