This Act may be cited as the ``Elderly Housing Quality Improvement Act of 2002''.
GRANTS FOR REPAIRS OF ELDERLY HOUSING.
Section 202b of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q-2) is amended by striking subsection (h) and inserting the following new subsection: ``(h) Authorization of Appropriations for Capital Repair Grants.-- For grants for activities under subsection (a)(1) there is authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007.''.
AFFORDABLE ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES.
Title I of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437 et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
GRANTS FOR CONVERSION OF PUBLIC HOUSING TO ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES.
Grant Authority.--The Secretary may make grants in accordance with this section to public housing agencies for use for activities designed to convert dwelling units in eligible projects described in subsection (b) to assisted living facilities or other facilities that expand the availability of supportive services, to enhance the ability of elderly persons to maintain independent living.
Eligible Projects.--An eligible project described in this subsection is a public housing project (or a portion thereof) that is primarily occupied by elderly persons.
Applications.--Applications for grants under this section shall be submitted to the Secretary in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary shall establish.
Such applications shall contain-- ``(1) a description of the proposed conversion activities for which a grant under this section is requested; ``(2) the amount of the grant requested; ``(3) a description of the resources that are expected to be made available, if any, in conjunction with the grant under this section; and ``(4) such other information or certifications that the Secretary determines to be necessary or appropriate.
Funding for Services.--The Secretary may not make a grant under this section unless the application contains sufficient evidence, in the determination of the Secretary, that there will be adequate funding for supportive services for residents of the facility converted with grant amounts.
Service Coordinators.--An application for a grant under this section may include a request for, and the Secretary may provide funds under a grant under this section for, amounts to provide service coordinators to assist in the provision of supportive services for residents of the facilities converted with grant amounts.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary shall select applications for grants under this section based upon selection criteria, which shall be established by the Secretary and shall include-- ``(1) the extent to which the conversion is likely to provide assisted living facilities or supportive services that are needed or are expected to be needed by the categories of elderly persons that the assisted living facility is intended to serve; ``(2) the extent of financial need on the part of the applicant for funding to carry out the conversion activities proposed; ``(3) the extent to which the agency has evidenced community support for the conversion, by such indicators as letters of support from the local community for the conversion and financial contributions from public and private sources; ``(4) the extent to which the applicant demonstrates a strong commitment to promoting the autonomy and independence of the elderly persons that the assisted living facility or other supportive services facility is intended to serve; ``(5) the quality, completeness, and managerial capability of providing services to elderly residents, especially in such areas as meals, 24-hour staffing, and on-site health care; and ``(6) such other criteria as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to ensure that funds made available under this section are used effectively.
Definition.--For the purposes of this section, the term `assisted living facility' has the meaning given such term in section 232(b) of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1715w(b)).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for providing grants under this section such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007.''.
ELDERLY HOUSING SERVICE COORDINATORS.
Authorization of Appropriations for Federally Assisted Housing.--For grants under section 676 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1992 (42 United States Code 13632) for providing service coordinators and for contracts under section 802 of the Cranston- Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act (42 United States Code 8011) to provide congregate services programs for eligible residents of eligible housing projects under subparagraphs (B) through (D) of subsection (k)(6) of such section, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, for each of fiscal years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007-- (1) such sums as may be necessary to renew all grants under such sections that were made for prior fiscal years; and (2) $30,000,000 for grants in addition to such renewal grants.
Public Housing.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, for each of fiscal years 2003, 2004, 2005, 2006, and 2007, for grants for use only for activities described in paragraph (2) of section 34(b) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437z-6(b)(2))-- (1) such sums as may be necessary to renew all grants for providing service coordinators and congregate services for the elderly and disabled in public housing that were made in prior fiscal years; and (2) $20,000,000 for grants in addition to such renewal grants.
MIXED FINANCE PILOT PROGRAM.
Authority.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall carry out a pilot program under this section to determine the effectiveness and feasibility of providing assistance under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q) for housing projects that are used both for supportive housing for the elderly and for other types of housing, which may include market rate housing.
Scope.--Under the pilot program the Secretary shall provide, to the extent that sufficient approvable applications for such assistance are received, assistance in the manner provided under subsection (d) for not more than five housing projects.
Mixed Use.--The Secretary shall require, for a project to be assisted under the pilot program-- (1) that a portion of the dwelling units in the project be reserved for use in accordance with, and subject to, the requirements applicable to units assisted under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959; and (2) that the remainder of the dwelling units be used for other purposes.
Financing.--The Secretary may use amounts provided for assistance under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 for assistance under the pilot program for capital advances in accordance with subsection (d)(1) of such section and project rental assistance in accordance with subsection (d)(2) of such section, only for dwelling units described in subsection (c)(1) of this section.
Any assistance provided pursuant to subsection (d)(1) of such section 202 shall be provided in the form of a capital advance, subject to repayment as provided in such subsection, and shall not be structured as a loan.
The Secretary shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure that the repayment contingency under such subsection is enforceable for projects assisted under the pilot program and to provide for appropriate protections of the interests of the Secretary in relation to other interests in the projects so assisted.
Waiver Authority.--Notwithstanding subsection (c)(1) of this section, the Secretary may waive the applicability of any provision of section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959 for any project assisted under the pilot program under this section as may be appropriate to carry out the program, except to the extent inconsistent with this section.