This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Television Violence Protection Act of 1993''.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``violence'' means any action that has as an element the use or threatened use of physical force against the person of another, or against one's self, with intent to cause bodily harm to such person or one's self.
For purposes of this Act, an action may involve violence regardless of whether or not such action or threat of action occurs in a realistic or serious context or in a humorous or cartoon type context.
The term ``programming'' includes cartoons.
The term ``child'' or ``children'' means any individual or individuals under 18 years of age.
The term ``person'' shall have the same meaning given that term under section 602(14) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 522(14)).
The term ``cable operator'' shall have the same meaning given that term under section 602(4) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 522(4)).
The term ``cable service'' shall have the same meaning given that term under section 602(5) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 522(5)).
The term ``television broadcast licensee'' means a ``licensee'' as defined in section 3(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 153(c)) authorized to engage in television broadcasting, including independent television broadcasting.
The term ``franchising authority'' shall have the same meaning given that term under section 602(10) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 522(10)).
Standards.--The Federal Communications Commission shall, within 30 days after the date of the enactment of this section, initiate a rulemaking proceeding to prescribe standards applicable to television broadcast licensees, and cable operators providing cable service under a franchise granted by a franchising authority, requiring such television broadcast licensees and cable operators, including cable programmers, in connection with the broadcasting of any video programming which may contain violence, or unsafe gun practices, to require a video and audio warning at the time of such broadcast to the effect that such programming may contain violence, or unsafe gun practices, and may adversely affect the mental or physical health, or both, of a child, and may, if the events portrayed in such programming occur in real life, warrant the imposition of criminal penalties.
Contents of Standards.--Standards required by subsection (a) shall require: (1) Broadcast television licensees, and cable operators, including cable programmers, to include, at the beginning of the programming, and at other appropriate times during such programming, a warning label, with an audio voice over, to the effect that the programming may contain violence, or unsafe gun practices, and may adversely affect the mental or physical health, or both, of a child, and may, if the events portrayed in such programming occur in real life, warrant the imposition of criminal penalties.
Public notice to assist interested persons in identifying programming which may contain violence, or unsafe gun practices.
Final Standards.--The Commission shall, within 150 days following the date of the enactment of this Act, prescribe final standards in accordance with this section.
Exception.--The provisions of subsection (a) shall not apply to any programming broadcast, in any time zone, during the period commencing at 11:00 P.M. and ending at 6:00 A.M. SEC.
Violations.--If a person violates any rule or regulation issued or promulgated pursuant to section 3, the Federal Communications Commission may, after notice and opportunity for hearing, impose on the person a civil fine of not more than $5,000.
For purposes of this subsection, each day of violation constitutes a separate violation.
Intentional Violations.--If a person intentionally violates any rule or regulation issued or promulgated pursuant to section 3, the Federal Communications Commission shall, after notice and opportunity for hearing, impose on the person a civil fine of not less than $10,000 or more than $25,000.
For purposes of this subsection, each day of violation constitutes a separate violation.
EXCEPTIONS FOR CERTAIN VIDEO PROGRAMMING.
The Federal Communications Commission may exempt, as public interest requires, certain video programming from the requirements of section 3, including news broadcasts, sporting events, educational programming and documentaries.
CONSIDERATION OF VIOLATIONS IN BROADCAST LICENSE RENEWAL.
The Federal Communications Commission shall consider, among the elements in its review of an application for renewal of a television broadcast license, including an independent television broadcaster, whether the licensee has complied with the standards required to be prescribed under section 3 of this Act.