This Act may be cited as the ``Armed Forces Behavioral Health Awareness Act''.
ELIGIBILITY OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES WHO SERVE IN OPERATION IRAQI FREEDOM OR OPERATION ENDURING FREEDOM FOR READJUSTMENT COUNSELING AND SERVICES THROUGH VET CENTERS.
In General.--A member of the Armed Forces, including the Reserve components, who is deployed in support of Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom shall be eligible for readjustment counseling and related mental health services under section 1712A of title 38, United States Code, through the centers for readjustment counseling and related mental health services (commonly known as ``Vet Centers'') operated by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs under that section.
Eligibility.-- (1) Regulations.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the eligibility of a member of the Armed Forces, including the Reserve components, for counseling and services under subsection (a) shall be subject to such regulations as the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall jointly prescribe for purposes of this section.
Duty status.--The duty status of a member may not have an effect on the eligibility of the member to receive counseling and services under subsection (a).
GRANTS FOR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE PROVISION OF EMOTIONAL SUPPORT SERVICES TO FAMILY MEMBERS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.
In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out a program to award grants to nonprofit organizations that provide emotional support services for family members of members of the Armed Forces, including the Reserve components.
Award of Grants.-- (1) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under the program under this section, a nonprofit organization shall meet such criteria as the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program.
Application.--A nonprofit organization seeking a grant under the program shall submit to the Secretary an application for the grant in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify for purposes of the program.
Grants.-- (1) Amount.--The amount of each grant awarded to a nonprofit organization under the program under this section shall be such amount as the Secretary determines appropriate for purposes of the program.
Duration.--The duration of each grant awarded to a nonprofit organization shall be such period as the Secretary determines appropriate for purposes of the program.
Use of Grant Funds.--Each nonprofit organization awarded a grant under the program under this section shall use amounts under the grant to provide emotional support services for family members of members of the Armed Forces, including the Reserve components, through certain programs as the Secretary shall specify in the grant.
Funding.--Amounts for grants under the program under this section shall be derived from amounts authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Defense for military personnel.
PILOT PROGRAM TO ENHANCE AWARENESS OF POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS DISORDER.
Pilot Program Required.--The Secretary of the Army shall carry out a pilot program to enhance awareness of post-traumatic stress disorder among members of the Army.
The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program in the following locations: (1) Fort Huachuca, Arizona.
Fort Leonard Wood, Missouri.
Activities.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out the pilot program, the Secretary shall implement activities that-- (A) for a member of the Army who will be deployed in support of a contingency operation, increase the understanding of-- (i) the neurophysiological effects of stress and trauma associated with combat, including post-traumatic stress disorder; and (ii) the means of eliminating or mitigating such effects after returning from combat; (B) for a member of the Army deployed in support of a contingency operation, reinforce the information provided under subparagraph (A); (C) for a member of the Army who returns from being deployed in support of a contingency operation, assist the member in reintegrating into noncombat life; and (D) for the family of a member of the Army covered under this subsection, include training and assistance (including Internet-based training and assistance) at each stage of deployment in order to assist the family and member in recognizing and addressing post-traumatic stress disorder.
Development of activities.--In developing activities under this subsection, the Secretary shall consider methods to address stress and trauma used by other appropriate populations, including special operations forces and elite athlete communities.
Duration.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program for a period of three years.
Report.--Not later than two years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report assessing the pilot program, including the effectiveness of the activities under subsection (b).