This Act may be cited as the ``Melanie Stokes Postpartum Depression Research and Care Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Postpartum depression is a devastating mood disorder which strikes many women during and after pregnancy.
Postpartum mood changes are common and can be broken into three subgroups: ``baby blues,'' which is an extremely common and the less severe form of postpartum depression; postpartum mood and anxiety disorders, which are more severe than baby blues and can occur during pregnancy and anytime within the first year of the infant's birth; and postpartum psychosis, which is the most extreme form of postpartum depression and can occur during pregnancy and up to twelve months after delivery.
``Baby blues'' is characterized by mood swings, feelings of being overwhelmed, tearfulness, irritability, poor sleep, mood changes, and a sense of vulnerability.
The symptoms of postpartum mood and anxiety disorders are the worsening and the continuation of the baby blues beyond the first days or weeks after delivery.
The symptoms of postpartum psychosis include losing touch with reality, distorted thinking, delusions, auditory hallucinations, paranoia, hyperactivity, and rapid speech or mania.
Each year over 400,000 women suffer from postpartum mood changes, with baby blues afflicting up to 80 percent of new mothers; postpartum mood and anxiety disorders impairing around 10-20 percent of new mothers; and postpartum psychosis striking 1 in 1,000 new mothers.
The causes of postpartum depression are complex and unknown at this time; however, theories include a steep and rapid drop in hormone levels after childbirth; difficulty during labor or pregnancy; a premature birth; a miscarriage; feeling overwhelmed, uncertain, frustrated or anxious about one's new role as a mother; a lack of support from one's spouse, friends or family; marital strife; stressful events in life such as death of a loved one, financial problems, or physical or mental abuse; a family history of depression or mood disorders; a previous history of major depression or anxiety; or a prior postpartum depression.
Postpartum depression is a treatable disorder if promptly diagnosed by a trained provider and attended to with a personalized regimen of care including social support, therapy, medication, and when necessary hospitalization.
All too often postpartum depression goes undiagnosed or untreated due to the social stigma surrounding depression and mental illness, the myth of motherhood, the new mother's inability to self-diagnose her condition, the new mother's shame or embarrassment over discussing her depression so near to the birth of her child, the lack of understanding in society and the medical community of the complexity of postpartum depression, and economic pressures placed on hospitals and providers.
Untreated, postpartum depression can lead to further depression, substance abuse, loss of employment, divorce and further social alienation, self-destructive behavior, or even suicide.
Untreated, postpartum depression impacts society through its affect on the infant's physical and psychological development, child abuse, neglect or death of the infant or other siblings, and the disruption of the family.
TITLE I--RESEARCH ON POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION AND PSYCHOSIS SEC.
CONSENSUS RESEARCH CONFERENCE AND PLAN CONCERNING POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION AND PSYCHOSIS.
Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 409C (42 United States Code 284k), relating to clinical research, as section 409G; (2) by redesignating the second section 409D (42 United States Code 284l), relating to enhancement awards, as section 409H; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CONSENSUS RESEARCH CONFERENCE AND PLAN CONCERNING POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION AND PSYCHOSIS.
Consensus Research Conference and Plan.-- ``(1) Conference.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of NIH, the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, and the heads of other Federal agencies that administer Federal health programs, shall organize a series of national meetings that are designed to develop a research plan for postpartum depression and psychosis.
Plan.--The Secretary, taking into account the findings of the research conference under paragraph (1), shall develop a research plan relating to postpartum depression and psychosis.
Such plan shall include-- ``(A) basic research concerning the etiology and causes of postpartum depression and psychosis; ``(B) epidemiological studies to address the frequency and natural history of postpartum depression and psychosis and the differences among racial and ethnic groups with respect to such conditions; ``(C) the development of improved diagnostic techniques relating to postpartum depression and psychosis; ``(D) clinical research for the development and evaluation of new treatments for postpartum depression and psychosis, including new biological agents; ``(E) development of information and education programs for health care professionals and the public relating to postpartum depression and psychosis; and ``(F) a plan to disseminate information and education on postpartum depression and psychosis to health care professionals and the public.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report concerning the research plan under paragraph (2).
Activity Relating to Research Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--After the development of the research plan under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary, acting through the Director of NIH shall expand and intensify research and related activities of the Institutes relating to postpartum depression and postpartum psychosis in a manner appropriate to carry out such plan, and in particular shall direct research efforts to carry out such plan.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the development of the research plan under subsection (a)(1), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the progress made with respect to such plan and the status of ongoing activities regarding postpartum depression and psychosis at the Nation Institutes of Health.''.
TITLE II--DELIVERY OF SERVICES REGARDING POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION AND PSYCHOSIS SEC.
DELIVERY OF SERVICES REGARDING POSTPARTUM DEPRESSION AND PSYCHOSIS.
Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb-31 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by inserting after the subpart heading the following: ``Chapter I--General Provisions''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Chapter II--Delivery of Services Regarding Postpartum Depression and Psychosis ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM OF GRANTS.
In General.--The Secretary shall in accordance with this chapter make grants to provide for projects for the establishment, operation, and coordination of effective and cost-efficient systems for the delivery of essential services to individuals with postpartum depression or postpartum psychosis (referred to in this section as a ``postpartum condition) and their families.
Recipients of Grants.--A grant under subsection (a) may be made to an entity only if the entity is a public or nonprofit private entity, which may include a State or local government; a public or nonprofit private hospital, community-based organization, hospice, ambulatory care facility, community health center, migrant health center, or homeless health center; or other appropriate public or nonprofit private entity.
Certain Activities.--To the extent practicable and appropriate, the Secretary shall ensure that projects under subsection (a) provide services for the diagnosis and management of postpartum conditions.
Activities that the Secretary may authorize for such projects may also include the following: ``(1) Delivering or enhancing outpatient and home-based health and support services, including case management, screening and comprehensive treatment services for individuals with or at risk for postpartum conditions; and delivering or enhancing support services for their families.
Delivering or enhancing inpatient care management services that ensure the well being of the mother and family and the future development of the infant.
Improving the quality, availability, and organization of health care and support services (including transportation services, attendant care, homemaker services, day or respite care, and providing counseling on financial assistance and insurance) for individuals with postpartum conditions and support services for their families.
Integration With Other Programs.--To the extent practicable and appropriate, the Secretary shall integrate the program under this title with other grant programs carried out by the Secretary, including the program under section 330.
``A grant may be made under section 520K only if the applicant involved makes the following agreements: ``(1) Not more than 5 percent of the grant will be used for administration, accounting, reporting, and program oversight functions.
The grant will be used to supplement and not supplant funds from other sources related to the treatment of postpartum conditions.
The applicant will abide by any limitations deemed appropriate by the Secretary on any charges to individuals receiving services pursuant to the grant.
As deemed appropriate by the Secretary, such limitations on charges may vary based on the financial circumstances of the individual receiving services.
The grant will not be expended to make payment for services authorized under section 520K(a) to the extent that payment has been made, or can reasonably be expected to be made, with respect to such services-- ``(A) under any State compensation program, under an insurance policy, or under any Federal or State health benefits program; or ``(B) by an entity that provides health services on a prepaid basis.
The applicant will, at each site at which the applicant provides services under section 520K(a), post a conspicuous notice informing individuals who receive the services of any Federal policies that apply to the applicant with respect to the imposition of charges on such individuals.
``The Secretary may provide technical assistance to assist entities in complying with the requirements of this chapter in order to make such entities eligible to receive grants under section 520K.
``For the purpose of carrying out this chapter, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2004.