This Act may be cited as the ``Counseling in Shelters Act of 2002''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Nearly \1/3\ of American women report being physically or sexually abused by a husband or boyfriend at some point in their lives.
Fifty-six percent of women who experience any partner violence are diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder.
Twenty-nine percent of all women who attempt suicide were battered, 37 percent of battered women have symptoms of depression, 46 percent have symptoms of anxiety disorder, and 45 percent experience post-traumatic stress disorder.
Children who witness domestic violence are more likely to exhibit behavioral and physical health problems including depression, anxiety, and violence toward peers.
They are also more likely to attempt suicide, abuse drugs and alcohol, run away from home, engage in teenage prostitution, and commit sexual assault crimes.
Each year, at least 6 percent of all pregnant women, equal to about 240,000 pregnant women, are battered by the men in their lives.
Complications of pregnancy, including low weight gain, anemia, and first and second trimester bleeding are significantly higher for abused women, as are maternal rates of depression, suicide attempts, tobacco, alcohol, and illicit drug use.
A major domestic violence program in St. Petersburg, Florida, reports that 70 percent of the families that come to their shelter have substance abuse in their family--either the woman, her children, or her batterer.
One study of a low-income Chicago neighborhood found that 42 percent of women experiencing severe abuse in the past 12 months reported depression.
Grants Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Assistant Secretary for the Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, shall make grants to eligible entities for the purpose of providing on site mental health and substance abuse counseling and referral services.
Eligible entity defined.--In this section the term ``eligible entity'' means a public or nonprofit private domestic or sexual violence program or other community-based entity including an Indian tribe or tribal organization that primarily serves victims of domestic violence.
Duration of awards.--The Secretary shall award grants under this section for a period not to exceed 5 years.
Such grants may be renewed.
Use of Funds.--An entity awarded a grant pursuant to subsection (a) shall-- (1) hire licensed professionals to provide on site mental health and substance abuse counseling to women and children who have been subjected to domestic or sexual violence; (2) hire dedicated staff qualified to coordinate the mental health and substance abuse services for victims of domestic and sexual violence and their children including linking them with more comprehensive treatment programs in their local communities; and (3) provide training in the dynamics of domestic violence and sexual assault, including safety risk, potential lethality, and appropriate interventions, to those mental health and substance abuse professionals hired to provide services to these women and their children.
Application.-- (1) In general.--Each eligible entity that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to paragraph (1) shall contain a plan for the rigorous evaluation of the activities funded under this section, including process and outcome evaluation, and the submission of an evaluation at the end of the project period.
Grantmaking Considerations.-- The Secretary, in awarding grants under this section shall-- (1) ensure that such grants are distributed equitably among the regions of the country and among urban and rural areas; and (2) give preference to applicants with strong ties to minority communities and those that demonstrate high levels of cultural competence.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary, acting through the Assistant Secretary for the Administration on Children, Youth, and Families, shall provide technical assistance to grant recipients with respect to the implementation of programs to provide on site mental health and substance abuse counseling and referral services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for succeeding fiscal years.