This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan Commission on Social Security Reform Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The 2000 Report of the Social Security Board of Trustees projects that the receipts financing the Social Security trust funds will fall below its outgo in 2015 and the trust funds will be depleted in 2037.
At that time only 72 percent of Social Security benefits would be payable then with incoming receipts.
The primary reason is demographic: the post-World War II baby boomers will begin retiring in less than a decade and life expectancy is rising.
By 2025 the number of people age 65 and older is predicted to grow by 75 percent.
In contrast, the number of workers supporting the system would grow by 13 percent.
If there are no other surplus governmental receipts, policymakers would have 3 choices: raise taxes or other income, cut spending, or borrow the money.
Mirroring this adverse outlook are public opinion polls showing that fewer than 50 percent of respondents are confident that Social Security can meet its long-term commitments.
There also is a widespread perception that Social Security may not be as good a value in the future as it is today.
While it is accepted that Social Security reform is needed without undue delay, there clearly is no consensus on how this should be accomplished.
This was evident by the Report of the 1994-1996 Social Security Advisory Council, which provided 3 very different plans but none of which received a majority's endorsement.
It also is reflected by the many bills introduced in the 105th Congress and the 106th Congress and proposals by the administration that represent a diversity of approaches to Social Security reform.
As a result of differences within Congress and with the administration, there has been no movement on Social Security reform.
This state of affairs shows the need to develop consensus legislation between Congress and the administration that can be enacted into law without undue delay.
To accomplish this there is to be established a Bipartisan Commission on Social Security Reform charged with developing a unified proposal to ensure the long-term retirement security of Americans.
There is established in the legislative branch a Bipartisan Commission on Social Security Reform (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall design a single set of legislative and administrative recommendations for long-range reforms for restoring the solvency of the Social Security system, and maintaining retirement income security in the United States.
COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 17 members, of whom-- (1) 3 members shall be selected by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, 1 from among Members of the House, and 2 from among private citizens; (2) 3 members shall be selected by the majority leader of the Senate, 1 from among Members of the Senate, and 2 from among private citizens; (3) 3 members shall be selected by the minority leader of the House of Representatives, 1 from among Members of the House, and 2 from among private citizens; (4) 3 members shall be selected by the minority leader of the Senate, 1 from among Members of the Senate, and 2 from among private citizens; and (5) 5 members shall be selected by the President, 2 from among officers of the executive branch of the United States Government, and 3 from among private citizens.
The Commissioner of Social Security shall be an ex officio, nonvoting member of the Commission.
Qualifications.--The members of the Commission shall consist of individuals who are of recognized standing and distinction who can represent the multiple generations who have a stake in the viability of the Social Security system, and who possess a demonstrated capacity to discharge the duties imposed on the Commission.
At least 1 of the members shall be appointed from individuals representing the interests of employees, and at least 1 of the members shall be appointed from individuals representing the interests of employers.
Chair.--The officials referred to in paragraphs (1) through (5) of subsection (a) shall designate a member of the Commission to serve as Chair of the Commission (or 2 of the members of the Commission to serve as Co-Chairs of the Commission) who shall chair (or jointly chair) the Commission, determine its duties, and supervise its staff.
Terms of Appointment.--The members of the Commission shall be appointed not more than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The members of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission but any such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of its Chair (or Co-Chairs) or a majority of its members.
If after 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, 9 or more members of the Commission have been appointed, members who have been appointed may meet and select the Chair (or Co-Chairs) who thereafter shall have the authority to begin the operations of the Commission, including the hiring of staff.
Quorum.--A quorum shall consist of nine members of the Commission, except that a lesser number may conduct a hearing under subsection (c).
Hearings and Other Activities.--For the purpose of carrying out its duties, the Commission may hold such hearings and undertake such other activities as the Commission determines necessary to carry out its duties.
Obtaining Information.--Upon request of the Commission, the Commissioner of Social Security and the head of any other agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government shall furnish information deemed necessary by the panel to enable it to carry out its duties.
Compensation.--Except as provided in subsection (b), members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses and Per Diem.--Each member of the Commission who is not a present Member of the Congress and who is not otherwise an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall receive travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff and Support Services.-- (1) Staff director.-- (A) Appointment.--The Chair (or Co-Chairs) in accordance with the rules agreed upon by the Commission shall appoint a staff director for the Commission.
Compensation.--The staff director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate established for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The Chair (or Co-Chairs) in accordance with the rules agreed upon by the Commission shall appoint such additional personnel as the Commission determines to be necessary.
Applicability of civil service laws.--The staff director and other members of the staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the staff director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Physical Facilities.--The Architect of the Capitol, in consultation with the appropriate entities in the legislative branch, shall locate and provide suitable office space for the operation of the Commission on a nonreimbursable basis.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Commission and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for the proper functioning of the Commission.
Administrative Support Services and Other Assistance.-- (1) Upon the request of the Commission, the Architect of the Capitol, the Commissioner of Social Security, and the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a nonreimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
In addition to the assistance set forth in paragraphs (1) and (2), departments and agencies of the United States may provide the Commission such services, funds, facilities, staff, and other support services as the Commission may deem advisable and as may be authorized by law.
Use of Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies and shall, for purposes of the frank, be considered a commission of Congress as described in section 3215 of title 39, United States Code.
Printing.--For purposes of costs relating to printing and binding, including the cost of personnel detailed from the Government Printing Office, the Commission shall be deemed to be a committee of the Congress.
Not later than 6 months after the date of the first meeting of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate a report which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, including the set of recommendations required under section 4.
The report shall be approved by at least nine members of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after submitting its final report.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the activities of the Commission.
Until such time as funds are otherwise specifically appropriated for such activities, $2,000,000 shall be available for the activities of the Commission from funds otherwise currently appropriated for administrative expenses of the Social Security Administration pursuant to section 201(g)(1)(A) of the Social Security Act.