This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Efficient Affordable Home Act of 1998''.
CREDIT FOR PURCHASE OF NEW ENERGY EFFICIENT HOME AND OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING HOMES.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
PURCHASE OF NEW ENERGY EFFICIENT HOME AND OF ENERGY EFFICIENCY IMPROVEMENTS TO EXISTING HOMES.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to-- ``(1) the purchase price of each new energy efficient dwelling purchased by the taxpayer during the taxable year, and ``(2) 20 percent of the cost paid or incurred by the taxpayer for qualified energy efficiency improvements installed during such taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by this section with respect to a dwelling shall not exceed $2,000.
Prior credit amounts for taxpayer on same dwelling taken into account.--If a credit was allowed to the taxpayer under subsection (a) with respect to a dwelling in 1 or more prior taxable years, the amount of the credit otherwise allowable for the taxable year with respect to that dwelling shall not exceed the amount of $2,000 reduced by the sum of the credits allowed under subsection (a) to the taxpayer with respect to the dwelling for all prior taxable years.
Carryforward of Unused Credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A of part IV of subchapter A (other than this section), such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) New energy efficient dwelling.--The term `new energy efficient dwelling' means a dwelling-- ``(A) located in the United States, ``(B) owned and used by the taxpayer as the taxpayer's principal residence (within the meaning of section 121), ``(C) the construction of which is substantially completed after December 31, 1998, ``(D) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer, and ``(E) which is certified to exceed by 30 percent or more the applicable standards for energy efficiency based upon energy use or building component performance established for comparable dwellings under the applicable Model Energy Code (promulgated by the Council of American Building Officials) or to exceed such alternative standards for energy efficiency as the Secretary may prescribe in consultation with the Secretary of Energy.
Purchase price.--The term `purchase price' means the adjusted basis of the dwelling on the date of its acquisition by the taxpayer.
Qualified energy efficiency improvements.--The term `qualified energy efficiency improvements' means any energy efficient building envelope component, and any high energy efficiency heating or cooling appliance, if-- ``(A) such component or appliance is installed in or on a dwelling-- ``(i) located in the United States, and ``(ii) owned and used by the taxpayer as the taxpayer's principal residence (within the meaning of section 121), ``(B) the original use of such component or appliance commences with the taxpayer, and ``(C) such component or appliance reasonably can be expected to remain in use for at least 5 years.
Energy efficient building envelope component.--The term `energy efficient building envelope component' means-- ``(A) insulation material which is specifically and primarily designed to reduce, when installed in or on a dwelling, the heat loss or gain of such dwelling, ``(B) exterior windows that are certified to equal or exceed the applicable standards for energy efficiency (as determined by the National Fenestration Rating Council or similar body), and ``(C) such other components of the building envelope as the Secretary may prescribe in consultation with the Secretary of Energy.
High energy efficiency heating or cooling appliance.--The term `high energy efficiency heating or cooling appliance' means mechanical heating or cooling equipment (including a hot water heater) which is certified by the manufacturer as having an energy efficiency rating that equals or exceeds 150 percent of the applicable minimum energy efficiency standard established under the National Appliance Energy Conservation Act of 1987 (Public Law 100-12).
Certification.-- ``(1) New dwelling certifications.--A certification described in subsection (d)(1)(E) with respect to a dwelling shall be made by the person who constructed the dwelling or by a local building regulatory authority.
Windows.--A certification described in subsection (d)(4)(B) with respect to a window shall be made by the person who sold or installed the window.
Form of certifications.--Certifications referred to in this subsection shall be in such form as the Secretary shall prescribe, and, except in the case of a certification by a representative of a local building regulatory authority, shall include the taxpayer identification number of the person making the certification.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant- stockholder (as defined in section 216) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in such section), such individual shall be treated as having paid his tenant- stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 216(b)(3)) of the cost of qualified energy efficiency improvements made by such corporation.
Condominiums.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who is a member of a condominium management association with respect to a condominium which he owns, such individual shall be treated as having paid his proportionate share of the cost of qualified energy efficiency improvements made by such association.
Condominium management association.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium management association' means an organization which meets the requirements of paragraph (1) of section 528(c) (other than subparagraph (E) thereof) with respect to a condominium project substantially all of the units of which are used as residences.
Basis Adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to any property, the increase in the basis of such property which would (but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so allowed.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a)(1) shall apply to dwellings purchased during the period beginning on January 1, 1999, and ending on December 31, 2003, and subsection (a)(2) shall apply to qualified energy efficiency improvements installed during such period.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (c) of section 23 of such Code is amended by inserting ``, section 25B, and section 1400C'' after ``other than this section''.
Subparagraph (C) of section 25(e)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 23'' and inserting ``sections 23, 25B, and 1400C''.
Subsection (d) of section 1400C of such Code is amended by inserting ``and section 25B'' after ``other than this section''.
Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (26), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (27) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(28) to the extent provided in section 25B(g), in the case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed under section 25B.''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Purchase of new energy efficient home and of energy efficiency improvements to existing homes.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 1998.