This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Safety Protection Act of 1996''.
PROTECTION OF EMPLOYEES PROVIDING AIR SAFETY INFORMATION.
General Rule.--Chapter 421 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER III--WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION PROGRAM ``Sec.
Protection of employees providing air safety information ``(a) Discrimination Against Airline Employees.--No air carrier or contractor or subcontractor of an air carrier may discharge an employee or otherwise discriminate against an employee with respect to compensation, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment because the employee (or any person acting pursuant to a request of the employee)-- ``(1) provided, caused to be provided, or is about to provide or cause to be provided to the Federal Government information relating to air safety under this subtitle or any other law of the United States; ``(2) has filed, caused to be filed, or is about to file or cause to be filed a proceeding relating to air carrier safety under this subtitle or any other law of the United States; ``(3) testified or is about to testify in such a proceeding; or ``(4) assisted or participated or is about to assist or participate in such a proceeding.
Department of Labor Complaint Procedure.-- ``(1) Filing and notification.--A person who believes that he has been discharged or otherwise discriminated against by a person in violation of subsection (a) may, within 180 days after such violation occurs, file (or have any person file on his behalf) a complaint with the Secretary of Labor alleging such discharge or discrimination.
Upon receipt of such a complaint, the Secretary of Labor shall notify the person named in the complaint and the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration of the filing of the complaint, of the allegations contained in the complaint, of the substance of evidence supporting the complaint, and of the opportunities which will be afforded to such person under paragraph (2).
Investigation; preliminary order.--Within 60 days of receipt of a complaint filed under paragraph (1) and after affording the person named in the complaint of an opportunity to submit to the Secretary of Labor a written response to the complaint and an opportunity to meet with a representative of the Secretary to present statements from witnesses, the Secretary of Labor shall conduct an investigation and determine whether there is reasonable cause to believe that the complaint has merit and notify the complainant and the person alleged to have committed a violation of subsection (a) of the Secretary's findings.
If the Secretary of Labor concludes that there is a reasonable cause to believe that a violation of subsection (a) has occurred, the Secretary shall accompany the Secretary's findings with a preliminary order providing the relief prescribed by paragraph (3)(B).
Within 30 days after notification of findings under this paragraph, either the person alleged to have committed the violation or the complainant may file objections to the findings or preliminary order, or both, and request a hearing on the record.
The filing of such objections shall not operate to stay any reinstatement remedy contained in the preliminary order.
Such hearings shall be conducted expeditiously.
If a hearing is not requested within such 30-day period, the preliminary order shall be deemed a final order which is not subject to judicial review.
Final order.-- ``(A) Deadline for issuance; settlement agreements.--Within 120 days after conclusion of a hearing under paragraph (2), the Secretary of Labor shall issue a final order providing the relief prescribed by this paragraph or denying the complaint.
At any time before issuance of a final order, a proceeding under this subsection may be terminated on the basis of a settlement agreement entered into by the Secretary of Labor, the complainant, and the person alleged to have committed the violation.
Remedy.--If, in response to a complaint filed under paragraph (1), the Secretary of Labor determines that a violation of subsection (a) has occurred, the Secretary of Labor shall order the person who committed such violation to-- ``(i) take affirmative action to abate the violation; ``(ii) reinstate the complainant to his former position together with the compensation (including back pay), terms, conditions, and privileges associated with his employment; and ``(iii) provide compensatory damages to the complainant.
If such an order is issued under this paragraph, the Secretary of Labor, at the request of the complainant, shall assess against the person against whom the order is issued a sum equal to the aggregate amount of all costs and expenses (including attorneys' and expert witness fees) reasonably incurred, as determined by the Secretary of Labor, by the complainant for, or in connection with, the bringing of the complaint upon which the order was issued.
Frivolous complaints.--If the Secretary of Labor finds that a complaint under paragraph (1) is frivolous or has been brought in bad faith, the Secretary of Labor may award to the prevailing employer a reasonable attorney's fee not exceeding $5,000.
Review.-- ``(A) Appeal to court of appeals.--Any person adversely affected or aggrieved by an order issued under paragraph (3) may obtain review of the order in the United States Court of Appeals for the circuit in which the violation, with respect to which the order was issued, allegedly occurred or the circuit in which the complainant resided on the date of such violation.
The petition for review must be filed within 60 days from the issuance of the order of the Secretary of Labor.
Review shall conform to chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code.
The commencement of proceedings under this subparagraph shall not, unless ordered by the court, operate as a stay of the order.
Limitation on collateral attack.--An order of the Secretary of Labor with respect to which review could have been obtained under subparagraph (A) shall not be subject to judicial review in any criminal or other civil proceeding.
Enforcement of order by secretary of labor.--Whenever a person has failed to comply with an order issued under paragraph (3), the Secretary of Labor may file a civil action in the United States district court for the district in which the violation was found to occur to enforce such order.
In actions brought under this paragraph, the district courts shall have jurisdiction to grant all appropriate relief including, but not limited to, injunctive relief and compensatory damages.
Enforcement of order by parties.-- ``(A) Commencement of action.--A person on whose behalf an order was issued under paragraph (3) may commence a civil action against the person to whom such order was issued to require compliance with such order.
The appropriate United States district court shall have jurisdiction, without regard to the amount in controversy or the citizenship of the parties, to enforce such order.
Attorney fees.--The court, in issuing any final order under this paragraph, may award costs of litigation (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to any party whenever the court determines such award is appropriate.
Mandamus.--Any nondiscretionary duty imposed by this section shall be enforceable in a mandamus proceeding brought under section 1361 of title 28, United States Code.
Nonapplicability to Deliberate Violations.--Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to an employee of an air carrier who, acting without direction from such air carrier (or such air carrier's agent), deliberately causes a violation of any requirement relating to air carrier safety under this subtitle or any other law of the United States.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER III--WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION PROGRAM ``42121.
Protection of employees providing air safety information.''.
Section 46301(a)(1)(A) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``subchapter II of chapter 421'' and inserting ``subchapter II or III of chapter 421''.