This title may be cited as the ``Harbor Services Fund Act of 1999''.
In General.--There is hereby imposed a fee on services provided to commercial vessels for port use.
Amount of Fee.--The amount of the fee imposed by subsection (a) shall be based on vessel category and vessel capacity unit in accordance with the following table: Vessel Category: Rate of Fee: Bulker......................... $0.12 per vessel capacity unit Tanker......................... $0.28 per vessel capacity unit General........................ $2.74 per vessel capacity unit Cruise......................... $0.12 per vessel capacity unit.
The aggregate amount of fees imposed under the authority of this section in a fiscal year shall be sufficient to pay the projected total expenditures of the Department of the Army, subject to appropriations, for harbor development, operation, and maintenance for a fiscal year.
If amounts appropriated in any fiscal year are less than the amount collected in fees for the prior fiscal year, then the rate of the fee for each vessel category shall be reduced in the year of the appropriation so as to result in collections not exceeding the total amount appropriated from the Harbor Services Fund for that fiscal year.
Imposition of Fees.--The fee imposed by subsection (a) shall be imposed on a voyage basis for commercial vessels and shall be payable by the operator of a commercial vessel upon the first port use by a vessel entering a United States port from a foreign port or at the originating port for domestic voyages.
Authorization of Collection and Appropriation of Fees.--Fees imposed pursuant to this section may be collected only to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Amounts so collected in any fiscal year shall be available for obligation in the following fiscal year only to the extent and in the amount provided in advance in the appropriations Act for such fiscal year.
Such fees are authorized to be appropriated to remain available until expended.
Exemptions.--No fee shall be imposed under this section for port use-- (1) by the United States or any agency or instrumentality thereof; (2) in connection with intraport movements; (3) in connection with transporting commercial cargo from the United States mainland to Alaska, Hawaii, or any possession of the United States for ultimate use or consumption in Alaska, Hawaii, or any possession of the United States; (4) in connection with transporting commercial cargo from Alaska, Hawaii, or any possession of the United States to the United States mainland, Alaska, Hawaii, or such possession for ultimate use or consumption in the United States mainland, Alaska, Hawaii, or such a possession; (5) in connection with transporting commercial cargo within Alaska, Hawaii, or a possession of the United States; or (6) in connection with transporting passengers on United States flag vessels operating solely within the State waters of Alaska or Hawaii and adjacent international waters.
Collection of Fee.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall be responsible for prescribing regulations-- (1) providing for the manner and method of payment and collection of the fee imposed by this section; (2) providing for the posting of bonds to secure payment of such fee; and (3) exempting any transaction or class of transactions from such fee where the collection of such fee is not administratively practical.
Audit of Fees.--The Secretary of the Army shall be responsible for prescribing regulations-- (1) providing for the remittance or mitigation of penalties and the settlement or compromise of claims; (2) providing for a periodic review of amounts collected under this section to ensure that the fees charged fairly approximate the cost of services provided to commercial vessels for port use; (3) providing for the prospective adjustment of the rate of the fee for any one or more of the bulker, tanker, or cruise vessel categories by up to $0.05, or, in the case of the general vessel category, by up to $0.25, as necessary to fairly approximate the cost of services provided to commercial vessels in each vessel category; and (4) such other regulations as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Creation of Fund.--There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United States a Harbor Services Fund (hereinafter referred to as the ``Fund'') into which shall be deposited as offsetting receipts all fees collected under section 2 of this Act and to which shall be transferred balances in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund established pursuant to 26 United States Code 9505.
Purposes.--(1) Subject to subsection (c), amounts in the Fund may be made available for each fiscal year to pay-- (A) 100 percent of the eligible harbor development costs; (B) 100 percent of the eligible operations and maintenance costs assigned to commercial navigation of all ports within the United States; and (C) 100 percent of the eligible costs of maintaining the Federal dredging capability for the Nation.
In addition to the purposes set forth in paragraph (1) of this subsection, an amount of up to $100,000,000 per fiscal year is authorized to be appropriated from the Fund for dredging of berthing areas and construction and maintenance of bulkheads associated with a Federally authorized project and for all or a portion of the non- Federal share of project costs of an eligible non-Federal interest participating in the construction, operation, or maintenance of a Federally authorized project.
Expenditures From Harbor Services Fund.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), amounts in the Fund shall be available, as provided in advance in appropriation Acts, to carry out subsection (b) of this section and for the payment of expenses incurred in administering the fee imposed by section 2(a) of this Act.
Such amounts are authorized to be appropriated to remain available until expended.
From the balances transferred to the Harbor Services Fund pursuant to section 3(a) of this Act, such sums as may be necessary are hereby reserved to implement legislation to be enacted to establish the Saint Lawrence Seaway Development Corporation as a performance based organization.
Section 210 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2238) is permanently repealed upon enactment of an appropriation Act for fiscal year 2000 authorizing the collection of fees pursuant to section 2(d) of this Act.
Sections 4461 and 4462 of title 26, United States Code, are permanently repealed upon enactment of an appropriation Act for fiscal year 2000 authorizing the collection of fees pursuant to section 2(d) of this Act.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``port'' means any channel or harbor (or component thereof) in the United States which is not an inland waterway and which is open to public navigation.
The term ``port'' does not include any channel or harbor with respect to which no Federal funds have been used since 1989 for construction, operation, or maintenance, or which was deauthorized by Federal law before 1997 or to any channel or harbor where commercial vessels cannot load or unload cargo or passengers.
The term ``port use'' means the use of a channel by a commercial vessel for entering and exiting a port for commercial purposes.
The term ``commercial cargo'' means any cargo transported on a commercial vessel.
The term does not include bunker fuel, ship's stores, sea stores, or equipment necessary to the operation of a vessel, or fish or other aquatic animal life caught and not previously landed on shore.
The term ``commercial vessel'' means any vessel in excess of 3,000 gross registered tons used in transporting cargo or passengers by water for compensation or hire, or in transporting cargo by water in the business of the owner, lessee, or operator of the vessel.
The term does not include any ferry engaged primarily in the ferrying of passengers (including their vehicles) between points within the United States, or between the United States and contiguous countries.
The term ``ferry'' means any vessel which arrives in the United States on a regular schedule during its operating season at intervals of at least once each business day.
The term ``vessel capacity unit'' means the unit measure of vessel capacity represented by net tonnage, or, in the case of containerships or cruise ships, gross tonnage.
The term ``United States mainland'' means the contiguous 48 States.
The term ``eligible harbor development costs'' means the Federal share of the costs associated with construction of the general navigation features at a harbor or inland harbor within the United States.
The term ``bulker'' as a vessel category means a waterborne vessel designed to transport dry bulk cargo, including self-propelled vessels and non self-propelled vessels.
The term ``tanker'' as a vessel category means a waterborne vessel designed to transport liquid bulk cargo, including self-propelled vessels and non self-propelled vessels.
The term ``general'' as a vessel category means a waterborne vessel designed to transport general cargo.
The term ``cruise ship'' as a vessel category means a waterborne vessel designed to transport fare paying, berthed passengers.
The term ``eligible non-Federal interest'' means a non-Federal interest for a Federally authorized navigation project at a port where the average amount of the harbor services fee collected over three consecutive fiscal years exceeds the average Federal expenditures from the Harbor Services Fund at that port during the same consecutive fiscal years by $10,000,000.
For purposes of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of section 2(d), the term ``commercial cargo'' does not include crude oil with respect to Alaska.
The fees prescribed pursuant to section 2(a) of this Act shall be imposed on the owners or operators of commercial vessels beginning on October 1, 1999.