This Act may be cited as the ``School and Day-Care Lead-Based Paint Reduction Act of 2001''.
PROGRAM OF GRANTS REGARDING LEAD-BASED PAINT HAZARDS AT PUBLIC ELEMENTARY SCHOOLS AND LICENSED CHILD DAY-CARE FACILITIES.
In General.-- (1) Authority for making grants.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development may make grants to States, units of local government, and local educational agencies for the purpose of evaluating and reducing lead-based paint hazards at-- (A) public elementary schools; and (B) child day-care facilities that are licensed by the State in which the facilities are located.
Consultations.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of Education, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary shall make grants under subsection (a) on the basis of the activities proposed to be carried out with the grants and on the basis of the following criteria for approving applications for the grants: (1) The extent to which the proposed activities will reduce the risk of lead poisoning to children at the eligible facilities involved, with priority given to facilities that serve significant numbers of children who are under the age of 6.
The comparative degree of severity and extent of lead- based paint hazards at the eligible facilities.
The extent to which the facilities and the applicant for the grant have the fiscal capacity to carry out the purpose described in subsection (a) without a grant under such subsection.
The ability of the applicant to provide for the non- Federal contributions required in subsection (d).
The ability of the applicant to carry out the proposed activities.
Such other factors as the Secretary determines appropriate to ensure that the grants are used effectively and to promote the purpose described in subsection (a).
Authorized Expenditures.--The Secretary may authorize the expenditure of a grant under subsection (a) for the following purposes: (1) To perform risk assessments and lead inspections at the eligible facilities involved.
To provide for the interim control of lead-based paint hazards at such facilities.
To provide for the abatement of such hazards at the facilities.
If the facilities are undergoing renovations carried out with funds other than the grant, to provide for the additional cost of reducing such hazards at the facilities.
To ensure that risk assessments, inspections, and abatements are carried out by certified contractors in accordance with section 402 of the Toxic Substances Control Act.
This paragraph may not be construed as prohibiting personnel who carry out maintenance or cleaning duties at eligible facilities from performing their normal duties at the facilities.
To monitor the blood-lead levels of workers involved in lead hazard reduction activities carried out pursuant to this section.
To assist in the temporary relocation of the activities of the facilities while lead hazard reduction measures are being conducted at the facilities.
To educate the following individuals on the nature and causes of lead poisoning and on measures to reduce lead-based paint hazards at the facilities: (A) School officials, teachers, and students at the facilities, and parents of the students, in the case of facilities that are eligible schools.
Supervisors, staff, and children at the facilities, and parents of the children, in the case of facilities that are eligible child day-care facilities.
Personnel who carry out maintenance duties at the eligible facilities.
Personnel who carry out cleaning duties at the facilities.
After lead-based paint hazard reduction activities have been conducted at the facilities, to test soil, interior surface dust, and the blood-lead levels of children at the facilities to assure that such activities do not cause excessive exposure to lead.
To carry out the activities described in this subsection at facilities that are not currently being used as eligible facilities but are undergoing renovation in order to be used as such facilities.
To carry out such other activities as the Secretary determines appropriate to promote the purpose described in subsection (a).
Requirement of Matching Funds.-- (1) In general.--A condition for the receipt of a grant under subsection (a) is that, subject to paragraph (2), the applicant for the grant agree to make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward the purpose described in such subsection in an amount that is not less than 50 percent of the amount of the grant.
Provisions regarding service to low-income children.-- With respect to eligible facilities that serve significant numbers of children from low-income families, the following apply: (A) In the case of the activities described in paragraphs (1) and (2) of subsection (c) (relating to risk assessments, inspections, and interim control), the Secretary may waive the requirement of paragraph (1) or reduce the percentage that otherwise would be applicable under such paragraph.
In the case of other activities described in subsection (c), the Secretary may reduce the percentage that otherwise would be applicable under such paragraph, except that the percentage may not be less than 10 percent.
Determination of amount contributed.--Non-Federal contributions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount of such non-Federal contributions.
Report.--A condition for the receipt of grant under subsection (a) is that the applicant for the grant agree that the applicant will for each fiscal year in which the grant is expended submit to the Secretary a report that provides the following: (1) A description of the purposes for which the grant was expended.
A statement of the number of risk assessments and inspections conducted at eligible schools and at eligible child day-care facilities.
A statement of the number of eligible schools and eligible child day-care facilities at which lead-based paint hazards have been reduced through interim controls.
A statement of the number of eligible schools and eligible child day-care facilities at which lead-based paint hazards have been abated.
Such other information as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Other Conditions.--A condition for the receipt of grant under subsection (a) is that the applicant for the grant agree to the following: (1) The grant will not be expended to replace other amounts made available or designated by the State, unit of local government, or local educational agency involved for the purpose described in subsection (a).
In determining compliance with the preceding sentence, the Secretary shall count non- Federal contributions provided by the applicant under subsection (d).
Not more than 10 percent of the grant will be used for the administrative expenses of carrying out the purpose described in subsection (a).
The applicant will maintain and provide the Secretary with financial records that are sufficient, in the determination of the Secretary, to ensure proper accounting and disbursing of the grant.
Application for Grant.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Coordination With Academic Year.--To the maximum extent feasible, the Secretary shall in making grants under subsection (a) with respect to eligible schools ensure that application deadlines and grant notification timelines are compatible with the needs of State and local officials in providing for a normal academic year at the eligible schools involved.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1)(A) The terms specified in subparagraph (B) have the meanings given such terms in section 1004 of the Residential Lead-Based Paint Hazard Reduction Act of 1992.
The terms referred to in subparagraph (A) are ``abatement''; ``certified contractor''; ``inspection''; ``interim controls''; ``lead-based paint''; ``lead-based paint hazard''; ``reduction''; and ``risk assessment''.
The term ``elementary school'' has the meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
The term ``eligible child day-care facilities'' means child day-care facilities described in subsection (a).
The term ``eligible facilities'' means eligible schools and eligible child day-care facilities.
The term ``eligible schools'' means schools described in subsection (a).
The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
The term ``low income family'' means families that have incomes at or below an amount equal to 200 percent of the official poverty line, as established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and revised by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, unless the context indicates otherwise.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year.