This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Tax Incentives Improvement Act of 2002''.
MODIFICATIONS TO ENTERPRISE ZONE BENEFITS AVAILABLE WITH RESPECT TO THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
Entire District of Columbia Treated as Empowerment Zone.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 1400 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to establishment of DC Zone) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Designation.--For purposes of this title-- ``(1) the District of Columbia-- ``(A) is hereby designated as the District of Columbia Enterprise Zone, and ``(B) shall be treated as an empowerment zone designated under subchapter U, and ``(2) the terms `District of Columbia Enterprise Zone' and `DC Zone' mean the District of Columbia.''
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 1400 of such Code is amended by striking subsections (b) and (c) and by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (b), (c), and (d), respectively.
Subsection (b) of section 1400 of such Code, as redesignated by subparagraph (A), is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Special Rule for Application of Employment Credit.--In the case of the DC Zone, section 1396 (relating to empowerment zone employment credit) shall be applied by substituting `20' for `15' in the table contained in section 1396(b).
The preceding sentence shall apply only with respect to qualified zone employees, as defined in section 1396(d), determined by treating no area other than the DC Zone as an empowerment zone or enterprise community.''
Paragraph (2) of section 1400(d) of such Code, as redesignated by subparagraph (A), is amended by striking ``the census tracts referred to in subsection (b)(1) as an enterprise community'' and inserting ``the enterprise community in the District of Columbia''.
Section 1400B of such Code is amended by striking subsection (d) and by redesignating subsections (e), (f), and (g) as subsections (d), (e), and (f), respectively.
Paragraph (1) of section 1400B(c) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 1400(e)'' and inserting ``section 1400(c)''.
Capital Gains Exclusion Available for Assets Held More Than 2 Years.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 1400B of such Code is amended by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``2 years''.
Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (7) of section 1400B(b) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``5-year'' in the heading and inserting ``2-year'', and (B) by striking ``5-year'' in the text and inserting ``2-year''.
Modifications to Definition of DC Zone Business.--Subsection (c) of section 1400B of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(c) DC Zone Business.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `DC Zone business' means any entity which is an enterprise zone business (as defined in section 1397B), determined-- ``(A) after the application of section 1400(c), ``(B) without regard to subsections (b)(1) and (d)(2)(B) of section 1397B, and ``(C) by treating no area other than the District of Columbia as an empowerment zone or enterprise community.
Special rule for businesses holding intangibles.-- Paragraph (4) of section 1397B(d) shall not apply in determining whether a business is a DC Zone business if-- ``(A) at least 30 percent of the employees of such business are residents of the District of Columbia, and ``(B) at least 50 percent of the wages (as defined by section 3401(a)) paid by such business are paid to residents of the District of Columbia.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if included in the amendments made by section 701 of the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997.
EXTENSION OF ENTERPRISE ZONE TREATMENT.
Effective Period of Designation.--Subsection (f) of section 1400 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``December 31, 2003'' each place it appears and inserting ``December 31, 2009''.
Economic Development Bonds.--Subsection (b) of section 1400A of such Code is amended by striking ``December 31, 2003'' and inserting ``December 31, 2009''.
Zero Percent Capital Gains Rate.-- (1) Paragraphs (2)(A)(i), (3)(A), (4)(A)(i), and (4)(B)(i)(I) of section 1400B(b) of such Code are each amended by striking ``January 1, 2004'' and inserting ``January 1, 2010''.
Subsections (e)(2) and (g) of section 1400B of such Code are each amended by striking ``2008'' each place it appears and inserting ``2014''.
FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYER CREDIT FOR DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA MADE PERMANENT; OTHER MODIFICATIONS.
Credit Made Permanent.--Subsection (i) of section 1400C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to first-time homebuyer credit for District of Columbia) is amended by striking ``, and before January 1, 2004''.
Treatment of Purchases In Connection With Divorce.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (c) of section 1400C of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Purchases in connection with divorce.-- Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2), an individual shall be treated as a first-time homebuyer with respect to the purchase of any residence if-- ``(A) the sale of the residence is pursuant to a divorce or separation instrument (as defined in section 71(b)(2)) relating to such individual and such individual's spouse or former spouse, and ``(B) such residence was the principal residence of such individual at the time of such sale or for any period ending not more than a reasonable period before such sale.
The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to prevent the abuse of the purposes of this paragraph.''
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to purchases after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Credit Allowed Against Regular Tax and Alternative Minimum Tax.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (d) of section 1400C of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A of part IV of subchapter A and section 27 for the taxable year.
Carryover of credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.''
Conforming amendment.--Section 1400C of such Code is amended by striking subsection (g) and by redesignating subsections (h) and (i) as subsections (g) and (h), respectively.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXPANSION OF TAX-EXEMPT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BONDS.
In General.--Section 1400A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by section 3, is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
TAX-EXEMPT ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BONDS.
In General.--In the case of the District of Columbia Enterprise Zone-- ``(1) section 1394(c)(1)(A) (relating to limitation on amount of bonds) shall not apply, ``(2) section 1394(b)(3)(A) shall be applied without regard to section 1397C(d)(4) (relating to treatment of businesses holding intangibles), and ``(3) section 1394(b)(3)(B)(iii) shall be applied without regard to the employee residency requirement.
Exemption From Volume Cap.--Bonds which are exempt facility bonds by reason of this section shall be treated as not being private activity bonds for purposes of section 146.
Period of Applicability.--This section shall apply to bonds issued during the period beginning on January 1, 1998, and ending on December 31, 2009.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to bonds issued after the date of the enactment of this Act.
BONDS OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA EXEMPT FROM STATE AND LOCAL TAXES.
In General.--Section 485 of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Bonds and notes issued by the Council pursuant to this title and the interest thereon shall be exempt from all taxation (except estate, inheritance, and gift taxes) by the United States, any State or political subdivision thereof, the District, or any possession of the United States.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
ZERO PERCENT WITHHOLDING RATE ON PAYMENTS MADE WITH RESPECT TO DC ZONE INSURANCE POLICIES.
In General.--Subchapter W of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ZERO PERCENT WITHHOLDING RATE ON PAYMENTS MADE WITH RESPECT TO DC ZONE INSURANCE POLICIES.
In General.--The tax and withholding rates under sections 871, 881, 1441, and 1442 shall be zero for any payments made by an exempt insurance company with respect to a DC Zone insurance policy issued by such company.
Exempt Insurance Company.--For purposes of this section, the term `exempt insurance company' means any insurance company-- ``(1) which is subject to tax under subchapter L, and ``(2) which is a DC Zone business (as defined in section 1400B(c)) or would be such a business if subsection (b) of section 1397B were applied without regard to paragraphs (2), (6), and (8) thereof.
DC Zone Insurance Policy.--The term `DC Zone insurance policy' means an insurance or annuity contract, including a contract for amounts held at interest, issued by (but not reinsured by) an exempt insurance company in connection with property in, liability arising out of an activity in, or the lives or health of residents of, a country other than the United States.
For purposes of this section, the determination of whether a contract is a life insurance contract or an annuity contract shall be made without regard to sections 72(s), 101(f), 871(h), and 7702 if-- ``(1) such contract is regulated as a life insurance contract or an annuity contract by the Department of Insurance and Securities Regulation of the District of Columbia, and ``(2) no policyholder, insured, annuitant, or beneficiary with respect to such policy is a United States person.
Exclusion From Reporting.--No reporting shall be required under this title from an exempt insurance company with respect to amounts paid by such company under a DC Zone insurance policy to a person who is not a United States person in connection with risks located outside the United States.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter W is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Zero percent withholding rate on payments made with respect to DC Zone insurance policies.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid after the date of the enactment of this Act.