This Act may be cited as the ``Southern Sea Otter Recovery and Research Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Sea otters were hunted to near extinction in the 18th and 19th centuries along the west coast of the United States.
Today a small population of southern sea otters exists along the California coastline.
Southern sea otters are listed as a threatened species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and are recognized as depleted under the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972.
Southern sea otters have educational, economic, ecological, and scientific importance to the people of California and the Nation.
Recent studies have-- (A) determined that an elevated level of mortality, particularly in adult southern sea otters, is limiting recovery of the population; and (B) determined that the major threats to the southern sea otter are largely due to degraded marine ecosystems, including infectious diseases, sequestration of contaminants, food resource limitations, and coastal oil spills.
Enactment of provisions to implement the United States Fish and Wildlife Service document entitled ``Final Revised Recovery Plan for the Southern Sea Otter (Enhydra lutris nereis'') could lead to delisting of the southern sea otter under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.
Research underlies every aspect of recovering southern sea otter populations, educating citizens and stakeholders, and restoring coastal ecosystems.
SOUTHERN SEA OTTER RECOVERY PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), shall carry out a recovery program for southern sea otter populations along the coast of California.
The recovery program shall include the following: (1) Monitoring and analysis of southern sea otter population demographics and life history parameters, including a biannual population census.
Protection of southern sea otter populations.
Reduction or elimination of potential factors limiting southern sea otter populations that are related to human activities.
Assessment of southern sea otter health in accordance with the Southern Sea Otter Health Assessment Plan developed under subsection (c).
Education and outreach to the public about southern sea otters and their survival.
Annual Report.--The Secretary shall annually submit to the Congress a report on the status of southern sea otter populations.
Health Assessment Plan.--The Secretary shall-- (1) in consultation with the Southern Sea Otter Recovery Implementation Team established under section 5, develop a Southern Sea Otter Health Assessment Plan; (2) collect and analyze tissue samples from southern sea otters; (3) after such analysis, submit the tissue samples to the Secretary of Commerce for inclusion in the National Marine Mammal Tissue Bank provided for under section 407 of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1421f) to allow for managed access to the tissues by other researchers; and (4) review progress on the implementation of the Southern Sea Otter Health Assessment Plan developed under paragraph (1) and report the status of the plan as part of the report under subsection (b).
Contents of Plan.--The Southern Sea Otter Health Assessment Plan developed under subsection (a)(1) shall include-- (1) mechanisms to assess and evaluate, among other matters, the immunology, virology, toxicology, parasitology, endocrinology, and nutritional status of southern sea otters; and (2) identification of centers of expertise and resources to implement the plan.
Promotion of Ecosystem Sustainability.--In implementing this section, the Secretary shall seek to promote ecosystem sustainability, in cooperation with the Secretary of Commerce and State fisheries management agencies.
SOUTHERN SEA OTTER RESEARCH PROGRAM.
Grant Authority.--The Secretary of the Interior shall award competitive grants to support research regarding southern sea otters.
Research Subjects.--Research funded with grants under this section-- (1) shall be in accordance with the research goals established by the Sea Otter Recovery Implementation Team under section 5; and (2) shall include the following topics: (A) Southern sea otter demographics and natural history.
Infectious diseases and parasites affecting southern sea otters.
Limitations on the availability of food resources for southern sea otters.
Recommendation of Grants by Advisory Board Required.--The Secretary-- (1) shall submit each grant proposal submitted under this section to the Southern Sea Otter Recovery Implementation Team established under section 5; and (2) may not make a grant under this section unless the grant proposal has been recommended by such Team.
SOUTHERN SEA OTTER RECOVERY IMPLEMENTATION TEAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of the Interior shall establish the Southern Sea Otter Recovery Implementation Team (in this section referred to as the ``Team'').
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 App.
United States Code) shall not apply to the Team.
Functions.--The Team shall-- (1) make recommendations to the Secretary regarding overall southern sea otter recovery program administration and research goals; (2) serve as a link between the recovery program and stakeholders; (3) review the recommendations of the Scientific Advisory Committee established by section 6; and (4) make recommendations to the Secretary regarding funding of scientific research under section 4.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Team shall have balanced representation and shall consist of no more than 13 members.
The Secretary shall, in consultation with the Marine Mammal Commission, appoint members of the Team from among-- (A) individuals who are representatives of Federal, State, or local agencies with expertise in sea otter management; (B) individuals who are representatives of local marine user groups; (C) individuals who are representatives of marine conservation and other public interest organizations; (D) individuals who are representatives of organizations involved in southern sea otter rescue, rehabilitation, and release; and (E) individuals who are representatives of scientific and educational organizations.
Chairman.--The Team shall elect a member of the Team as chairman of the Team for a term of 3 years.
A member of the Team may not serve more than 2 terms as chairman.
Conflicts of Interest.--A member of the Team who participated in the development of a proposal may not participate in the review and recommendation of grants under section 4(c) with respect to the proposal by the Team.
Staffing and Assistance.--The Secretary may make available to the Team any staff, information, administrative services, or assistance the Secretary determines is reasonably required to enable the Team to carry out its function.
Administration.-- (1) Internal administrative regulations.--The Team shall adopt rules, procedures, and other internal administrative regulations as may be necessary to carry out its functions.
Subsidiary bodies.--The Team may establish such subsidiary bodies as it considers necessary to carry out its functions.
Public Participation and Procedural Matters.--The following apply with respect to the conduct of business meetings of the Team: (1) Each meeting shall be open to the public, and interested persons shall be allowed to present oral or written statements on items on the agenda.
Regular business meetings of the Team shall occur at least once a year.
Other extraordinary meetings of the Team may be held at the call of the chairman.
Timely notice of each meeting, including the time, place, and agenda of the meeting, shall be published locally and in the Federal Register.
Minutes of each meeting shall be kept, and shall contain a summary of attendees and matters discussed.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish the Southern Sea Otter Recovery Scientific Advisory Committee (in this section referred to as the ``Advisory Committee'').
The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 App.
United States Code) shall not apply to the Advisory Committee.
Functions.--The Advisory Committee shall-- (1) evaluate the scientific merit and quality of southern sea otter research proposals submitted for funding in response to a request by the Secretary for proposals, based on the research goals established by the Secretary; and (2) make recommendations to the Southern Sea Otter Recovery Implementation Team established by section 5 regarding funding of such proposals.
Membership.--The Advisory Committee shall have balanced representation, and shall consist of no more than 11 members appointed by the Secretary from among individuals with a doctorate or equivalent education degree.
The Secretary shall, in consultation with the Marine Mammal Commission and the Sea Otter Recovery Implementation Team established under section 5, appoint members of the Team from among-- (1) representatives of Federal, State, or local agencies with expertise in sea otter management; (2) representatives of local marine user groups; (3) representatives of marine conservation and other public interest organizations; (4) representatives of organizations involved in southern sea otter rescue, rehabilitation, and release; and (5) representatives of scientific and educational organizations.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the term of a member of the Advisory Committee shall be 3 years.
Initial appointments.--Of the members first appointed as members of the Advisory Committee-- (A) 3 shall be appointed to an initial term of 1 year; and (B) 3 shall be appointed to an initial term of 2 years.
Conflicts of Interest.--A member of the Advisory Committee who participated in the development of a proposal may not participate in the review and recommendation of grants under section 4(c) with respect to the proposal by the Advisory Committee.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out this Act $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009, of which $2,000,000 each fiscal year shall be for grants under section 4.
Administrative Expenses.--Of amounts available each fiscal year to carry out section 6, the Secretary may expend not more than 6 percent or $80,000, whichever is greater, to pay the administrative expenses necessary to carry out section 6.