This Act may be cited as the ``Older Americans Sustainable Mobility Act of 2006''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The population of the United States is aging in greater numbers than ever before in the Nation's history.
Dignified and sustainable mobility is essential for the health, safety, and quality of life of older individuals, their families, their communities, and the Nation.
Older individuals who rely on the private automobile for transportation need an acceptable alternative to driving so they may safely transition from driving without unduly compromising their independence, quality of life, and activity in the community.
Many older individuals have special, age-related conditions, such as dementia and frailty, that special transportation alternatives must effectively address.
Many older individuals live in rural and suburban areas that lack the density for traditional mass transit, and more than half of all people age 65 or older live in communities with no public transportation.
The cost of addressing the transportation needs of older individuals is outstripping the public resources available, and that cost will only increase in the next 30 years as the Nation's population ages.
Programs that provide increased mobility for older individuals will promote economic growth and development by moderating health care expenses, supporting family caregivers, promoting volunteerism, fostering civic engagement, and enriching community well-being through the participation of the Nation's most experienced citizens.
Models exist by which private nonprofit organizations can provide economically sustainable, consumer-oriented senior transportation alternatives, that address the transportation needs of older individuals.
Those models can be used to supplement, but not displace, public transportation, and can also be successfully replicated in communities where public transportation is unavailable.
It is appropriate for the Federal Government to accelerate the availability of transportation alternatives for older individuals through those models, and to test the viability of constructing a nationwide network based on them.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a demonstration project to develop a national network of economically sustainable transportation providers and qualified transportation providers, to provide transportation services to older individuals, and individuals who are blind, in urban, suburban, and rural settings.
In this Act: (1) Economically sustainable transportation provider.--The term ``economically sustainable transportation provider'' means a nonprofit provider of transportation services that-- (A) submits to the Secretary and obtains approval of a plan demonstrating that the provider is capable of providing economically sustainable transportation services through the National Network; (B) on receiving a grant under section 6, connects to the National Network and provides economically sustainable transportation services through the National Network in accordance with this Act; and (C) on receiving a grant under section 7, provides economically sustainable transportation services through the National Network in accordance with this Act.
Economically sustainable transportation services.--The term ``economically sustainable transportation services'' means demand-responsive transportation services that are provided-- (A) by automobile; (B) to qualified individuals and qualified passengers; (C) 24 hours a day, 7 days a week; (D) by a combination of volunteer and paid drivers; and (E)(i) for a period of not more than 5 fiscal years by a provider who is receiving Federal financial assistance under this Act; and (ii) after such period, by that provider without receiving Federal or other public financial assistance for the services.
National network.--The term ``National Network'' means a network of economically sustainable transportation providers and qualified transportation providers that provides transportation services to qualified individuals and qualified passengers.
Qualified individual.--The term ``qualified individual'' means an individual who is-- (A) an older individual, as defined in section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3002); or (B) an individual who is blind, within the meaning of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 701 et seq.
), an individual who has significant visual impairment described in section 751 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 796j), or an individual who is eligible for benefits under title II or XVI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401 et seq., 1381 et sequentes) on the basis of blindness.
Qualified passenger.--The term ``qualified passenger'' means an individual who is authorized by a qualified individual to receive transportation services paid for in part or in whole through the qualified transportation account of the qualified individual.
Qualified transportation account.--The term ``qualified transportation account'' means an account established for a qualified individual for the purpose of acquiring transportation services from an economically sustainable transportation provider or a qualified transportation provider.
Qualified transportation provider.--The term ``qualified transportation provider'' means a nonprofit, public, or licensed private transportation provider that-- (A) submits to the Secretary and obtains approval of a plan demonstrating that the provider is capable of providing transportation services through the National Network; and (B) on receiving a grant under section 6, connects to the National Network and provides transportation services through the National Network in accordance with this Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Assistant Secretary for Aging.
Transportation services.--The term ``transportation services'' means transportation of a passenger or a group of passengers, along with the incidental goods or luggage of a passenger described in this paragraph.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish and carry out a demonstration project to enable qualified individuals and qualified passengers to obtain economically sustainable transportation services from economically sustainable transportation providers and transportation services from qualified transportation providers.
Contract or Agreement.--In carrying out the demonstration project, the Secretary shall enter into a contract or a cooperative agreement with an eligible entity to provide recommendations to the Secretary on appropriate requirements and other provisions for, and administration of, the demonstration project.
Eligible Entity.--To be eligible to enter into a contract or agreement under subsection (b), an organization shall be a private nonprofit organization with experience in replicating models for economically sustainable transportation services.
Activities.--An entity that enters into a contract or agreement under this section shall-- (1) provide technical assistance and support to the Secretary for the administration of the demonstration project; (2) provide recommendations to the Secretary about the establishment of, and requirements for, the National Network, including requirements concerning locations where transportation services will be provided through the network; (3) provide recommendations to the Secretary for provisions for the establishment of qualified transportation accounts for the transportation services, including provisions that such an account-- (A) may be funded with credits or funds equal to the value of a vehicle traded to an economically sustainable transportation provider by, or on behalf of, a qualified individual, or by other means; (B) shall be used only to provide transportation services to the qualified individual or a qualified passenger of the qualified individual; (C) shall have a designated beneficiary; and (D) shall be transferable to an individual other than the qualified individual; (4) provide recommendations to the Secretary for provisions for the use of the qualified transportation accounts, including the manner in which-- (A) an economically sustainable transportation provider or a qualified transportation provider may debit such an account in exchange for providing transportation services to a qualified individual or qualified passenger; (B) the account may be terminated; and (C) the credits or funds in the account may be exchanged or withdrawn; (5) provide recommendations to the Secretary regarding requirements for, and the administration of, the national network connection grant program described in section 6; and (6) provide recommendations to the Secretary regarding requirements for, and the administration of, the matching grant program described in section 7.
Provisions.--After receiving the recommendations described in subsection (d), the Secretary shall establish the requirements and other provisions described in subsection (d).
Copyrights and Trademarks.--Nothing in this Act shall affect the rights of the eligible entity under the copyright or trademark laws of the United States.
Nothing in this Act shall require the disclosure of information to which Federal law relating to trade secrets (including section 552(b)(4) of title 5, United States Code) applies.
In entering into a contract or cooperative agreement under this section, the Secretary shall not establish any conditions that affect such rights or require such disclosure.
Incentive for Vehicles Traded to Economically Sustainable Transportation Providers.--For purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, there shall be allowed as a credit against income tax of any qualified individual under chapter 1 of such Code for any taxable year, an amount equal to 30 percent of the value of transportation services allocated to a qualified transportation account of such qualified individual in exchange for the transfer of any motor vehicle by such qualified individual to an economically sustainable transportation provider during such taxable year.
Such credit shall be treated as a credit under subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of such chapter.
NATIONAL NETWORK CONNECTION GRANT PROGRAM.
Grants.--In carrying out the demonstration project, the Secretary shall make grants to economically sustainable transportation providers and qualified transportation providers to pay for the Federal share of the costs of acquiring and using technology to connect to the National Network.
Amount.--The Secretary shall make a grant under this section in an amount of not more than $25,000.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a provider shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the costs described in subsection (a) shall be 50 percent.
The provider shall provide the non- Federal share of the costs in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services, except that not more than 10 percent of the costs may be provided in kind.
Grants.--In carrying out the demonstration project, the Secretary shall make grants to economically sustainable transportation providers to pay for the Federal share of the costs of participating in, and providing economically sustainable transportation services through, the National Network (other than the costs described in section 6(a)).
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a provider shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the costs described in subsection (a) shall be 50 percent.
The provider shall provide the non- Federal share of the costs in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services, except that not more than 10 percent of the costs may be provided in kind.
The non-Federal share of the costs provided in cash shall be provided through passenger fares, including fares from qualified transportation accounts, and public funds or private contributions from the community in which the provider is located.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $25,000,000 for the period of fiscal years 2007 through 2011.
This Act ceases to be effective 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act.