This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans and Survivors Behavioral Health Awareness Act''.
SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING OF BEHAVIORAL HEALTH CARE SPECIALISTS FOR VET CENTERS.
Program Required.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, acting through the Under Secretary for Health of the Department of Veterans Affairs, shall carry out a program to provide scholarships to individuals pursuing education or training in behavioral health care specialties that are critical to the operations of Vet Centers in order to recruit and retain individuals with such specialties for service as behavioral health care specialists in Vet Centers.
Eligibility.--An individual shall be eligible for a scholarship under the program under this section if the individual-- (1) is pursuing education or training leading to licensure or other certified proficiency in such behavioral health care specialties critical to the operations of Vet Centers as the Secretary shall designate for purposes of the program; and (2) otherwise meets such other criteria or requirements as the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program.
Amount.--The amount of any scholarship provided under the program under this section shall be determined by the Secretary.
Agreement To Serve as Behavioral Health Care Specialist in Vet Centers.--As a condition of receipt of a scholarship under the program under this section, an individual receiving a scholarship shall enter into an agreement with the Secretary to serve as an employee of a Vet Center in the behavioral health care specialty of the individual for such period as the Secretary shall specify in the agreement.
Repayment.--Each agreement under subsection (c) shall contain such provisions as the Under Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program under this section relating to repayment of the amount of a scholarship provided under this section in the event the individual entering into such agreement does not fulfill the service requirements in such agreement.
Such provisions shall apply, to the maximum extent practicable, uniformly to all recipients of scholarships provided under this section.
Funding.--(1) Amounts for scholarships under the program under this section shall be derived from amounts available to the Secretary for readjustment benefits.
The total amount available for scholarships under the program under this section in any fiscal year may not exceed $2,000,000.
Vet Centers Defined.--In this section, the term ``Vet Centers'' means the centers for readjustment counseling and related mental health services for veterans under section 1712A of title 38, United States Code.
RESTORATION OF AUTHORITY OF VETS CENTERS TO PROVIDE REFERRAL AND OTHER ASSISTANCE UPON REQUEST TO FORMER MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES NOT AUTHORIZED COUNSELING.
Section 1712A of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c): ``(c) Upon receipt of a request for counseling under this section from any individual who has been discharged or released from active military, naval, or air service but who is not otherwise eligible for such counseling, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) provide referral services to assist such individual, to the maximum extent practicable, in obtaining mental health care and services from sources outside the Department; and ``(2) if pertinent, advise such individual of such individual's rights to apply to the appropriate military, naval, or air service, and to the Department, for review of such individual's discharge or release from such service.''.
GRANTS FOR NONPROFIT ORGANIZATIONS FOR THE PROVISION OF EMOTIONAL SUPPORT SERVICES TO SURVIVORS OF MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND VETERANS.
In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry out a program to award grants to nonprofit organizations that provide emotional support services for survivors of deceased members of the Armed Forces (including members of the National Guard and Reserve) and deceased veterans through peers of such survivors.
Award of Grants.-- (1) Eligibility.--To be eligible for a grant under the program under this section, a nonprofit organization shall meet such criteria as the Secretary shall establish for purposes of the program.
Application.--A nonprofit organization seeking a grant under the program shall submit to the Secretary an application for the grant in such form and manner as the Secretary shall specify for purposes of the program.
Grants.-- (1) Amount.--The amount of each grant awarded a nonprofit organization under the program under this section shall be such amount as the Secretary determines appropriate for purposes of the program.
Duration.--The duration of each grant awarded a nonprofit organization shall be such period as the Secretary determines appropriate for purposes of the program.
Use of Grant Funds.--Each nonprofit organization awarded a grant under the program under this section shall utilize amounts under the grant to provide such emotional support services for survivors of deceased members of the Armed Forces (including members of the National Guard and Reserve) and deceased veterans through peers of such survivors as the Secretary shall specify in the grant.
Funding.--Amounts for grants under the program under this section shall be derived from amounts authorized to be appropriated for the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs.