This Act may be cited as the ``Commission to Study the Federal Statistical System Act of 1996''.
The Congress, recognizing the importance of statistical information in the development and administration of policies for the private and public sector, finds that-- (1) accurate Federal statistics are required to develop, implement, and evaluate government policies and laws; (2) Federal spending consistent with legislative intent requires accurate and appropriate statistical information; (3) business and individual economic decisions are influenced by Federal statistics and contracts are often based on such statistics; (4) statistical information on the manufacturing and agricultural sectors is more complete than statistical information regarding the service sector which employs more than half the Nation's workforce; (5) experts in the private and public sector have long- standing concerns about the accuracy and adequacy of numerous Federal statistics, including the Consumer Price Index, gross domestic product, trade data, wage data, and the poverty rate; (6) Federal statistical data should be accurate, consistent, and continuous; (7) the Federal statistical infrastructure should be modernized to accommodate the increasingly complex and ever changing American economy; (8) Federal statistical agencies should utilize all practical technologies to disseminate statistics to the public; and (9) the Federal statistical infrastructure should maintain the privacy of individuals.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Commission to Study the Federal Statistical System (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 13 members of whom-- (A) 5 shall be appointed by the President; (B) 4 shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, in consultation with the majority leader and minority leader of the Senate; and (C) 4 shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the majority leader and minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Political party limitation.--(A) Of the 5 members of the Commission appointed under paragraph (1)(A), no more than 3 members may be members of the same political party.
Of the 4 members of the Commission appointed under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1), respectively, no more than 2 members may be members of the same political party.
Consultation before appointments.--In making appointments under paragraph (1), the President, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall consult with the National Science Foundation and appropriate professional organizations, such as the American Economic Association and the American Statistical Association.
Qualifications.--An individual appointed to serve on the Commission-- (A) shall have expertise in statistical policy and a background in such disciplines as actuarial science, demography, economics, and finance; (B) may not be a Federal officer or employee; and (C) should be an academician, a statistics user in the private sector, or a former government official with experience related to-- (i) the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor; or (ii) the Bureau of Economic Analysis or the Bureau of the Census of the Department of Commerce.
Date.--The appointments of the members of the Commission shall be made no later than 150 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--No later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairman.--The President shall designate a Chairman of the Commission from among the members.
FUNCTIONS OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive study of all matters relating to the Federal statistical infrastructure, including longitudinal surveys conducted by private agencies and partially funded by the Federal Government.
Study and recommendations.--The matters studied by and recommendations of the Commission shall include-- (A) an examination of multipurpose statistical agencies that collect and analyze data of broad interest across department and function areas, such as the Bureau of Economic Analysis and the Bureau of the Census of the Commerce Department, and the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Labor Department; (B) a review and evaluation of the collection of data for purposes of administering such programs as Old-Age, Survivors and Disability Insurance and Unemployment Insurance under the Social Security Act; (C) a review and evaluation of the mission and organization of various statistical agencies, including-- (i) recommendations with respect to statistical activities that should be expanded or deleted; (ii) the order of priority such activities should be carried out; (iii) a review of the advantages and disadvantages of a centralized statistical agency or a partial consolidation of the agencies for the Federal Government; and (iv) an assessment of which agencies could be consolidated into such an agency; (D) an examination of the methodology involved in producing official data and recommendations for technical changes to improve statistics; (E) an evaluation of the accuracy and appropriateness of key statistical indicators and recommendations of ways to improve such accuracy and appropriateness; (F) a review of interagency coordination of statistical data and recommendations of methods to standardize collection procedures and surveys, as appropriate, and presentation of data throughout the Federal system; (G) a review of information technology and recommendations of appropriate methods for disseminating statistical data, with special emphasis on resources, such as the Internet, that allow the public to obtain information in a timely and cost- effective manner; (H) an examination of individual privacy in the context of statistical data; (I) a comparison of the United States statistical system to statistical systems of other nations; (J) a consideration of the coordination of statistical data with other nations and international agencies, such as the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development; and (K) a recommendation of a strategy for maintaining a modern and efficient Federal statistical infrastructure as the needs of the United States change.
Report.-- (1) Interim report.--No later than June 1, 1998, the Commission shall submit an interim report on the study conducted under subsection (a) to the President and to the Congress.
Final report.--No later than January 15, 1999, the Commission shall submit a final report to the President and the Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, and recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as the Commission considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Compensation of Members.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Chairman.--The Chairman shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Such travel may include travel outside the United States.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Commission shall, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, relating to the competitive service, appoint an executive director who shall be paid at a rate equivalent to a rate established for the Senior Executive Service under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission shall appoint such additional personnel as the Commission determines to be necessary to provide support for the Commission, and may compensate such additional personnel without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, relating to the competitive service.
Limitation.--The total number of employees of the Commission (including the executive director) may not exceed 30.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date on which the Commission submits the final report of the Commission.
There are authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 for fiscal year 1997, $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and $2,500,000 for fiscal year 1999 to the Commission to carry out the purposes of this Act.