SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR PRODUCING INDIAN OIL OR GAS.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 29 the following new section: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR PRODUCING INDIAN OIL OR GAS.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to-- ``(1) $6.12, multiplied by ``(2) the barrel-of-oil equivalent of Indian oil or gas-- ``(A) sold by the taxpayer to an unrelated person during the taxable year, and ``(B) the production of which is attributable to the taxpayer.
Limitations and Adjustments.-- ``(1) Phaseout of credit.--The amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) shall be reduced by an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount of the credit (determined without regard to this paragraph) as-- ``(A) the amount by which the reference price for the calendar year in which the sale occurs exceeds $47.90, bears to ``(B) $12.23.
Credit and phaseout adjustment based on inflation.-- The $6.12 amount in subsection (a) and the $47.90 and $12.23 amounts in paragraph (1) shall each be adjusted by multiplying such amount by the inflation adjustment factor for the calendar year in which the sale occurs.
Limitation based on amount of tax.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the sum of the regular tax and the tax imposed by section 55 for such taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27 and 29.
Carryback and carryover of excess credits.-- ``(A) In general.--If the sum of the credit allowed by this section for a taxable year plus the amount of the carryforwards to the taxable year under this paragraph exceeds the limitation imposed by paragraph (3) for such taxable year (in this paragraph referred to as the `excess credit year'), such excess shall be-- ``(i) a carryback to each of the 3 taxable years preceding the excess credit year, and ``(ii) a carryforward to each of the 20 taxable years following the excess credit year, and, subject to the limitation imposed by paragraph (3), shall be taken into account under subsection (a).
Amount carried to each year.-- ``(i) Entire amount carried to first year.--The entire amount of the excess credit for an excess credit year shall be carried first to the earliest of the 23 taxable years to which (by reason of this paragraph) such credit may be carried.
Amount carried to other 22 years.-- The amount of the excess credit for the excess credit year shall be carried to each of the other 22 years to the extent that such excess credit may not be taken into account under subsection (a) for a prior taxable year because of the limitation imposed by paragraph (3) of this subsection.
Definition of Indian Oil or Gas.--For purposes of this section, the term `Indian oil or gas' means oil or gas that is produced-- ``(1) from oil or gas deposits that are either held by the United States in trust for the benefit of any Indian tribe or individual Indian or held by any Indian tribe or individual Indian subject to a restriction imposed by the United States against alienation, and ``(2) pursuant to a lease or other agreement issued or approved by the United States.
Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Indian tribe.--The term `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, pueblo, community, rancheria, colony, or other group that owns land or interests in land the title to which is held in trust by the United States or is subject to a restriction against alienation imposed by the United States, including-- ``(A) any Native village (as defined in section 3(c) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1602(c), whether organized traditionally or pursuant to the Act of June 18, 1934 (commonly known as the Indian Reorganization Act (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes)), and ``(B) any Regional Corporation or Village Corporation (as defined in sections 3(g) and 3(j) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1602(g) and 1602(j)), respectively), that is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States under Federal law to Indians because of their status as Indians.
Individual indian.--The term `individual Indian' means any individual member of an Indian tribe or Alaska Native who owns land or interests in land the title to which is held in trust by the United States or is subject to a restriction against alienation imposed by the United States.
Computation of inflation adjustment factor and reference price.--The inflation adjustment factor and the reference price for any calendar year shall be determined as provided in section 29(d)(2), except such section shall be applied by substituting `calendar year 2001' for `calendar year 1979' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Other definitions.--The terms `barrel-of-oil equivalent' and `barrel' have the meanings given such terms by paragraphs (5) and (6) of section 29(d), respectively.
Certain rules made applicable.--For purposes of this section, paragraphs (3), (7), and (8) of section 29(d) shall apply.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply with respect to Indian oil or gas which is produced after December 31, 2001, except that this section shall not apply with respect to any Indian oil or gas for which a credit is allowed under section 29 for the taxable year.''.
Alternative Minimum Tax Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Alternative minimum tax.--Section 59(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (A) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In the case of any taxpayer for whom the Indian oil or gas credit is allowable under section 29A for the taxable year, alternative minimum taxable income shall not include any income derived from production for which a credit is allowed under section 29A.
'', and (B) by inserting ``29A,'' before ``30A'' in the heading thereof.
Regular tax.--Section 55(c)(1) of such Code is amended by inserting ``the Indian oil or gas credit allowable under section 29A,'' after ``under section 27(b),''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 29 the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit for producing Indian oil or gas.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2001, and to carrybacks from such years.