This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Adjustment Assistance for Farmers Act''.
TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR FARMERS.
In General.--Title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2251 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 6--ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR FARMERS ``SEC.
``In this chapter: ``(1) Agricultural commodity.--The term `agricultural commodity' means any agricultural commodity (including livestock, fish, or harvested seafood) in its raw or natural state.
Agricultural commodity producer.--The term `agricultural commodity producer' means any person who is engaged in the production and sale of an agricultural commodity in the United States and who owns or shares the ownership and risk of loss of the agricultural commodity.
Contributed importantly.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `contributed importantly' means a cause which is important but not necessarily more important than any other cause.
Determination of contributed importantly.-- The determination of whether imports of articles like or directly competitive with an agricultural commodity with respect to which the petition under this chapter was filed contributed importantly to a decline in the price of the agricultural commodity shall be made by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Duly authorized representative.--The term `duly authorized representative' means an association of agricultural commodity producers.
National average price.--The term `national average price' means the national average price paid to an agricultural commodity producer for an agricultural commodity in a marketing year as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
In General.--A petition for a certification of eligibility to apply for adjustment assistance under this chapter may be filed with the Secretary by a group of agricultural commodity producers or by their duly authorized representative.
Upon receipt of the petition, the Secretary shall promptly publish notice in the Federal Register that the Secretary has received the petition and initiated an investigation.
Hearings.--If the petitioner, or any other person found by the Secretary to have a substantial interest in the proceedings, submits not later than 10 days after the date of the Secretary's publication under subsection (a) a request for a hearing, the Secretary shall provide for a public hearing and afford such interested persons an opportunity to be present, to produce evidence, and to be heard.
Group Eligibility Requirements.--The Secretary shall certify a group of agricultural commodity producers as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance under this chapter if the Secretary determines-- ``(1) that the national average price for the agricultural commodity, or a class of goods within the agricultural commodity, produced by the group for the most recent marketing year for which the national average price is available is less than 80 percent of the average of the national average price for such agricultural commodity, or such class of goods, for the 5 marketing years preceding the most recent marketing year; and ``(2) that increases in imports of articles like or directly competitive with the agricultural commodity, or class of goods within the agricultural commodity, produced by the group contributed importantly to the decline in price described in paragraph (1).
Special Rule for Qualified Subsequent Years.--A group of agricultural commodity producers certified as eligible under section 293 shall be eligible to apply for assistance under this chapter in any qualified year after the year the group is first certified, if the Secretary determines that-- ``(1) the national average price for the agricultural commodity, or class of goods within the agricultural commodity, produced by the group for the most recent marketing year for which the national average price is available is equal to or less than the price determined under subsection (c)(1); and ``(2) the requirements of subsection (c)(2) are met.
Determination of Qualified Year and Commodity.--In this chapter: ``(1) Qualified year.--The term `qualified year', with respect to a group of agricultural commodity producers certified as eligible under section 293, means each consecutive year after the year in which the group is certified that the Secretary makes the determination under subsection (c) or (d), as the case may be.
Classes of goods within a commodity.--In any case in which there are separate classes of goods within an agricultural commodity, the Secretary shall treat each class as a separate commodity in determining group eligibility, the national average price, and level of imports under this section and section 296.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date on which a petition is filed under section 292, but in any event not later than 60 days after that date, the Secretary shall determine whether the petitioning group meets the requirements of section 292 (c) or (d), as the case may be and shall, if the group meets the requirements, issue a certification of eligibility to apply for assistance under this chapter covering agricultural commodity producers in any group that meet the requirements.
Each certification shall specify the date on which eligibility under this chapter begins.
Notice.--Upon making a determination on a petition, the Secretary shall promptly publish a summary of the determination in the Federal Register, together with the Secretary's reasons for making the determination.
Termination of Certification.--Whenever the Secretary determines, with respect to any certification of eligibility under this chapter, that the decline in price for the agricultural commodity covered by the certification is no longer attributable to the conditions described in section 292, the Secretary shall terminate such certification and promptly cause notice of such termination to be published in the Federal Register, together with the Secretary's reasons for making such determination.
STUDY BY SECRETARY WHEN INTERNATIONAL TRADE COMMISSION BEGINS INVESTIGATION.
In General.--Whenever the International Trade Commission (in this chapter referred to as the `Commission') begins an investigation under section 202 with respect to an agricultural commodity, the Commission shall immediately notify the Secretary of the investigation.
Upon receipt of the notification, the Secretary shall immediately conduct a study of-- ``(1) the number of agricultural commodity producers producing a like or directly competitive agricultural commodity who have been or are likely to be certified as eligible for adjustment assistance under this chapter, and ``(2) the extent to which the adjustment of such producers to the import competition may be facilitated through the use of existing programs.
Report.--Not later than 15 days after the day on which the Commission makes its report under section 202(f), the Secretary shall submit a report to the President setting forth the findings of the study under subsection (a).
Upon making his report to the President, the Secretary shall also promptly make it public (with the exception of information which the Secretary determines to be confidential) and shall have a summary of it published in the Federal Register.
BENEFIT INFORMATION TO AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY PRODUCERS.
In General.--The Secretary shall provide full information to producers about the benefit allowances, training, and other employment services available under this title and about the petition and application procedures, and the appropriate filing dates, for such allowances, training, and services.
The Secretary shall provide whatever assistance is necessary to enable groups to prepare petitions or applications for program benefits under this title.
Notice of Benefits.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall mail written notice of the benefits available under this chapter to each agricultural commodity producer that the Secretary has reason to believe is covered by a certification made under this chapter.
Other notice.--The Secretary shall publish notice of the benefits available under this chapter to agricultural commodity producers that are covered by each certification made under this chapter in newspapers of general circulation in the areas in which such producers reside.
QUALIFYING REQUIREMENTS FOR AGRICULTURAL COMMODITY PRODUCERS.
In General.--Payment of a trade adjustment allowance shall be made to an adversely affected agricultural commodity producer covered by a certification under this chapter who files an application for such allowance within 90 days after the date on which the Secretary makes a determination and issues a certification of eligibility under section 293, if the following conditions are met: ``(1) The producer submits to the Secretary sufficient information to establish the amount of agricultural commodity covered by the application filed under subsection (a) that was produced by the producer in the most recent year.
The producer certifies that the producer has not received cash benefits under any provision of this title other than this chapter.
The producer's net farm income (as determined by the Secretary) for the most recent year is less than the producer's net farm income for the latest year in which no adjustment assistance was received by the producer under this chapter.
The producer certifies that the producer has met with an Extension Service employee or agent to obtain, at no cost to the producer, information and technical assistance that will assist the producer in adjusting to import competition with respect to the adversely affected agricultural commodity, including-- ``(A) information regarding the feasibility and desirability of substituting 1 or more alternative commodities for the adversely affected agricultural commodity; and ``(B) technical assistance that will improve the competitiveness of the production and marketing of the adversely affected agricultural commodity by the producer, including yield and marketing improvements.
Amount of Cash Benefits.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of section 298, an adversely affected agricultural commodity producer described in subsection (a) shall be entitled to adjustment assistance under this chapter in an amount equal to the product of-- ``(A) one-half of the difference between-- ``(i) an amount equal to 80 percent of the average of the national average price of the agricultural commodity covered by the application described in subsection (a) for the 5 marketing years preceding the most recent marketing year, and ``(ii) the national average price of the agricultural commodity for the most recent marketing year, and ``(B) the amount of the agricultural commodity produced by the agricultural commodity producer in the most recent marketing year.
Special rule for subsequent qualified years.--The amount of cash benefits for a qualified year shall be determined in the same manner as cash benefits are determined under paragraph (1) except that the average national price of the agricultural commodity shall be determined under paragraph (1)(A)(i) by using the 5-marketing-year period used to determine the amount of cash benefits for the first certification.
Maximum Amount of Cash Assistance.--The maximum amount of cash benefits an agricultural commodity producer may receive in any 12- month period shall not exceed $10,000.
Limitations on Other Assistance.--An agricultural commodity producer entitled to receive a cash benefit under this chapter-- ``(1) shall not be eligible for any other cash benefit under this title, and ``(2) shall be entitled to employment services and training benefits under sections 235 and 236.
FRAUD AND RECOVERY OF OVERPAYMENTS.
In General.-- ``(1) Repayment.--If the Secretary, or a court of competent jurisdiction, determines that any person has received any payment under this chapter to which the person was not entitled, such person shall be liable to repay such amount to the Secretary, except that the Secretary may waive such repayment if the Secretary determines, in accordance with guidelines prescribed by the Secretary, that-- ``(A) the payment was made without fault on the part of such person; and ``(B) requiring such repayment would be contrary to equity and good conscience.
Recovery of overpayment.--Unless an overpayment is otherwise recovered, or waived under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall recover the overpayment by deductions from any sums payable to such person under this chapter.
False Statements.--If the Secretary, or a court of competent jurisdiction, determines that a person-- ``(1) knowingly has made, or caused another to make, a false statement or representation of a material fact, or ``(2) knowingly has failed, or caused another to fail, to disclose a material fact, and, as a result of such false statement or representation, or of such nondisclosure, such person has received any payment under this chapter to which the person was not entitled, such person shall, in addition to any other penalty provided by law, be ineligible for any further payments under this chapter.
Notice and Determination.--Except for overpayments determined by a court of competent jurisdiction, no repayment may be required, and no deduction may be made, under this section until a determination under subsection (a)(1) by the Secretary has been made, notice of the determination and an opportunity for a fair hearing thereon has been given to the person concerned, and the determination has become final.
Payment to Treasury.--Any amount recovered under this section shall be returned to the Treasury of the United States.
Penalties.--Whoever makes a false statement of a material fact knowing it to be false, or knowingly fails to disclose a material fact, for the purpose of obtaining or increasing for himself or for any other person any payment authorized to be furnished under this chapter shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 1 year, or both.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated and there are appropriated to the Department of Agriculture not to exceed $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006 to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
Proportionate Reduction.--If in any year, the amount appropriated under this chapter is insufficient to meet the requirements for adjustment assistance payable under this chapter, the amount of assistance payable under this chapter shall be reduced proportionately.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents for title II of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the items relating to chapter 5 the following: ``Chapter 6--Adjustment Assistance for Farmers ``Sec.
Study by Secretary when International Trade Commission begins investigation.
Benefit information to agricultural commodity producers.
Qualifying requirements for agricultural commodity producers.
Fraud and recovery of overpayments.