ESTABLISHMENT OF POSITION OF UNDER SECRETARY OF DEFENSE FOR SPACE, INTELLIGENCE, AND INFORMATION.
Authority of Secretary of Defense To Establish Position.--Upon the direction of the President, the Secretary of Defense may, subject to subsection (b), establish in the Office of the Secretary of Defense the position of Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information.
If the position is so established, the Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information shall perform duties and exercise powers as set forth under section 137 of title 10, United States Code, as amended by subsection (d).
Deadline for Exercise of Authority.--The Secretary may not exercise the authority in subsection (a) after December 31, 2003.
Notice of Exercise of Authority.--If the authority in subsection (a) is exercised, the Secretary shall immediately notify Congress of the establishment of the position of Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information, together with the date on which the position is established.
Nature of Position.-- (1) In general.--Effective as of the date provided for in paragraph (7), chapter 4 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating section 137 as section 139a and by transferring such section (as so redesignated) within such chapter so as to appear after section 139; and (B) by inserting after section 136 the following new section 137: ``Sec.
Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information ``(a) There is an Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information, appointed from civilian life by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense, the Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information shall perform such duties and exercise such powers relating to the space, intelligence, and information programs and activities of the Department of Defense as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe.
The duties and powers prescribed for the Under Secretary shall include the following: ``(1) In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Policy, the establishment of policy on space.
In coordination with the Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition, Technology, and Logistics, the acquisition of space systems.
The deployment and use of space assets.
The oversight of research, development, acquisition, launch, and operation of space, intelligence, and information assets.
The coordination of military intelligence activities within the Department.
The coordination of intelligence activities of the Department and the intelligence community in order to meet the long-term intelligence requirements of the United States.
The coordination of space activities of the Department with commercial and civilian space activities.
The Secretary of Defense shall designate the Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information as the Chief Information Officer of the Department of Defense under section 3506(a)(2)(B) of title 44.
The Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information takes precedence in the Department of Defense after the Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness.''.
Additional assistant secretary of defense.--Section 138(a) of that title is amended by striking ``nine Assistant Secretaries of Defense'' and inserting ``ten Assistant Secretaries of Defense''.
Duties of assistant secretaries of defense for space, intelligence, and information.--Section 138(b) of that title is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Two of the Assistant Secretaries shall have as their principal duties supervision of activities relating to space, intelligence, and information.
The Assistant Secretaries shall each report to the Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information in the performance of such duties.''.
Conforming amendments.--Section 131(b) of that title is amended-- (A) by redesignating paragraphs (6) through (11) as paragraphs (7) through (12), respectively; and (B) by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph (6): ``(6) The Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information.''.
Pay levels.--(A) Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after ``Under Secretary of Defense for Personnel and Readiness'' the following: ``Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information.''.
Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended in the item relating to Assistant Secretaries of Defense by striking ``(9)'' and inserting ``(10)''.
Clerical amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 4 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking the item relating to section 137 and inserting the following new item: ``137.
Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information.
''; and (B) by inserting after the item relating to section 139 the following new item: ``139a.
Director of Defense Research and Engineering.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall take effect as of the date specified in the notification provided by the Secretary of Defense to Congress under subsection (c) of the exercise of the authority in subsection (a).
Report.--(1) Not later than 30 days before an exercise of the authority provided in subsection (a), the President shall submit to Congress a report on the proposed organization of the office of the Under Secretary of Defense for Space, Intelligence, and Information.
If the Secretary of Defense has not exercised the authority granted in subsection (a) on the date that is one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives on that date a report describing the actions taken by the Secretary to address the problems in the management and organization of the Department of Defense for space activities that are identified by the Commission To Assess United States National Security Space Management and Organization in the report of the Commission submitted under section 1623 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (Public Law 106-65; 113 United States Statutes at Large 815).
RESPONSIBILITY FOR SPACE PROGRAMS.
In General.--Part IV of subtitle A of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 134 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 135--SPACE PROGRAMS ``Sec.
Responsibility for space programs.
Responsibility for space programs ``(a) Responsibility of Secretary of Air Force as Executive Agent.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall be the executive agent of the Department of Defense for functions of the Department designated by the Secretary of Defense with respect to the following: ``(1) Planning for the acquisition programs, projects, and activities of the Department that relate to space.
Efficient execution of the programs, projects, and activities.
Responsibility of Under Secretary of Air Force as Acquisition Executive.--The Under Secretary of the Air Force shall be the acquisition executive of the Department of the Air Force for the programs, projects, and activities referred to in subsection (a).
Responsibility of Under Secretary of Air Force as Director of NRO.--The Under Secretary of the Air Force shall act as the Director of the National Reconnaissance Office.
Coordination of Duties of Under Secretary of Air Force.--In carrying out duties under subsections (b) and (c), the Under Secretary of the Air Force shall coordinate the space programs, projects, and activities of the Department of Defense and the programs, projects, and activities of the National Reconnaissance Office.
Space Career Field.--(1) The Under Secretary of the Air Force shall establish and implement policies and procedures to develop a cadre of technically competent officers with the capability to develop space doctrine, concepts of space operations, and space systems for the Department of the Air Force.
The Secretary of the Air Force shall assign to the commander of Air Force Space Command primary responsibility for-- ``(A) establishing and implementing education and training programs for space programs, projects, and activities of the Department of the Air Force; and ``(B) management of the space career field under paragraph (1).
Joint Program Management.--The Under Secretary of the Air Force shall take appropriate actions to ensure that, to maximum extent practicable, Army, Navy, Marine Corps, and Air Force personnel are assigned, on a joint duty assignment basis, as follows: ``(1) To carry out the space development and acquisition programs of the Department of Defense; and ``(2) To the Office of the National Security Space Architect.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of such subtitle and at the beginning of part IV of such subtitle are amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 134 the following new item: ``135.
MAJOR FORCE PROGRAM CATEGORY FOR SPACE PROGRAMS.
Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense shall create a major force program category for space programs for purposes of the future- years defense program under section 221 of title 10, United States Code.
Commencement.--The category created under subsection (a) shall be included in each future-years defense program submitted to Congress under section 221 of title 10, United States Code, in fiscal years after fiscal year 2002.
ASSESSMENT OF IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS OF COMMISSION TO ASSESS UNITED STATES NATIONAL SECURITY SPACE MANAGEMENT AND ORGANIZATION.
Comptroller General Assessment.--The Comptroller General shall carry out an assessment of the progress made by the Department of Defense in implementing the recommendations of the Commission To Assess United States National Security Space Management and Organization as contained in the report of the Commission submitted under section 1623 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (Public Law 106-65; 113 United States Statutes at Large 815).
Reports.--Not later than February 15 of each of 2002 and 2003, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the assessment carried out under subsection (a).
Each report shall set forth the results of the assessment as of the date of such report.
GRADE OF COMMANDER OF AIR FORCE SPACE COMMAND.
In General.--Chapter 845 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Commander of Air Force Space Command ``(a) Grade.--The officer serving as commander of the Air Force Space Command shall, while so serving, have the grade of general.
Limitation on Concurrent Command Assignments.--The officer serving as commander of the Air Force Space Command may not, while so serving, serve as commander-in-chief of the United States Space Command (or any successor combatant command with responsibility for space) or as commander of the United States element of the North American Air Defense Command.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``8584.
Commander of Air Force Space Command.''.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING GRADE OF OFFICER ASSIGNED AS COMMANDER OF UNITED STATES SPACE COMMAND.
It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of Defense should assign the best qualified officer of the Army, Marine Corps, or Air Force with the grade of general, or of the Navy with the grade of admiral, to the position of Commander of the United States Space Command.