This Act may be cited as the ``Military Recruiter Secondary Schools Access Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The combined effects of the strongest economy in 40 years, the lowest unemployment rate since the establishment of an all-volunteer force for the Armed Forces, and a declining propensity on the part of America's youth to serve in the military make the recruitment of persons for the Armed Forces unusually challenging.
For the recruitment of high quality personnel, each of the Armed Forces faces intense competition from the other branches of the Armed Forces, the private sector, and postsecondary educational institutions.
It is becoming increasingly difficult for the Armed Forces to meet their respective recruiting goals.
Despite a variety of innovative approaches taken by recruiters and the extensive programs of benefits that are available for recruits, recruiters have to devote extraordinary time and effort to fill monthly requirements for immediate accessions.
A number of local educational agencies have denied recruiters for the Armed Forces access to secondary school students, or to student directory information about secondary school students, of those agencies.
In 1999, there were 4,515 instances of denial of access in the case of the Army, 4,364 instances in the case of the Navy, 4,884 instances in the case of the Marine Corps, and 5,465 instances in the case of the Air Force.
As of the beginning of 2000, local educational agencies operating nearly one-fourth of all secondary schools nationwide did not release student directory information to the Armed Forces for recruiting purposes.
In testimony presented to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate, military recruiters have stated that the single biggest obstacle to carrying out their recruiting mission for new enlisted accessions is the denial of access to directory information about secondary school students.
The denial to military recruiters of direct access to secondary school students and the denial of access to directory information about those students unfairly harms the students themselves, since students are thereby prevented from receiving full information on the educational and training incentives offered by the Armed Forces, thus impairing the career decisionmaking process for the students by limiting the availability of complete information on their options.
The denial of access for Armed Forces recruiters to secondary school students or to student directory information ultimately undermines the national defense by making it more difficult for the Armed Forces to recruit young Americans in the quantity and of the quality necessary for maintaining the readiness of the Armed Forces to provide for the national defense.
LOCAL EDUCATIONAL AGENCIES DENYING EQUAL ACCESS TO SECONDARY SCHOOLS FOR MILITARY RECRUITING PURPOSES.
Denial of Educational Assistance Funds.--Section 503 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Denial of Federal Educational Assistance Funds to Local Educational Agencies Denying Equal Access to Recruiters.--(1) Section 983 of this title (other than subsection (a) of that section) shall apply to each local educational agency included on the list maintained under paragraph (2) as if the local educational agency were an institution of higher education described in subsection (b) of that section.
The Secretary of Defense shall maintain a list of local educational agencies that are required under paragraph (3) to be listed as local educational agencies that deny recruiting access to the armed forces.
(A) If a local educational agency denies a request by a representative of an armed force for recruiting access to secondary school students, the Secretary concerned shall provide for an officer of that armed force to meet with representatives of that local educational agency in person, at the offices of that agency, for the purpose of attempting to arrange for recruiting access.
The Secretary shall seek to have such meeting occur not later than 120 days after the date of the denial of the request.
If, after a meeting under subparagraph (A) with representatives of a local educational agency that has denied a request by a representative of an armed force for recruiting access to secondary school students or (if such a meeting cannot be arranged within 120 days of such denial) after the end of such 120-day period, the Secretary of Defense determines that the agency continues to deny recruiting access, the Secretary shall transmit to the Chief Executive of the State in which the local educational agency is located a notification of the denial of recruiting access and a request for assistance in obtaining such access.
The notification shall be transmitted within 60 days after the date of the determination.
The Secretary shall provide to the Secretary of Education a copy of such notification and any other communication between the Secretary and a Chief Executive with respect to such access.
If a local educational agency continues to deny recruiting access one year after the date of the transmittal of a notification regarding that agency under subparagraph (B), the Secretary-- ``(i) shall determine whether the agency denies recruiting access to at least two of the armed forces (other than the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy); and ``(ii) upon making an affirmative determination, shall include the agency on the list maintained under paragraph (2).
In this subsection: ``(A) The term `local educational agency' includes the governing body of a person or entity owning a private secondary educational institution.
The term `recruiting access' means access requested by the Department of Defense, as described in subsection (c), that the Department be provided the same access to secondary school students, and to directory information concerning such students, for military recruiting purposes as is provided generally to post-secondary educational institutions or to prospective employers of those students.
The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Republic of Palau, and the United States Virgin Islands.''.
Transition Provisions.--(1) In the case of a local educational agency that, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, is included on a list maintained by the Department of Defense as an educational agency that denies recruiting access-- (A) the local educational agency shall be deemed to have first denied recruiting access on that date; (B) the meeting required under paragraph (3)(A) of section 503(d) of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), shall be made by an officer of any armed force that is appropriate under that paragraph, as determined by the Secretary of Defense; (C) any notification required under paragraph (3)(B) of such section shall be transmitted within 90 days (instead of 60 days) after the Secretary of Defense makes a determination under that paragraph; and (D) paragraph (1) of such section shall not apply to the agency unless and until the date on which the Secretary of Defense is required under paragraph (3)(C) of that section to include the agency on the list of local educational agencies that deny recruiting access to the Armed Forces.
For purposes of this subsection, the terms ``local educational agency'' and ``recruiting access'' have the meanings given those terms in section 503(d)(4) of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)).
Technical Amendments.--Section 503 of title 10, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), is further amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by inserting ``Recruiting Campaigns.--'' after ``(a)''; (2) in subsection (b), by inserting ``Compilation of Directory Information.--'' after ``(b)''; and (3) in subsection (c), by inserting ``Recruiting Access to Secondary Schools.--'' after ``(c)''; SEC.
REPEAL OF EXCEPTION FOR STUDENT FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FROM BAN ON FEDERAL GRANTS AND CONTRACTS TO INSTITUTIONS OF HIGHER EDUCATION DENYING ACCESS TO ROTC OR MILITARY RECRUITERS.
Section 8120 of the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 2000 (Public Law 106-79; 113 United States Statutes at Large 1260; 10 United States Code 983 note), is repealed.