This Act may be cited as the ``Bombing Prevention Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the number of criminal bombing incidents in the United States has doubled since 1988; (2) each year, hundreds of millions of pounds of explosives are purchased without a permit being required; (3) about one-third of the bombs used in crime in recent years have contained black powder or smokeless powder as filler; (4) the terrorist bombing of the World Trade Center, a series of bombings in western New York State, the bombing of the Federal building in Oklahoma City, and the bombing in Centennial Park in Atlanta demonstrate the grave dangers of bomb attacks; (5) effective regulation of interstate commerce in explosives is possible only with changes in the regulatory framework; (6) explosive materials, by their nature, are composed of numerous different substances, many of which have travelled in interstate or foreign commerce; and (7) the protection of the safety and property of the citizenry, including the infrastructure vital to the conduct of interstate and foreign commerce, requires more careful regulation of explosives transactions.
PERMITS FOR PURCHASE OF EXPLOSIVES.
In General.--Section 842 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by amending subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (a)(3) to read as follows: ``(A) to transport, ship, cause to be transported, or receive any explosive materials in interstate or foreign commerce; or ``(B) to distribute explosive materials in interstate or foreign commerce to any person other than a licensee or permittee.
''; and (2) in subsection (b)-- (A) by adding ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1); (B) by striking ``; or'' at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a period; and (C) by striking paragraph (3).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to conduct engaged in after the 18-month period that begins with the date of the enactment of this Act.
Regulations.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall issue final regulations with respect to the amendments made by subsection (a), which shall take effect 18 months after such date of enactment.
Notice to states.--On the issuance of regulations pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury shall notify the States of the regulations so that the States may consider revising their explosives laws.
LICENSES AND USER PERMITS.
Section 843(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``, including fingerprints and a photograph of the applicant'' before the period at the end of the 1st sentence; and (2) by striking the 2nd sentence and inserting the following: ``Each applicant for a license shall pay for each license a fee established by the Secretary that shall not exceed $300.
Each applicant for a permit shall pay for each permit a fee established by the Secretary that shall not exceed $100.''.
USE OF NATIONAL INSTANT CRIMINAL BACKGROUND CHECK SYSTEM TO INVESTIGATE APPLICANTS FOR LICENSES AND PERMITS.
The Secretary of the Treasury may use the national instant criminal background check system established under section 103 of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act to investigate each applicant for a license or permit under chapter 40 of title 18, United States Code.
REQUIREMENTS FOR PURCHASES OF BLACK POWDER AND SMOKELESS POWDER.
In General.--Section 845 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(4), by striking ``and components thereof''; (2) in subsection (a)(5), by striking ``commercially manufactured black powder in quantities not to exceed fifty pounds,''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Except in the case of section 842(f), and subsections (d), (e), (f), (g), (h), (i), (n), and (o) of section 844, this chapter shall not apply to commercially manufactured black powder or smokeless powder in quantities not to exceed 5 pounds.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 926 of such title is amended by striking subsection (c).
Pursuant to its authority under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, the United States Sentencing Commission shall promulgate amendments to the sentencing guidelines to appropriately enhance the penalties for a violation of any provision of chapter 40 of title 18, United States Code, the penalties for which are not as severe as the penalties for a comparable violation of chapter 44 of such title 18, so that the penalties for the violation of the provision of such chapter 40 are the same as the penalties for a comparable violation of such chapter 44.
FORFEITURE OF INSTRUMENTALITIES OF EXPLOSIVES OFFENSES.
Civil Forfeiture.--Section 981(a)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(G) Any property, real or personal, involved in a violation of chapter 40 (relating to importation, manufacture, distribution, and storage of explosive materials), or in a conspiracy to commit such a violation, and any other property traceable to such property.''.
Criminal Forfeiture.--Section 982(a) of such title is amended by inserting the following: ``(6) The court, in imposing a sentence on a person convicted of a violation of chapter 40 or of conspiring to commit such a violation, shall order the person to forfeit to the United States any property, real or personal, involved in the violation or in the conspiracy, and any other property traceable to such property.