This Act may be cited as the ``South Dakota Tribal Nursing Facilities Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The highest rate of poverty in South Dakota occurs on Indian reservations.
According to the 2000 United States Census, nine counties that encompass Indian reservations are among the 100 poorest counties in the United States.
There are no nursing facilities on the Indian reservations in South Dakota.
The lack of nursing facilities on the larger Indian reservations is a barrier that prevents Indian elders from accessing long-term health care.
The elderly poor constitute a growing portion of the membership of the Indian tribes and tribal organizations of South Dakota.
The great distances between Indian reservations and off-reservation nursing facilities-- (A) deter the Indian elderly from using such facilities; and (B) if the Indian elderly do use such facilities, prevent visitation from family and relatives that is essential to the well-being of the Indian elderly.
There is a critical need for nursing facilities on the Indian reservations located in South Dakota to meet the elderly and assisted-living needs of tribal members.
A South Dakota law imposes a moratorium on the licensing of new nursing facilities in the State.
The medicaid program requires State licensure of nursing facilities to qualify such facility for reimbursement for care provided to individuals eligible for medical assistance under such program.
The impact of the South Dakota moratorium on nursing facility licensure and the requirements of the medicaid program prevent Indian tribes and tribal organizations in South Dakota from developing and operating these badly needed facilities on Indian reservations.
It is the responsibility and goal of the United States, in the fulfillment of its responsibility to provide and facilitate adequate health care for elderly and needy members of Indian tribes and tribal organizations, to protect the right of Indian tribes and tribal organizations to provide nursing facilities for those members.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are, notwithstanding any impediment imposed by State law-- (1) to facilitate the development and operation of nursing facilities that are owned or operated by an Indian tribe or tribal organization on Indian reservations that are located in the State of South Dakota; and (2) to protect the right of members of Indian tribes and tribal organizations to access health care provided by nursing facilities in the exercise of those members' entitlement to medical assistance under the medicaid program.
ELIGIBILITY OF CERTAIN NURSING FACILITIES FOR REIMBURSEMENT UNDER THE MEDICAID PROGRAM.
In General.--Notwithstanding any provision of title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes), an applicable nursing facility shall be eligible for reimbursement for medical assistance provided under such title and shall be deemed to be a facility of the Indian Health Service for purposes of the third sentence of section 1905(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396d(b)) if and for so long as-- (1) the facility meets all of the conditions and requirements which are applicable generally to such facilities under such title (other than any State requirement relating to the operation of such a facility under such title); and (2) has in effect a plan approved under subsection (b)(2).
Submission and Approval of Plans.-- (1) Submission.--An Indian tribe or tribal organization that desires an applicable nursing facility to be reimbursed through the operation of this section shall submit a plan to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may specify, including evidence that-- (A) such facility is licensed by the Indian tribe or tribal organization; and (B) the State, the Indian tribe, or the tribal organization has agreed to perform the functions of the State under section 1919 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396r).
Approval.--Not later than the date that is 90 days after the date on which a plan is submitted under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall approve or disapprove such plan or shall notify the facility of the additional information needed for approval or disapproval.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Applicable nursing facility.--The term ``applicable nursing facility'' means an existing or planned nursing facility (as defined in section 1919(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396r(a))) that-- (A) is owned or operated by an Indian tribe or tribal organization; (B) is located (or will be located) in the State of South Dakota; and (C) is not able to obtain a State license only as a result of a State imposed moratorium on the issuance of such licenses.
Indian tribe and tribal organization.--The terms ``Indian tribe'' and ``tribal organization'' have the meanings given such terms under section 4 of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.