This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan Campaign Practices Commission Act of 1996''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Bipartisan Commission on Campaign Practices'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall study the laws and regulations that affect how campaigns for Federal office are conducted and may make recommendations for change.
In studying Federal campaign practices, the Commission shall consider-- (1) whether too much or too little money is spent trying to influence campaigns for Federal office and whether the funds that are spent are sufficiently disclosed; (2) whether the current laws (including regulations) governing campaigns for Federal office encourage or discourage those most qualified to hold office from seeking it; (3) whether the existing system of financing campaigns for Federal office promotes trust and confidence in the political process among the electorate; (4) whether the rules governing access to media ensure that the electorate has the greatest possible opportunity to be informed of candidates' positions on the issues; and (5) such other matters as the Commission considers appropriate.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members of the private sector, as follows: (1) Two shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two shall be appointed by the President.
One shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
One shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
A chairperson shall be appointed in accordance with subsection (b).
Chairperson.-- (1) Selection.--Within 7 days after all the members described in section 3(a) (1) through (5) are appointed, those members shall meet and by majority vote select a chairperson.
Failure to make selection.--If, by the date that is 30 days after the date of the meeting described in subsection (b), the office of chairperson is still vacant, all current members of the Commission shall be discharged from further service as members of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Quorum.--Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and any decision of the Commission shall require the affirmative vote of 6 members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson or at the request of 6 members of the Commission.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; SERVICES.
Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the chairperson, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classifications and General Schedule pay rates, may appoint such staff personnel as the chairperson considers necessary and procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
RECOMMENDATION; FAST TRACK PROCEDURES.
Report.--Not later than 30 days after the convening of the 105th Congress, the Commission shall submit to Congress a report describing the study conducted under section 3.
Recommendations.--The report under subsection (a) may include any recommendations for changes in the laws (including regulations) governing the conduct of Federal campaigns, including any changes in the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, to which 6 or more members of the Commission may agree.
Preparation of Bills.--If 7 or more members concur on 1 or more recommendations for changes in the way campaigns for Federal office are conducted, the members agreeing on each such recommendation shall prepare for each a bill that would implement the recommendation, and the implementing bill shall be submitted with the report under subsection (a).
Consideration by Congress.--Each implementing bill submitted with the report under subsection (a) shall be given expedited consideration under the same provisions and in the same way as an implementing bill for a trade agreement under section 151 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191).
The Commission shall cease to exist 30 days after submission of the report under section 6.
There is authorized to be appropriated $750,000 to carry out this Act.