This Act may be cited as the ``Telecommunications Policy Coordination Act of 1995''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Committee'' means the Advisory Committee on Telecommunications Policy established under section 10.
The term ``Office'' means the Office of Telecommunications Policy established in section 3.
The term ``Deputy Director'' means the Deputy Director of the Office appointed under section 5(b).
The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office appointed under section 5(a).
There is hereby established in the Executive Office of the President the Office of Telecommunications Policy.
In General.--The Office, acting through the Director, shall-- (1) take such action as may be necessary to provide for the preparation of national telecommunications policy options; (2) serve as the principal advisor to the President in matters relating to telecommunications issues and policies; (3) act as the arbiter of disputes and differences which may arise between or among Government agencies in connection with the development and implementation of national telecommunications policies; (4) communicate the views of Government agencies, as well as the views of the President, with respect to telecommunications matters to the Federal Communications Commission, and communicate the views of the President and Government agencies (other than the Commission) to the Congress; (5) monitor the development of new telecommunications technologies, study the effects of new telecommunications facilities, services, and systems, and make recommendations to the President and to the Congress with respect to the introduction of new technologies into the national economy; and (6) perform such other functions vested in the President relating to telecommunications as the President may delegate to the Office.
Effect on FCC Authority.--The authority of the Office under this Act shall not affect the authority of the Federal Communications Commission under the Communications Act of 1934 or the Satellite Communications Act of 1962.
Presidential Regulations.--The functions of the Office under subsection (a) (3) and (4), and the corresponding obligations of other agencies affected thereunder, shall be in accordance with regulations which the President shall prescribe.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF; ORGANIZATION OF OFFICE.
Director.--The head of the Office shall be the Director, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Director shall be paid at a rate equal to the rate of basic pay which is payable from time to time for level II of the Executive Schedule under section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
Deputy Director.--The Office shall have a Deputy Director, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Deputy Director shall be paid at a rate equal to the rate of basic pay which is payable from time to time for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
The Deputy Director shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as the Director may prescribe.
The Deputy Director shall act for, and exercise the powers of, the Director during any absence or disability of the Director or during any vacancy in the office of Director.
Staff.--(1)(A) The Director may appoint not more than two full- time professional staff members who shall perform such duties as the Director may direct.
The Deputy Director may appoint not more than one such staff member who shall perform such duties as the Deputy Director may direct.
The appointments specified in subparagraph (A) may be made without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service.
Such staff member may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
The Director may fix the compensation of not more than one such staff member at a rate not in excess of the maximum rate payable from time to time for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
The remaining staff members appointed under subparagraph (A) may be compensated at a rate fixed by the Director or the Deputy Director, as the case may be, not in excess of the maximum rate payable from time to time for grade GS-16 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
The Director may appoint and fix the pay of such clerical and other support personnel as the Director considers desirable.
Such personnel shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Organization.--The Director may organize the personnel of the Office into such bureaus, divisions, or offices as the Director may consider necessary.
AUTHORITY AND FUNCTIONS OF DIRECTOR.
In General.--The Director shall exercise all the executive and administrative functions of the Office.
Additional Authority.--The Director-- (1) may obtain services as authorized in section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, at rates not to exceed the daily rate prescribed for GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for persons employed intermittently in Federal Government service; (2) may delegate to the Deputy Director, or to any other employee of the Office, any authority of the Director established in this Act; (3) shall prescribe such rules as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act; (4) shall distribute business among any personnel appointed under section 5(c)(2), and among any bureaus, divisions, or offices established under section 5(d); (5) shall administer the use and expenditure of funds available to the Office; (6) shall coordinate and organize the work of the Office in order to promote prompt and efficient disposition of all matters within the jurisdiction of the Office; and (7) shall assure appropriate consumer representation in connection with the development of policy by the Office.
Establishment.--The Director shall establish an advisory committee to be known as the Advisory Committee on Telecommunications Policy.
Membership.--The Committee shall consist of members appointed by the Director from the general public, including representatives of-- (1) various segments of the telecommunications industry, (2) labor organizations involved in such industry, and (3) public interest and consumer organizations.
Functions.--The Committee shall provide advice and recommendations to the Director on matters referred to it by the Director and on such other matters relating to the functions of the Director as it considers appropriate.
Consistent with otherwise applicable law, the Committee may make public any advice or recommendations it has provided to the Director under this subsection.
ANNUAL REPORTS; FCC REPORTS.
Duty To Submit.--The Director shall, not later than the 15th day of February following the end of each fiscal year, commencing with the first complete fiscal year following the effective date provided for in section 9, make a report to the President for submission to the Congress relating to the activities of the Office during the preceding fiscal year.
Contents.--Each report made by the Director under subsection (a) shall-- (1) describe actions taken by the Office in connection with the preparation of national telecommunications policies in accordance with section 4(1); (2) identify and analyze emerging trends in telecommunications; and (3) include such other information as the Director considers appropriate.
Commission Response to Office Views.--In any case in which the Office submits views to the Federal Communications Commission under section 4(a)(4) and the Commission takes any final action after such submittal which is inconsistent with such views, the Commission shall, within twenty days of such final action is taken, submit a report to the President and to the Congress setting forth the reasons therefor.
The provisions of this Act shall take effect ninety days after the date of the enactment of this Act.