This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Law Enforcement Officers Pay Equity and Reform Act of 2002''.
LIMITATION ON PREMIUM PAY.
In General.--Section 5547 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``5545a,''; (2) in subsection (c), by striking ``or 5545a''; and (3) in subsection (d), by striking the period and inserting ``or a criminal investigator who is paid availability pay under section 5545a.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of section 1114 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2002 (Public Law 107-107; 115 United States Statutes at Large 1239).
SEPARATE PAY, EVALUATION, AND PROMOTION SYSTEM FOR FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
Study.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Office of Personnel Management shall study and submit to Congress a report which shall contain its findings and recommendations regarding the need for, and the potential benefits to be derived from, the establishment of a separate pay, evaluation, and promotion system for Federal law enforcement officers.
In carrying out this subsection, the Office of Personnel Management shall take into account the findings and recommendations contained in the September 1993 report of the Office entitled ``A Plan to Establish a New Pay and Job Evaluation System for Federal Law Enforcement Officers''.
Demonstration Project.-- (1) In general.--If, after completing its report under subsection (a), the Office of Personnel Management considers it to be appropriate, the Office shall implement, within 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, a demonstration project to determine whether a separate system for Federal law enforcement officers (as described in subsection (a)) would result in improved Federal personnel management.
Applicable provisions.--Any demonstration project under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with the provisions of chapter 47 of title 5, United States Code, except that a project under this subsection shall not be taken into account for purposes of the numerical limitation under section 4703(d)(2) of such title.
Permanent changes.--Not later than 6 months before the demonstration project's scheduled termination date, the Office of Personnel Management shall submit to Congress-- (A) its evaluation of the system tested under the demonstration project; and (B) recommendations as to whether or not that system (or any aspects of that system) should be continued or extended to other Federal law enforcement officers.
Federal Law Enforcement Officer Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Federal law enforcement officer'' means a law enforcement officer as defined by section 8331 or 8401 of title 5, United States Code.
REPORT ON FEDERAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Office of Personnel Management shall submit a report to Congress on the definition of a Federal law enforcement officer for purposes of pay and benefits under the provisions of title 5, United States Code.
Recommendations.--The report under subsection (a) shall include recommendations of applying pay and benefit provisions (including retirement under chapters 83 and 84 of title 5, United States Code, and premium pay under subchapter V of chapter 55 of that title) to Federal employees who are not defined as law enforcement officers under those provisions.
EMPLOYEE EXCHANGE PROGRAM BETWEEN DEPARTMENT EMPLOYEES AND EMPLOYEES OF STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Employing agency.--The term ``employing agency'' means the Federal, State, or local government agency with which the participating employee was employed before an assignment under the Program.
Participating employee.--The term ``participating employee'' means an employee who is participating in the Program.
Program.--The term ``Program'' means the employee exchange program established under subsection (b).
Establishment.--The President shall establish an employee exchange program between Federal agencies that perform law enforcement functions and agencies of State and local governments that perform law enforcement functions.
Conduct of Program.--The Program shall be conducted in accordance with subchapter VI of chapter 33 of title 5, United States Code.
Qualifications.--An employee of an employing agency who performs law enforcement functions may be selected to participate in the Program if the employee-- (1) has been employed by that employing agency for a period of more than 3 years; (2) has had appropriate training or experience to perform the work required by the assignment; (3) has had an overall rating of satisfactory or higher on performance appraisals from the employing agency during the 3- year period before being assigned to another agency under this section; and (4) agrees to return to the employing agency after completing the assignment for a period not less than the length of the assignment.
Written Agreement.--An employee shall enter into a written agreement regarding the terms and conditions of the assignment before beginning the assignment with another agency.