This Act may be cited as the ``Ukrainian American Veterans Charter Act''.
CHARTER FOR UKRAINIAN AMERICAN VETERANS, INCORPORATED.
In General.--Title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 2103 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 2200--UKRAINIAN AMERICAN VETERANS, INCORPORATED ``Sec.
Duty to maintain corporate and tax-exempt status.
Liability for acts of officers and agents.
Definition ``For purposes of this chapter, `State' includes the District of Columbia and the territories and possessions of the United States.
Organization ``(a) Federal Charter.--The Ukrainian American Veterans, Incorporated (in this chapter, the `corporation'), incorporated in New York, is a federally chartered corporation.
Expiration of Charter.--If the corporation does not comply with any provision of this chapter, the charter granted by this chapter expires.
Purposes ``(a) General.--The purposes of the corporation are as provided in its articles of incorporation and include a commitment, on a national basis, to-- ``(1) preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States; ``(2) commemorate the wars, campaigns, and military actions of the United States in respect, honor, and tribute of the veterans of the Armed Forces; ``(3) promote a greater understanding of, and appreciation for, the sacrifices made by the veterans of the Armed Forces; ``(4) stimulate, to the highest degree possible, the interest of the people of the United States in the problems faced by the veterans of the Armed Forces, their widows, and orphans; ``(5) collect, edit, publish, and preserve records and artifacts of the patriotic service of veterans of the Armed Forces; and ``(6) foster the association of individuals of Ukrainian descent who have served in the Armed Forces.
Corporate Function.--The corporation shall function as an educational, patriotic, civic, and historical organization under the laws of each State in which it is incorporated.
Powers ``The corporation has only the powers provided in its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in each State in which it is incorporated.
Restrictions ``(a) Stock and Dividends.--The corporation may not issue stock or declare or pay a dividend.
Political Activities.--The corporation and any officer or director of the corporation, acting as such officer or director, may not contribute to, support, or otherwise participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation.
Distribution of Income or Assets.--No part of the income or assets of the corporation may inure to the benefit of, or be distributed to, any member, officer, or director of the corporation during the life of this charter.
No provision in this subsection may be construed to prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to the officers and employees of the corporation or the reimbursement of actual necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors of the corporation.
Loans.--The corporation may not make any loan to any member, officer, director, or employee of the corporation.
Claims of Governmental Approval or Authority.--The corporation may not claim the approval of the Congress or the authorization of the Federal Government for any of its activities.
Duty to maintain corporate and tax-exempt status ``(a) Corporate Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as a corporation incorporated under the laws of New York.
Tax-Exempt Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 1 et sequentes).
Records and inspection ``(a) Records.--The corporation shall keep-- ``(1) correct and complete records of account; ``(2) minutes of the proceedings of its members, board of directors, and committees having any of the authority of its board of directors; and ``(3) at its principal office, a record of the names and addresses of its members entitled to vote.
Liability for acts of officers and agents ``The corporation is liable for the acts of its officers and agents within the scope of their authority.
Annual report ``The corporation shall submit an annual report to Congress on the activities of the corporation during the prior fiscal year.
The report shall be submitted at the same time as the report of the audit required by section 10101 of this title.
The report may not be printed as a public document.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters at the beginning of subtitle II of title 36, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 2103 the following new item: ``2200.
Ukrainian American Veterans, Incorporated........... 220001''.