This Act may be cited as the ``Higher Education Accumulation Program Act of 1994''.
DEDUCTION FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO HEAP ACCOUNTS.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
HIGHER EDUCATION ACCUMULATION PROGRAM (HEAP) ACCOUNTS.
Deduction Allowed.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the amount paid in cash for the taxable year by the taxpayer to a HEAP account established for the purpose of accumulating funds to pay the educational expenses of any child of the taxpayer.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum deduction.--The amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) to the taxpayer for any taxable year shall not exceed $5,000 ($2,500 in the case of a married individual filing a separate return) for amounts paid for the benefit of each child of the taxpayer.
In no event shall the amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) to the taxpayer for any taxable year exceed $15,000 ($7,500 in the case of a married individual filing a separate return).
Deduction may not exceed compensation.--The amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) shall not exceed the amount of compensation (as defined in section 219(f)) includible in the taxpayer's gross income for the taxable year.
Account may not be established for benefit of more than 1 individual.--A HEAP account may not be established for the benefit of more than 1 individual.
No deduction after beneficiary attains age 18.--No deduction shall be allowed for any payment to a HEAP account established for the benefit of an individual who has attained age 18 before the close of the calendar year in which such payment is made.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) HEAP account.--The term `HEAP account' means a trust created or organized in the United States exclusively for the purpose of paying the educational expenses of a child of the taxpayer, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted unless it is in cash, and contributions will not be accepted for the taxable year in excess of $5,000.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which that person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust shall not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
On the termination date-- ``(i) the balance in the account shall be distributed to the individual for whose benefit the account is established, or ``(ii) at the election of such individual, such account shall be treated for purposes of this title as an individual retirement account.
Child.--The term `child' has the meaning given such term by section 151(c)(3).
Termination date.--The term `termination date' means-- ``(A) the date the beneficiary attains age 25, ``(B) if the beneficiary is at least a half-time student on the date referred to in subparagraph (A), the last day of the last school year for which the beneficiary is at least a half-time student, or ``(C) the date of the beneficiary's death.
Educational expenses.--The term `educational expenses' means-- ``(A) tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of a student at an eligible educational institution, ``(B) fees, books, supplies, and equipment required for courses of instruction at an eligible educational institution, and ``(C) a reasonable allowance for meals and lodging while attending an eligible educational institution.
Eligible educational institution.--The term `eligible educational institution' means-- ``(A) an institution of higher education, or ``(B) a vocational school.
Institution of higher education.--The term `institution of higher education' means the institutions described in section 1201(a) or 481(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Vocational school.--The term `vocational school' means an area vocational education school as defined in subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 521(4) of the Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act to the extent such school is located within any State (as defined in such section).
Time when contributions deemed made.--A taxpayer shall be deemed to have made a contribution on the last day of the preceding taxable year if the contribution is made on account of such taxable year and is made not later than the time prescribed by law for filing the return for such taxable year (including extensions thereof).
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid from a HEAP account shall be included in the gross income of the beneficiary of such account for the taxable year in which the payment is received.
Amounts used for education expenses.--If any payment from a HEAP account is used to pay the educational expenses of the beneficiary of such account-- ``(A) paragraph (1) shall not apply, but ``(B) \1/10\th of such amount shall be included in gross income of the beneficiary of such account for the taxable year in which the payment is received and for each of the 9 taxable years thereafter.
Excess contributions returned before due date of return.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to the distribution of any contribution made during a taxable year to a HEAP account to the extent that such contribution exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (a) if-- ``(A) such distribution is received on or before the day prescribed by law (including extensions of time) for filing such individual's return for such taxable year, ``(B) no deduction is allowed under subsection (a) with respect to such excess contribution, and ``(C) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in subparagraph (C) shall be included in the gross income of the individual for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Treatment as individual retirement plan not subject to income tax inclusion.--The treatment described in subsection (c)(1)(E) shall not be treated as a distribution for purposes of this subsection or subsection (f).
Tax Treatment of Accounts.-- ``(1) Exemption from tax.--A HEAP account is exempt from taxation under this subtitle unless such account has ceased to be a HEAP account by reason of paragraph (2) or (3).
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, any such account is subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable, etc.
Loss of exemption of account where individual engages in prohibited transaction.-- ``(A) In general.--If the individual for whose benefit a HEAP account is established or any individual who contributes to such account engages in any transaction prohibited by section 4975 with respect to the account, the account shall cease to be a HEAP account as of the first day of the taxable year (of the individual so engaging in such transaction) during which such transaction occurs.
Account treated as distributing all its assets.--In any case in which any account ceases to be a HEAP account by reason of subparagraph (A) as of the first day of any taxable year, paragraph (1) of subsection (d) shall apply as if there was a distribution on such first day in an amount equal to the fair market value (on such first day) of all assets in the account (on such first day).
Effect of pledging account as security.--If, during any taxable year, the individual for whose benefit a HEAP account is established, or any individual who contributes to such account, uses the account or any portion thereof as security for a loan, the portion so used shall be treated as distributed to the individual so using such portion.
Additional Tax on Certain Distributions.-- ``(1) Distribution not used for educational expenses.--If any payment from a HEAP account is used for any purpose other than the payment of the education expenses of the beneficiary of such account, the tax liability under this chapter of such beneficiary for the taxable year in which the payment is received shall be increased by an amount equal to 10 percent of such payment.
Distributions on termination of account.--Paragraph (1) shall be applied by substituting `5 percent' for `10 percent' in the case of any distribution made on the termination date (other than by reason of the beneficiary's death).
Disability or death cases.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall not apply if the distribution is made after the account beneficiary becomes disabled within the meaning of section 72(m)(7) or dies.
Disqualification cases.--Any amount treated under paragraph (2) or (3) of subsection (e) as distributed from a HEAP account shall be treated as a distribution to which the tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies.
Community Property Laws.--This section shall be applied without regard to any community property laws.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and if the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute a HEAP account described in subsection (c)(1).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of a HEAP account shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the individual for whose benefit the account is maintained with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require under regulations.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required by those regulations.''
Deduction Allowed in Arriving at Adjusted Gross Income.-- Paragraph (7) of section 62(a) of such Code (relating to retirement savings) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or education'' after ``retirement'' in the heading of such paragraph, and (2) by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``and the deduction allowed by section 220 (relating to HEAP accounts)''.
Tax on Excess Contributions.--Section 4973 of such Code (relating to tax on excess contributions to individual retirement accounts, certain section 403(b) contracts, and certain individual retirement annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``heap accounts,'' after ``accounts,'' in the heading of such section, (2) by striking out ``or'' at the end of paragraph (1) of subsection (a), (3) by redesignating paragraph (2) of subsection (a) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) a HEAP account (within the meaning of section 220(c)(1)), or'', and (4) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Excess Contributions to HEAP Accounts.--For purposes of this section, in the case of a HEAP account, the term `excess contributions' means the amount by which the amount contributed for the taxable year to the account exceeds the amount allowable as a deduction under section 220 for such taxable year.
For purposes of this subsection, any contribution which is distributed out of the HEAP account in a distribution to which section 220(d)(3) applies shall be treated as an amount not contributed.''
Tax on Prohibited Transactions.--Section 4975 of such Code (relating to prohibited transactions) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (c) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Special rule for heap accounts.--An individual for whose benefit a HEAP account is established and any contributor to such account shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if, with respect to such transaction, the account ceases to be a HEAP account by reason of the application of section 220(e)(2)(A) to such account.
'', and (2) by inserting ``, a HEAP account described in section 220(c)(1),'' in subsection (e)(1) after ``described in section 408(a)''.
Failure To Provide Reports on HEAP Accounts.--Section 6693 of such Code (relating to failure to provide reports on individual retirement accounts or annuities) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``or on heap accounts'' after ``annuities'' in the heading of such section, and (2) by adding at the end of subsection (a) the following new sentence: ``The person required by section 220(i) to file a report regarding a HEAP account at the time and in the manner required by such section shall pay a penalty of $50 for each failure, unless it is shown that such failure is due to reasonable cause.''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking out the item relating to section 220 and inserting in lieu thereof the following new items: ``Sec.
The table of sections for chapter 43 of such Code is amended by striking out the item relating to section 4973 and inserting in lieu thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Tax on excess contributions to individual retirement accounts, HEAP accounts, certain 403(b) contracts, and certain individual retirement annuities.''
The table of sections for subchapter B of chapter 68 of such Code is amended by striking out the item relating to section 6693 and inserting in lieu thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Failure to provide reports on individual retirement accounts or annuities or on HEAP accounts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.