Initial Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Over the last 5 decades, billions of dollars in social security taxes have been paid by American workers but have not been credited to their social security earnings records.
When the Social Security Administration is not able to match information on annual earnings reports to existing workers' earnings records, the amount of such earnings reported are credited by the Administration in a ``suspense file'' of uncredited earnings.
Largely due to the inflexible matching policy of the Social Security Administration and an unacceptable number of errors made by employers on annual earnings reports submitted to the Administration, the suspense file has accumulated approximately 200,000,000 individual earnings reports totaling approximately $200,000,000,000 in earnings.
These numbers continue to grow.
Because earnings are used to determine an individual's eligibility and benefit amount, uncredited earnings can affect social security benefit payments.
Current beneficiaries have lost, and continue to lose, benefits because of the failure of the Social Security Administration to correctly credit their earnings.
This has the practical effect of denying millions of hard-working Americans up to hundreds of dollars on their monthly retirement or disability benefits.
Further Findings.--The Congress further finds the following: (1) Current and future retirees should receive the full social security benefits to which they are entitled.
The impact of uncredited earnings on social security beneficiaries has not been adequately determined.
An examination of the practical effects of uncredited earnings on individuals' benefits should be conducted, in order that beneficiaries who are due higher benefits or retroactive payments can be compensated accordingly.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to ensure that the Social Security Administration, together with the Secretary of the Treasury, will take prompt action to-- (1) determine and implement an effective procedure to reconcile the wage reports currently in the suspense file to the rightful beneficiaries, and (2) put in place a system that will prevent further mismatches.
In General.--The Commissioner of Social Security and the Secretary of the Treasury shall jointly undertake, as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, a thorough study with respect to the inability of the Social Security Administration to provide for American workers their full social security benefits by reason of insufficiency of information held by the Administration necessary for correctly identifying accounts for the earnings of such workers.
Matters To Be Studied.--The Commissioner and the Secretary, in their study under this section, shall address, analyze, and report specifically on the following matters: (1) the extent of, and the reasons for, the inability of the Social Security Administration to maintain accurate and current records of every worker's annual earnings sufficient for determining eligibility for, and the correct amount of, monthly insurance benefits under title II of the Social Security Act, (2) proposals for an effective procedure for eliminating the current backlog of uncredited earnings in the suspense file maintained by the Social Security Administration, (3) proposals for an effective procedure for resolving new discrepancies which would result in new uncredited earnings, and (4) any additional resources which the Social Security Administration would require to carry out effective procedures described in paragraphs (2) and (3).
Pursuant to the study carried out under section 2, the Commissioner of Social Security and the Secretary of the Treasury shall promptly-- (1) devise and implement a procedure for eliminating, in accordance with an established time-phased schedule, the backlog of uncredited earnings currently contained in the suspense file maintained by the Administration, and (2) devise and implement a procedure for resolving new discrepancies which would prevent the addition of future uncredited earnings in the suspense file.
The Commissioner of Social Security and the Secretary of the Treasury shall submit to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate, not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, a report of the findings of the study conducted under section 2 and the progress made in meeting the requirements of section 3.
Such report shall include any recommendations for further legislative action the Commissioner and the Secretary consider appropriate.