This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Education Loan Forgiveness Act of 2010''.
ENERGY EDUCATION LOAN FORGIVENESS.
Part B of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 428L the following new section: ``SEC.
ENERGY EDUCATION LOAN FORGIVENESS.
Purpose.--The purposes of this section are-- ``(1) to encourage individuals to enter and continue in advanced energy professions; and ``(2) to reward such individuals for their service in advanced energy professions by reducing the burden of student loan debt.
Program Authorized.-- ``(1) Loan forgiveness authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to forgive, in accordance with this section, the student loan obligation of a borrower, in the amount specified in subsection (c), who-- ``(A) has been employed for at least one calendar year after the date of enactment of the Energy Education Loan Forgiveness Act of 2010 as a full-time skilled energy worker trained in an industry that focuses on advanced energy (as defined in subsection (f)); and ``(B) is not in default on a loan for which the borrower seeks forgiveness.
Method of loan forgiveness.--To provide loan forgiveness under paragraph (1), the Secretary is authorized to carry out a program-- ``(A) through the holder of the loan, to assume the obligation to repay a qualified loan amount for a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this part (other than an excepted PLUS loan (as such term is defined in section 493C(a))); and ``(B) to cancel a qualified loan amount for a loan made under part D or part E of this title (other than such an excepted PLUS loan).
Qualified Loan Amount.--The Secretary shall, from funds appropriated under subsection (h), forgive the loan obligation of a borrower in accordance with this section and in the following increments: ``(1) After the first calendar year of employment described in subsection (b)(1), not more than $2,000 of the loan obligation of the borrower that is outstanding after the completion of such calendar year.
After the second such year of employment, not more than $2,500 of the loan obligation of the borrower that is outstanding after the completion of such year.
After the third such year of employment, not more than $3,000 of the loan obligation of the borrower that is outstanding after the completion of such year.
After the fourth such year of employment, not more than $4,500 of the loan obligation of the borrower that is outstanding after the completion of such year.
After the fifth such year of employment, not more than $5,000 of the loan obligation of the borrower that is outstanding after the completion of such year.
Priority.--The Secretary shall grant loan forgiveness under this section on a first-come, first-served basis, and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Ineligibility for Double Benefits.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a reduction of loan obligations under both this section and section 428K or 455(m).
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Advanced energy.--The term `advanced energy' shall have the meaning given such term by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (g).
Industry that focuses on advanced energy.--The term `industry that focuses on advanced energy' means an industry the primary purpose of which is to develop, produce, and distribute advanced energy (as defined by the Secretary in accordance with subsection (g)), and includes the following industries: ``(A) Alternative energy, including wind and solar energy.
Energy efficient construction, retrofitting, and design.
Sustainable energy technologies, including chemical technology, nanotechnology, and electrical technology.
Water and energy conservation.
Recycling and waste reduction.
Advanced agriculture and farming.
Carbon sequestration and storage.
Skilled energy worked.--The term `skilled energy worker' shall have the meaning given such term by the Secretary pursuant to subsection (g).
Regulations.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to issue such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Consultation with secretary of energy.--The Secretary shall coordinate with the Secretary of Energy to promulgate regulations to define, for the purpose of awarding loan forgiveness under this section, the term `advanced energy', the term `skilled energy worker', and each of the categories of industries that focus on advanced energy that are listed under subsection (f)(2).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2011 and each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.