This Act may be cited as the ``Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia Recognition Act''.
The Congress declares and finds the following: (1) The Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia are descendants of and political successors to those Indians known as the original Creek Indian Nation at the time of initial European contact with America.
The Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia are descendants and political successors to the signatories of the 1832 Treaty of Washington which was a treaty made while the Creeks were one nation, before removal.
The Treaty involved all Creeks, including the Upper, Middle, and Lower Creeks, when the Creek Nation was whole and intact.
The Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia consists of over 2,500 eligible members, most of whom continue to reside close to their ancestral homeland within the State of Georgia.
Pursuant to Article XII of the 1832 Treaty of Washington, the Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia declined to be removed and continued to operate as a sovereign Indian tribe comprising those Lower Creeks declining removal under the Treaty of 1832.
The Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia continues its political and social existence with a viable tribal government carrying out many of its governmental functions through its traditional form of collective decisionmaking and social interaction.
In 1972, when the Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia (also known as the Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe East of the Mississippi River) petitioned the Bureau of Indian Affairs for Federal recognition, the tribal leaders were not well educated and the Tribe could not afford competent counsel adequately versed in Federal Indian law.
The Tribe was unable to obtain technical assistance in its petition which consequently lacked critical and pertinent historical information necessary for recognition.
Thus, due to technical omissions, the petition was denied on December 21, 1981.
Despite the denial of the petition, the United States Government, the government of the State of Georgia, and local governments, have recognized the political leaders of the Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia as leaders of a distinct political governmental entity.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Tribe'' means the Lower Muscogee-Creek Indian Tribe of Georgia; (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; and (3) The term ``member'' means an enrolled member of the Tribe, as of the date of enactment of this Act, or an individual who has been placed on the membership rolls of the Tribe in accordance with this Act.
In General.--Federal recognition is hereby extended to the Tribe.
All laws and regulations of general application to Indians or nations, tribes, or bands of Indians that are not inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Federal Benefits and Services.--The Tribe and its members shall be eligible, on or after the date of enactment of this Act, for all Federal benefits and services furnished to federally recognized Indian tribes and their members because of their status as Indians without regard to the existence of a reservation for the Tribe or the residence of any member on or near an Indian reservation.
Service Area.-- (d) Indian Reorganization Act Applicability.--The Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et sequentes) shall be applicable to the Tribe and its members.
Lands Taken Into Trust.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, if, not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Tribe transfers interest in land within the boundaries of Grady County, Carroll County, and such other counties in the State of Georgia to the Secretary, the Secretary shall take such interests in land into trust for the benefit of the Tribe.
Reservation Established.--Land taken into trust pursuant to subsection (a) shall be the initial reservation land of the Tribe.
In General.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Tribe shall submit to the Secretary a membership roll consisting of all individuals who are members of the Tribe.
The qualifications for inclusion in the membership roll of the Tribe shall be developed and based upon the membership provisions as contained in the Tribe's Constitution and Bill of Rights.
Upon completion of the membership roll, the Secretary shall publish notice of such in the Federal Register.
The Tribe shall ensure that such roll is maintained and kept current.
Future Membership.--The Tribe shall have the right to determine future membership in the Tribe; however, in no event may an individual be enrolled as a member of the Tribe unless the individual is a lineal descendant of a person on the base membership roll, and has continued to maintain political relations with the Tribe.
The reservation established pursuant to this Act shall be Indian country under Federal and tribal jurisdiction.