ESTABLISHMENT OF TOLL FREE NUMBER PILOT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--If the Secretary of Commerce determines, on the basis of comments submitted in rulemaking under section 2, that-- (1) interest among manufacturers is sufficient to warrant the establishment of a 3-year toll free number pilot program, and (2) manufacturers will provide fees under section 2(c) so that the program will operate without cost to the Federal Government, the Secretary shall establish such program solely to help inform consumers whether a product is made in America or the equivalent thereof.
The Secretary shall publish the toll-free number by notice in the Federal Register.
Contract.--The Secretary of Commerce shall enter into a contract for-- (1) the establishment and operation of the toll free number pilot program provided for in subsection (a), and (2) the registration of products pursuant to regulations issued under section 2, which shall be funded entirely from fees collected under section 2(c).
Use.--The toll free number shall be used solely to inform consumers as to whether products are registered under section 2 as made in America or the equivalent thereof.
Consumers shall also be informed that registration of a product does not mean-- (1) that the product is endorsed or approved by the Government, (2) that the Secretary has conducted any investigation to confirm that the product is a product which meets the definition of made in America or the equivalent thereof, or (3) that the product contains 100 percent United States content.
Proposed Regulation.--The Secretary of Commerce shall propose a regulation-- (1) to establish a procedure under which the manufacturer of a product may voluntarily register such product as complying with the definition of a product made in America or the equivalent thereof and have such product included in the information available through the toll free number established under section 1(a); (2) to establish, assess, and collect a fee to cover all the costs (including start-up costs) of registering products and including registered products in information provided under the toll-free number; (3) for the establishment under section 1(a) of the toll- free number pilot program; and (4) to solicit views from the private sector concerning the level of interest of manufacturers in registering products under the terms and conditions of paragraph (1).
Promulgation.--If the Secretary determines based on the comments on the regulation proposed under subsection (a) that the toll- free number pilot program and the registration of products is warranted, the Secretary shall promulgate such regulations.
Registration Fee.-- (1) In general.--Manufacturers of products included in information provided under section 1 shall be subject to a fee imposed by the Secretary of Commerce to pay the cost of registering products and including them in information provided under subsection (a).
Amount.--The amount of fees imposed under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) in the case of a manufacturer, not be greater than the cost of registering the manufacturer's product and providing product information directly attributable to such manufacturer, and (B) in the case of the total amount of fees, not be greater than the total amount appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for salaries and expenses directly attributable to registration of manufacturers and having products included in the information provided under section 1(a).
Crediting and availability of fees.-- (A) In general.--Fees collected for a fiscal year pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be credited to the appropriation account for salaries and expenses of the Secretary of Commerce and shall be available in accordance with appropriation Acts until expended without fiscal year limitation.
Collections and appropriation acts.--The fees imposed under paragraph (1)-- (i) shall be collected in each fiscal year in an amount equal to the amount specified in appropriation Acts for such fiscal year, and (ii) shall only be collected and available for the costs described in paragraph (2).
Any manufacturer of a product who knowingly registers a product under section 2 which is not made in America or the equivalent thereof-- (1) shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $7500 which the Secretary of Commerce may assess and collect, and (2) shall not offer such product for purchase by the Federal Government.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``made in America or the equivalent thereof'' means-- (A) an unmanufactured end product mined or produced in the United States; or (B) an end product manufactured in the United States if the value of its components mined, produced, or manufactured in the United States equals 90 percent or more of the total value of all of its components.
The term ``product'' means a product with a retail value of at least $250.
Nothing in this Act or in any regulation promulgated under section 2 shall be construed to alter, amend, modify, or otherwise affect in any way, the Federal Trade Commission Act or the opinions, decisions, and rules of the Federal Trade Commission under such Act regarding the use of the term ``made in America or the equivalent thereof'' in labels on products introduced, delivered for introduction, sold, advertised, or offered for sale in commerce.
Passed the House of Representatives August 8, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.