This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Club Drug Abuse Reduction Act''.
TITLE I--INTERAGENCY CLUB DRUG TASK FORCE SEC.
Establishment.--There is established a ``Club Drug Task Force'' (referred to in this title as the ``interagency task force'') which shall consist of the following members: (1) The Attorney General, or a designee, who shall serve as chair.
2 representatives selected by the Attorney General.
The Secretary of Education or a designee.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services or a designee.
2 representatives of State and local law enforcement and regulatory agencies, to be selected by the Attorney General.
2 representatives selected by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
5 nongovernmental experts in drug abuse prevention and treatment to be selected by the Attorney General.
Responsibilities.--The interagency task force shall be responsible for designing, implementing, and evaluating the education and prevention and treatment practices and strategies of the Federal Government in conjunction with State, local, and community leaders with respect to club drugs and other synthetic stimulants.
Meetings.--The interagency task force shall meet at least once every 6 months.
Funding.--The administrative expenses of the interagency task force shall be paid out of existing Department of Justice appropriations.
FACA.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
shall apply to the interagency task force.
Termination.--The interagency task force shall terminate 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall develop a public health monitoring program to monitor club drugs in the United States.
The program shall include the collection and dissemination of data related to club drug abuse which can be used by public health officials in policy development.
As used in this title, the term ``club drug'' means a primary synthetic that includes 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), Katamine, Gamma Hydroxybutyrate (GHB), Gamma Butyrolactone (GBL), Flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), Phencyclidine (PCP), or methamphetamine.
TITLE II--EXPANDING CLUB DRUG ABUSE PREVENTION EFFORTS SEC.
GRANTS BY CENTER FOR SUBSTANCE ABUSE PREVENTION.
Section 515 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb-21) is amended by adding at the end the following subsection: ``(e) Prevention of Club Drug Abuse and Addiction.-- ``(1) Grants.--The Director of the Prevention Center may make grants to and enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with public and nonprofit private entities to enable such entities-- ``(A) to carry out school-based programs concerning the dangers of club drug abuse and addiction, using methods that are effective and evidence-based, including initiatives that give students the responsibility to create their own anti-drug abuse education programs for their schools; and ``(B) to carry out community-based club drug abuse and addiction prevention programs that are effective and evidence-based.
Use of funds.--Amounts made available under a grant, contract or cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) shall be used for planning, establishing, or administering club drug prevention programs in accordance with paragraph (3).
Prevention programs and activities.-- ``(A) In general.--Amounts provided under this subsection may be used-- ``(i) to carry out school-based programs that are focused on those districts with high or increasing rates of club drug abuse and addiction and targeted at populations which are most at risk to start club drug abuse; ``(ii) to carry out community-based prevention programs that are focused on those populations within the community that are most at-risk for club drug abuse and addiction; ``(iii) to assist local government entities to conduct appropriate club drug prevention activities; ``(iv) to train and educate State and local law enforcement officials, prevention and education officials, members of community anti- drug coalitions and parents on the signs of club drug abuse and addiction and the options for treatment and prevention; ``(v) for planning, administration, and educational activities related to the prevention of club drug abuse and addiction; ``(vi) for the monitoring and evaluation of club drug prevention activities, and reporting and disseminating resulting information to the public; and ``(vii) for targeted pilot programs with evaluation components to encourage innovation and experimentation with new methodologies.
Priority.--The Director of the Prevention Center shall give priority in making grants under this subsection to rural and urban areas that are experiencing a high rate or rapid increases in club drug abuse and addiction.
Analyses and evaluation.-- ``(A) In general.--Not less than $500,000 of the amount available in each fiscal year to carry out this subsection shall be made available to the Director of the Prevention Center, acting in consultation with other Federal agencies, to support and conduct periodic analyses and evaluations of effective prevention programs for club drug abuse and addiction and the development of appropriate strategies for disseminating information about and implementing these programs.
Annual reports.--The Director of the Prevention Centers shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Commerce and Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate, an annual report with the results of the analyses and evaluation under subparagraph (A).
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `club drug' means a primary synthetic that includes 3,4- methylenedioxymethamphetamine (MDMA), katamine, gamma hydroxybutyrate (GHB), gamma butyrolactone (GBL), flunitrazepam (Rohypnol), d-lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD), phencyclidine (PCP), or methamphetamine.
Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2002 and each subsequent fiscal year.