This Act may be cited as the ``Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) in order to promote efficiency, productivity, and the improvement of administrative functions, to enhance public service and public trust in the administrative resolution of disputes, and to enhance the enforcement of the administrative law provisions of title 5, United States Code, the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States should be established; (2) the existing system of agency assignments of administrative law judges appointed under section 3015 of title 5, United States Code, will be enhanced, by creating the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States and will serve the public with maximum economy and efficiency; and (3) the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States will enhance judicial performance, status, and legal training of administrative law judges by establishing initial and continuing education programs, studying the adjudication system, and reporting annually to Congress.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER VI--THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES ``Sec.
Definitions ``For the purposes of this subchapter-- ``(1) the term `agency' means an authority referred to in section 551(l); ``(2) the term `Conference' means the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States established under section 598; ``(3) the term `administrative law judge' means an administrative law judge appointed under section 3105 before or after the effective date of this subchapter; and ``(4) the term `chief judge' means the chief administrative law judge appointed and serving under section 599.
Establishment; membership ``There is established the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States consisting of all administrative law judges appointed under section 599A.
Chief administrative law judge ``(a) Appointment; Term; Pay.--The chief administrative law judge shall be the chief administrative officer and presiding judge of the Conference.
The chief judge shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The chief judge shall have served as an administrative law judge for at least 5 years immediately before the date of appointment.
The term of office of the chief judge shall be 5 years or, after expiration of 5 years, until a successor is appointed and qualifies to serve.
A chief judge may be reappointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, for 1 additional term upon the expiration of the first term of such judge.
The chief judge shall be paid at the rate of 105 percent of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Powers of the Chief Judge.--The chief judge shall-- ``(1) enhance and develop the administrative law process and the administrative law judge function; ``(2) develop training programs, in coordination with the agencies, to promote judicial education, specialization, and efficiency of administrative law judges; ``(3) consult with agencies and the Office of Management and Budget regarding resources necessary to support administrative law judge functions; ``(4) study instances when administrative law judges are directed by an agency not to follow decisions of Federal circuit courts of appeal because of nonacquiescence by the agency for which the judge presides and report the findings to the President and the Congress; and ``(5) make rules and procedures to implement the functions of the Conference.
The chief judge shall make an annual written report to the President and the Congress including recommendations to improve the administrative adjudicative process.
Transfer.--All functions of the Office of Personnel Management with respect to administrative law judges are transferred to the Conference.
Administrative law judge ``(a) Assignment to Agencies.--After selection for appointment to the position of administrative law judge by an agency, the administrative law judge shall be assigned by the chief judge to such agency for the adjudication of cases for the agency.
Each administrative law judge appointed at the time of the date of enactment of this section shall be assigned to the agency the administrative law judge was assigned to at the time of the date of enactment of this section.
Subsequent assignments of the administrative law judge shall be made with the consent of the administrative law judge and the appointing agency.
Agencies.--Each agency with assigned administrative law judges shall be responsible to provide for all budget, resources and support requirements for each administrative law judge assigned to the agency.
Appointment of Agency Chief Judges.--The chief administrative law judge of each agency shall be appointed by the agency head.
Jurisdiction ``(a) Referral of Cases by Courts.--With the approval of the agency to whom the administrative law judge is assigned, courts are authorized to refer cases, or portions thereof, to an administrative law judge to act as a special master pursuant to the provisions of Rule 53(a) of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure or otherwise to make findings of fact in a case on behalf of the referring court, which shall continue to have exclusive and undiminished jurisdiction over the case.
When a court has referred a case to an administrative law judge, the recommendations, rulings, and findings of fact of the administrative law judge are subject to de novo review by the referring court.
The court shall provide for reimbursement to the agency involved for costs relating to the administrative law judge referral.
Savings Clause.--The provisions of this subchapter shall effect no change in-- ``(1) any agency's rulemaking, interpretative, or policy making authority in carrying out the statutory responsibilities vested in the agency or agency head; ``(2) the adjudicatory authority of administrative law judges; or ``(3) the authority of an agency to review decisions of administrative law judges under any applicable provision of law.
Standards of conduct ``The chief judge, after providing notice and a period for comment, shall adopt and issue rules of judicial conduct for administrative law judges, consistent with the Model Code of Judicial Conduct for administrative law judges (American Bar Association, 1989).
An administrative law judge may not be removed, suspended, reprimanded, or disciplined except as provided in section 7521.
The rules of judicial conduct for administrative law judges shall provide for a voluntary alternative dispute resolution process that shall be conducted at the request of the administrative law judge.''.
Satisfaction of Other Procedural Requirements.--Compliance with subchapter VI of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall satisfy all requirements imposed under section 916 of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 for the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``SUBCHAPTER VI--THE ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE CONFERENCE OF THE UNITED STATES ``597.
Chief administrative law judge.
Transfers.--There shall be transferred to the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States established under section 598 of title 5, United States Code, the personnel, property, unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, and other funds employed and held by the Office of Personnel Management and relating to the administrative law function administered by the Office of Personnel Management.
Appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds paid or transferred by agencies to the Office of Personnel Management for the administration of the administrative law judge function shall, after the date of the enactment of this Act, be paid or transferred to the Conference.
Collective Bargaining Agreements.--Collective bargaining agreements, relating to personnel transferred by subsection (a), shall remain in effect according to the terms thereof.
Disputes.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, at such time or times as the Director may provide, shall make such determinations as may be necessary with regard to any dispute arising from the transfer of personnel or assets by subsection (a).
OPERATION OF THE CONFERENCE.
Operation of the Administrative Law Judge Conference of the United States established under section 598 of title 5, United States Code, shall commence on the date the first chief judge of the Conference takes office under section 599 of such title.
Except as otherwise provided, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.