This Act may be cited as the ``Depressed Smaller Cities Improvement Act of 1993''.
INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON DEPRESSED SMALLER CITIES.
Establishment.--There is hereby established an interagency task force to be known as the Interagency Task Force on Depressed Smaller Cities (in this Act referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Task Force shall be composed of 9 members as follows: (A) The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development, or the Secretary's delegate.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, or the Secretary's delegate.
The Attorney General of the United States, or the Attorney General's delegate.
The Secretary of Commerce, or the Secretary's delegate.
5 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, not later than the expiration of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, who shall be public officials of depressed smaller cities.
Geographical diversity.--No 2 members appointed under paragraph (1)(E) may be residents of the same State.
Terms.--Members of the Task Force shall be appointed for the life of the Task Force.
Any vacancy in the Task Force shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Chairperson.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall be the chairperson of the Task Force.
Prohibition of Compensation.--Members of the Task Force shall not receive pay or other compensation on account of their service on the Task Force.
Travel Expenses.--Each member of the Task Force shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
DUTIES OF TASK FORCE.
Study.--The Task Force shall carry out a study of the problems affecting depressed smaller cities, including problems involving crime, the environment, housing, labor and unemployment, education, health, and poverty.
The study shall examine and analyze Federal, State, and local programs to alleviate such problems, the coordination or lack of coordination among such programs, and the effectiveness and efficiency of such programs, and shall determine the proper scope and extent of Federal assistance and programs to reduce the problems affecting such cities.
In conducting the study, the Task Force shall consult with officials of local governments to obtain and provide advice regarding measures that may be implemented before the completion of the study to alleviate such problems and to coordinate the ongoing efforts of the local governments with the various Federal agencies.
Reports.-- (1) Annual reports.-- (A) In general.--The Task Force shall submit a report to the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate, not less than annually until the termination of the Task Force under section 5.
Contents.--Each report shall describe the activities of the Task Force during the previous year in conducting the study under subsection (a) and the findings and determinations of the Task Force resulting from the study.
Each report shall also-- (i) identify the most pervasive problems affecting depressed smaller cities and the extent of such problems; (ii) describe any efforts to alleviate such problems that the Task Force considers to have been effective and efficient; (iii) identify the immediate and long-term needs of such cities in alleviating such problems; (iv) identify any existing Federal programs that may be useful to such cities in alleviating such problems; (v) include an agenda of actions to be taken to alleviate such problems, which describes the priorities of such actions; and (vi) include recommendations of the Task Force for actions and legislation by the Federal Government to assist State and local governments to alleviate the problems affecting depressed smaller cities.
Final report.--Not later than the termination of the Task Force under section 5, the Task Force shall submit to the Committees referred to in paragraph (1)(A) a final report describing the study conducted by the Task Force, the activities of the Task Force, and the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Task Force upon the completion of the study.
Meetings.--To carry out the study under subsection (a) and prepare the reports under subsection (b), the Task Force shall meet not less than quarterly in each year.
IDENTIFICATION OF DEPRESSED SMALLER CITIES.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``depressed smaller city'' means any unit of general local government that, as determined by the Task Force for the most recent 12-month period for which statistics are available, is classified as a municipality by the United States Bureau of the Census, has a population of less than 50,000 and more than 5,000, and meets any 3 of the following 5 criteria: (1) Unemployment.--The total rate of unemployment for the unit of general local government (as determined by appropriate available data) is 12 percent or more.
Crime rate.--For the unit of general local government, the ratio of the aggregate number of violent crimes in the unit (according to statistics compiled by the Federal Bureau of Investigation) to the population of the unit, is 5 percent or greater.
Lack of municipal health facilities.--The unit of general local government does not own or operate any municipal health facilities.
Income level.--The median annual household income for households residing in the unit of general local government (as determined by the Bureau of the Census of the Department of Commerce) does not exceed $15,000.
Environmental problems.--The unit of general local government has substantial environmental problems resulting from industrial activities, as determined by the Task Force.
The Commission shall terminate upon the expiration of the 3-year period beginning on the date of the appointment of the entire membership of the Task Force under section 2(b).
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $750,000, which shall be available during fiscal years 1995, 1996, and 1997.