This Act may be cited as the ``Chief Justice John Marshall Commemorative Coin Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) John Marshall served as the Chief Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States from 1801 to 1835, the longest tenure of any Chief Justice in the Nation's history; (2) Under Marshall's leadership, the Supreme Court expounded the fundamental principles of constitutional interpretation, including judicial review, and affirmed national supremacy, both of which served to secure the newly founded United States against dissolution; and (3) John Marshall's service to the nascent United States, not only as Chief Justice, but also as a soldier in the Revolutionary War, as a member of the Virginia Congress and the United States Congress, and as Secretary of State, makes him one of the most important figures in our Nation's history.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the 250th anniversary of the birth of Chief Justice John Marshall, the Secretary of the Treasury (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 400,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of sections 5134 and 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of Chief Justice John Marshall and his contributions to the United States.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act, there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2005''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts, and the Supreme Court Historical Society; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Coinage Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act beginning on January 1, 2005.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this Act after December 31, 2005.
Sale Price.--The coins minted under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in section 7 with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins minted under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to pre-paid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Supreme Court Historical Society for the purposes of-- (1) historical research about the Supreme Court and the Constitution of the United States and related topics; (2) supporting fellowship programs, internships, and docents at the Supreme Court; and (3) collecting and preserving antiques, artifacts, and other historical items related to the Supreme Court and the Constitution of the United States and related topics.
Audits.--The Supreme Court Historical Society shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the Society under subsection (b).
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins referred to in section 3(a) shall result in no net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment for the Coins.--The Secretary may not sell a coin referred to in section 3(a) unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the Federal Government for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution, the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
Passed the Senate November 21, 2003.
Attest: EMILY J. REYNOLDS, Secretary.