This Act may be cited as the ``Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY ADMINISTRATION.
In General.--Chapter 1 of subtitle I of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Sec.
Motor Carrier Safety Administration ``(a) Establishment.--The Motor Carrier Safety Administration is an administration of the Department of Transportation.
Administrator.--The Head of the Administration is an Administrator who is appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, and shall be an individual with professional experience in motor carrier safety.
The Administrator reports directly to the Secretary.
Functions, Powers, and Duties.--The Administrator shall carry out-- ``(1) duties and powers related to motor carrier safety vested in the Secretary by chapters 5, 311, 313, 315, and 317 of this title; and ``(2) other functions, powers, and duties of the Secretary related to motor carriers as prescribed by the Secretary, except for the authority to promulgate motor vehicle safety standards applicable to the manufacture and retrofit of trucks and buses which authority shall be in the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Motor Coach Division.--Within the Administration, there shall be a separate division to oversee commercial motor coach safety and to carry out other functions, powers, and duties of the Secretary as prescribed by the Secretary.
Continuity of Operations.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999, or the amendments made thereby, the Administrator shall perform all functions that, immediately before the effective date of such Act, were functions of the Office of Motor Carrier and Highway Safety of the Federal Highway Administration or were performed by any officer or employee of the Office of Motor Carrier and Highway Safety in the capacity of such officer or employee.
Those personnel, property, and records employed, used, held, available, or to be made available in connection with a function transferred to the Administrator by this Act shall be transferred to the Administrator for use in connection with the functions transferred, and unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, or other funds of the Office of Motor Carrier and Highway Safety shall also be transferred to the Administrator.
Cap on personnel and funding at fy 2000 level.-- Except as otherwise provided in the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999, or the amendments made thereby, the number of personnel employed by, and funds available for operations of, the Motor Carrier Safety Administration shall not exceed the number of personnel, or funds available, respectively, within the Department of Transportation for the duties, powers, and functions described in subsection (c) for fiscal year 2000.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Federal highway administration.--Section 104 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon in subsection (c)(1); (B) by striking paragraph (2) of subsection (c) and redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); and (C) by striking subsection (d) and redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (d).
Chapter analysis.--The chapter analysis for such chapter is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``113.
Motor Carrier Safety Administration.''.
Motor Carrier Safety Administration.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation from the Highway Trust Fund (other than from the Mass Transit Account) such sums as may be necessary to pay the operating expenses of the Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
Availability of Amounts for State Grants.--Section 31104(a) of title 49, United States Code is amended to read as follows: ``(a) In General.--The following amounts are authorized for the Secretary of Transportation to incur obligations to carry out section 31102: ``(1) Not more than $120,500,000 for fiscal year 2000, of which not less than $95,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
Not more than $125,500,000 for fiscal year 2001, of which not less than $100,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
Not more than $130,500,000 for fiscal year 2002, of which not less than $105,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
Not more than $135,500,000 for fiscal year 2003, of which not less than $110,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).''.
Contract Authority Funding for Information Systems.-- (1) In general.--Section 31107 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking so much of the section as precedes subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Authorization of appropriations and contract authority funding for information systems ``(a) Funding.--The following amounts are authorized to carry out sections 31106 and 31309 of this title: ``(1) Not more than $35,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, of which not less than $10,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
Not more than $36,500,000 for fiscal year 2001, of which not less than $12,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
Not more than $36,500,000 for fiscal year 2002, of which not less than $12,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
Not more than $39,500,000 for fiscal year 2003, of which not less than $15,000,000 will be made available from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account).
''; and (B) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c), and inserting after subsection (a) the following: ``(b) Emergency CDL Program Grants.--Of the amounts authorized by subsection (a), the Secretary may provide a grant of up to $1,000,000 to a grant to a State whose commercial driver's license program is in danger of being designated as failing to fulfill compliance requirements.
If the Secretary determines a State will not fulfill compliance requirements after it has received such a grant, the Secretary shall immediately suspend the State's authority to issue commercial driver's licenses.''.
Conforming amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by striking the item relating to section 31107 and inserting the following: ``31107.
Authorization of appropriations and contract authority funding for information systems.''.
The Secretary of Transportation shall implement the safety improvement recommendations provided for in the Department of Transportation Inspector General's Report TR-1999-91.
The Secretary shall report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure the specific actions taken to carry out this section every 90 days, beginning 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, until all of those recommendations have been implemented.
IMPROVEMENTS TO THE COMMERCIAL DRIVERS LICENSE PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 31311(a) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``commercial'' the second place it appears in paragraph (6); (2) by striking ``cancellation.''
in paragraph (8) and inserting ``cancellation, and the violation that resulted in the disqualification, revocation, suspension, or cancellation shall be recorded.
''; (3) by striking ``individual operating a commercial'' in paragraph (9) and inserting ``individual possessing a commercial driver's license operating a''; (4) by striking ``violation.''
in paragraph (9) and inserting ``violation, and the violation shall be recorded.
''; (5) by adding at the end of paragraph (10) the following: ``The State may not issue a special license or permit to an individual who holds a commercial driver's license that permits the individual to drive a commercial motor vehicle during a period in which-- ``(A) the individual is disqualified from operating a commercial motor vehicle; or ``(B) the individual's driver's license is revoked, suspended, or canceled.
''; and (6) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(18) The State shall maintain, as part of its driver information system, a record of each violation by, or conviction under, a State or local motor vehicle traffic control law while operating a motor vehicle (except a parking violation) for each individual who holds a commercial driver's license.
The State may not allow information regarding violations described in section 31310 of this chapter to be withheld or masked in any way from the record of an individual possessing a commercial driver's license.
This paragraph takes effect on January 1, 2001.''.
Withholding for Noncompliance.--Subsections (a) and (b) of 31314 of title 49, United States Code, are each amended by striking ``shall withhold'' and inserting ``may withhold up to''.
Medical Certificates.-- (1) Medical certificates.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall initiate a rulemaking to provide for a Federal medical qualification certificate to be made a part of commercial drivers' licenses issued by any State.
National registry of medical providers.--The Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking to establish a national registry of preferred medical providers.
To be listed in the registry, a medical provider shall, at a minimum, demonstrate knowledge of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Standards for driver medical and physical qualifications.
Decertification Authority.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 313 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Sec.
Decertification authority ``If the Secretary of Transportation determines that a State is in substantial noncompliance with this chapter, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) prohibit that State from carrying out licensing procedures under this chapter; and ``(2) prohibit that State from issuing any commercial driver's licenses until such time the Secretary determines such State is in compliance with this chapter.''.
Conforming amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 313 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``31312.
IMPROVED DATA COLLECTION AND MOTOR CARRIER SAFETY.
In General.--The Secretary of Transportation shall carry out a program, in cooperation with the States, to improve the collection and analysis of data on crashes, including crash causation, involving commercial motor vehicles.
Program Administration.--The Secretary shall administer the program through the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration in cooperation with the Motor Carrier Safety Administration.
The National Highway Traffic Administration shall-- (1) enter into agreements with the States to collect data and report the data by electronic means to a central data repository; and (2) train State employees and motor carrier safety enforcement officials to assure the quality and uniformity of the data.
Use of Data.--The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration shall-- (1) integrate the data, including driver citation and conviction information; and (2) make the data base available electronically to the Motor Carrier Safety Administration, the States, motor carriers, and other interested parties for problem identification, program evaluation, planning, and other safety- related activities.
Report.--Within 3 years after the date on which the improved data program begins, the Secretary shall transmit a report to the Congress on the program, together with any recommendations the Secretary finds appropriate.
Funding.--For each of the fiscal years 2001, 2002, and 2003, the Secretary may use up to $10,000,000 of the amounts made available to the Secretary under section 31107 of title 49, United States Code, to carry out this section.
Harmonization of Reporting Violations by States.--The Secretary of Transportation, in cooperation with the States, shall develop a uniform system to support the electronic transmission of data State-to- State on violations of all motor vehicle traffic control laws by individuals possessing a commercial drivers' licenses as required by sections 31311(a)(9) and (19) of title 49, United States Code.
Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Committee on Commerce, Science and Transportation and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a report on the status of the implementation of this subsection.
Motor Carrier Safety Initiatives.-- (1) Event recorders.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a department-wide policy to ensure the protection of privacy for any individual or entity utilizing electronic recorders or other technology to monitor vehicle and operator performance or location.
Under the policy established by the Secretary the data obtained from the devices shall receive no less protection than that provided for users and owners of flight data recorders, cockpit voice recorders, and other forms of safety information under Federal Aviation Administration and National Transportation Safety Board privacy procedures or regulations.
8-passenger vehicle safety rule.--The regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Transportation under section 31136 of title 49, United States Code, apply to operators of commercial motor vehicles described in section 31132(1)(B) of such title.
This paragraph takes effect 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Data improvements for uniform carrier registration system.--Section 13908 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking the last sentence of subsection (d); and (B) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(f) Deadline for Operational System.--The uniform carrier registration system developed under this section shall be in operation no later than one year after the date of enactment of the Motor Carrier Safety Improvement Act of 1999.''.
Minimum financial responsibility.-- (A) Transportation of passengers.--Section 31138 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (i) by striking ``for compensation'' in subsection (a); and (ii) adding at the end of subsection (c) the following: ``(4) The Secretary shall require all persons subject to the minimum financial responsibility requirements of this section to file evidence of the required financial responsibility with the Secretary.''.
Transportation of Property.--Section 31139 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (i) by striking ``for compensation'' in subsection (b)(1); and (ii) adding at the end of subsection (e) the following: ``(4) The Secretary shall require all persons subject to the minimum financial responsibility requirements of this section to file evidence of the required financial responsibility with the Secretary.''.
COMMERCIAL MOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Transportation may establish a Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Advisory Committee to provide advice and recommendations on a range of regulatory issues.
The members of the advisory committee shall be appointed by the Secretary from among individuals affected by rulemakings under consideration by the Department of Transportation, including representatives of labor, industry, safety advocates, manufacturers, and safety enforcement officials.
No one interest may constitute a majority of the advisory committee.
Function.--The advisory committee established under subsection (a) shall provide advice to the Secretary on commercial motor vehicle safety regulations and assist the Secretary in timely completion of ongoing rulemakings by utilizing negotiated rulemaking procedures.
OWNER-CONTROLLED INSURANCE PROGRAM ACCOUNTABILITY.
In General.--Section 305 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(c) Owner-Controlled Insurance Program Accountability.-- ``(1) In general.--For all transportation projects receiving Federal funding, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) ensure that reserves for owner-controlled insurance programs do not exceed current and projected liabilities, as computed using acceptable actuarial cost methods, for claims; ``(B) in the case of liabilities that do not become payable for more than one year after reserves are provided, ensure that the reserve amounts do not exceed the discounted value of the liabilities; and ``(C) ensure that adjustments in owner-controlled insurance program premiums and reserves are made at least annually.
Refunds.--Any refunds of insurance premiums or reserve amounts, including interest, that exceed a project's liabilities shall be immediately returned to the Federal government.