SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT REFERENCES.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act Amendments of 1998''.
Amendment of National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation Establishment Act (16 United States Code 3701 et seq.).
MEMBERSHIP OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE FOUNDATION.
Amendments.--Section 3 (16 United States Code 3702) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``15'' and inserting ``22''; (B) in paragraph (1), by striking ``six'' and inserting ``4'', and by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; (C) in paragraph (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; (D) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) 4 of whom must be knowledgeable and experienced in ocean and coastal resource conservation.
''; and (E) in the material following paragraph (3) (as so added), by striking ``shall be'' and inserting ``and the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere shall each be''; and (2) by amending subsection (b) to read as follows: ``(b) Appointment and Terms.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the `Secretary') shall appoint the Directors of the Board, after considering recommendations from the Board under paragraph (4).
The Secretary of the Interior shall consult with the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere before appointing any Director of the Board.
Terms.--The Directors shall be appointed for terms of 6 years; except that the Secretary, in making the initial appointments to the Board, shall appoint 3 Directors to a term of 2 years, 2 Directors to a term of 4 years, and 2 Directors to a term of 6 years.
No individual may serve more than 2 consecutive full terms as a Director.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Board shall be filled within 60 days after the occurrence of the vacancy.
Any individual appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of any term of office shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Nomination of appointees.--The Board may recommend to the Secretary individuals to be appointed as Directors of the Board.''.
Application.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to any appointment of a Director of the Board of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Appointment of Additional Members.-- (1) Nominations.--The Board of Directors on the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation shall submit any recommendations of individuals for appointment to positions on the Board created by the amendment made by subsection (a)(1) by not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Staggered terms.--Of the Directors on the Board of Directors of the National Fish and Wildlife Foundation first appointed pursuant to the amendment made by subsection (a)(1)-- (A) 3 shall be appointed to a term that expires December 31, 1999; (B) 2 shall be appointed to a term that expires December 31, 2001; and (C) 2 shall be appointed to a term that expires December 31, 2003, as specified by the Secretary of the Interior at the time of appointment.
RIGHTS AND OBLIGATIONS OF THE FOUNDATION.
Investment and Deposit of Federal Funds.--Section 4(c) (16 United States Code 3703(c)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) through (7) in order as paragraphs (8) through (12); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) to invest any funds provided to the Foundation by the Federal Government in obligations of the United States or in obligations or securities that are guaranteed or insured by the United States; ``(4) to deposit any funds provided to the Foundation by the Federal Government into accounts that are insured by an agency or instrumentality of the United States; ``(5) to make use of any interest or investment income that accrues as a consequence of actions taken under paragraph (3) or (4) to carry out the purposes of the Foundation; ``(6) to provide Federal funds for the purpose of entering into cooperative agreements with willing private landowners for restoration and enhancement of fish, wildlife, and other natural resources on public or private land, or both, if such cooperative agreements-- ``(A) provide general conservation benefits; or ``(B) benefit fish, wildlife, or other natural resources on public land; ``(7) to accept and manage funds provided by any Federal agency under any other law when it is in the public interest;''.
Agency Approval of Acquisitions of Property.--Section 4(e) (16 United States Code 3703(e)) is amended-- (1) by amending paragraph (1)(B) to read as follows: ``(B) the Foundation notifies the Federal agency that administers the program under which the funds were provided of the proposed acquisition, and the agency fails to object in writing to the proposed acquisition within 60 days after the date of that notification.
''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``the Director'' and inserting ``the head of the Federal agency that administers the program under which the funds were provided''.
Repeal.--Section 304 of Public Law 102-440 (16 United States Code 3703 note) is repealed.
Agency Approval of Conveyances and Grants.--Section 4(e)(3)(B)(ii) (16 United States Code 3703(e)(3)(B)(ii)) is amended to read as follows: ``(ii) the Foundation notifies the Federal agency that administers the Federal program under which the funds were provided of the proposed conveyance or provision of Federal funds, and the head of the agency fails to object in writing to such proposed conveyance or provision of Federal funds within 60 days after the date of that notification.''.
Reconveyance of Real Property.--Section 4(e)(5) (16 United States Code 3703(e)(5)) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) The Foundation shall convey at not less than fair market value any real property acquired by it in whole or in part with Federal funds if the Foundation notifies the Federal agency that administers the Federal program under which the funds were provided, and the agency fails to disagree within 60 days after the date of that notification, that-- ``(A) the property is no longer valuable for the purposes of fish and wildlife conservation or management; and ``(B) the purposes of the Foundation would be better served by the use of the proceeds of the conveyance for authorized activities of the Foundation.''.
Termination of Condemnation Limitation; Expenditures for Printing or Capital Equipment.--Section 4(d) (16 United States Code 3703(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Expenditures for Printing or Capital Equipment.--The Foundation may not make an expenditure of Federal funds for printing or capital equipment that is greater than $10,000 unless the expenditure is approved by the Federal agency that administers the Federal program under which the funds were provided.''.
Section 10(b)(1) (16 United States Code 3709(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``matching, in whole or in part,'' and inserting ``matching, on a one- to-one basis,''.
RESTRICTIONS ON USE OF GRANTS PROVIDED BY FOUNDATION.
Section 10(b) (16 United States Code 3709(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Amounts provided as a grant by the Foundation shall not be used for-- ``(i) expenses related to litigation; or ``(ii) any activity the purpose of which is to influence legislation pending before the Congress.
Subparagraph (A)(ii) shall not be considered to prohibit officers or employees of the Foundation from communicating to Members or staff of Congress requests for legislation that they consider necessary for the efficient conduct of the business of the Foundation or that relates to the authority of the Foundation, appropriations for use by the Foundation, or use of Federal funds by the Foundation.
Amounts provided as a grant by the Foundation shall not be used for any activity related to the introduction of wolves or grizzly bears in Idaho, Montana, Utah, or Wyoming.''.
In General.--Section 10(a) (16 United States Code 3709(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Commerce, in the aggregate, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1999.''.
Repeal.--Section 10(c) (16 United States Code 3709(c)) is repealed.