SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Kate Mullany National Historic Site Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Establishment of Kate Mullany National Historic Site.
Administration of historic site.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``historic site'' means the Kate Mullany National Historic Site established by section 4 of this Act.
The term ``plan'' means the general management plan developed pursuant to section 6(d).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The Kate Mullany House in Troy, New York, is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and has been designated as a National Historic Landmark.
The National Historic Landmark Theme Study on American Labor History concluded that the Kate Mullany House appears to meet the criteria of national significance, suitability, and feasibility for inclusion in the National Park System.
The city of Troy, New York-- (A) played an important role in the development of the collar and cuff industry and the iron industry in the 19th century, and in the development of early men's and women's worker and cooperative organizations; and (B) was the home of the first women's labor union, led by Irish immigrant Kate Mullany.
The city of Troy, New York, with 6 neighboring cities, towns, and villages, entered into a cooperative arrangement to create the Hudson-Mohawk Urban Cultural Park Commission to manage their valuable historic resources and the area within these municipalities has been designated by the State of New York as a heritage area to represent industrial development and labor themes in the State's development.
This area, known as the Hudson-Mohawk Urban Cultural Park or RiverSpark, has been a pioneer in the development of partnership parks where intergovernmental and public and private partnerships bring about the conservation of our heritage and the attainment of goals for preservation, education, recreation, and economic development.
Establishment of the Kate Mullany National Historic Site and cooperative efforts between the National Park Service and the Hudson-Mohawk Urban Cultural Park Commission will provide opportunities for the illustration and interpretation of important themes of the heritage of the United States, and will provide unique opportunities for education, public use, and enjoyment.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve and interpret the nationally significant home of Kate Mullany for the benefit, inspiration, and education of the people of the United States; and (2) to interpret the connection between immigration and the industrialization of the Nation, including the history of Irish immigration, women's history, and worker history.
ESTABLISHMENT OF KATE MULLANY NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
Establishment.--There is established, as a unit of the National Park System, the Kate Mullany National Historic Site in the State of New York.
Description.--The historic site shall consist of the home of Kate Mullany, comprising approximately 0.05739 acre, located at 350 Eighth Street in Troy, New York, as generally depicted on the map entitled __________ and dated ____________.
Real Property.--The Secretary may acquire lands and interests therein within the boundaries of the historic site and ancillary real property for parking or interpretation, as necessary and appropriate for management of the historic site.
Such acquisitions may be by donation, purchase from willing sellers with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Personal Property.--The Secretary may acquire personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic site using the methods provided in subsection (a).
ADMINISTRATION OF HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and all laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes; commonly known as the National Park Service Organic Act), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes; commonly known as the Historic Sites, Buildings, and Antiquities Act).
Cooperative Agreements.--To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may consult with and enter into cooperative agreements with the State of New York and the Hudson-Mohawk Urban Cultural Park Commission, and other public and private entities to facilitate public understanding and enjoyment of the life and work of Kate Mullany through the development, presentation, and funding of exhibits and other appropriate activities related to the preservation, interpretation, and use of the historic site and related historic resources.
Exhibits.--The Secretary may display, and accept for the purposes of display, items associated with Kate Mullany, as may be necessary for the interpretation of the historic site.
General Management Plan.--Not later than 2 complete fiscal years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a general management plan for the historic site.
Upon its completion, the Secretary shall submit the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
The plan shall include recommendations for regional wayside exhibits, to be carried out through cooperative agreements with the State of New York and other public and private entities.
The plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 12(b) of Public Law 91-383 (16 United States Code 1a-1 et sequentes; commonly known as the National Park System General Authorities Act).