It is the purpose of this Act to create principles governing the conduct of industrial cooperation projects of United States nationals in the People's Republic of China and Tibet.
It is the sense of the Congress that any United States national conducting an industrial cooperation project in the People's Republic of China or Tibet should adhere to the following principles, which shall be known as the ``Harry Wu Principles'': (1) Suspend the use of any goods, wares, articles, or merchandise that the United States national has reason to believe were mined, produced, or manufactured, in whole or in part, by convict labor or forced labor; and refuse to use forced labor in the industrial cooperation project.
Seek to ensure that political or religious views, sex, ethnic or national background, involvement in political activities or nonviolent demonstrations, or association with suspected or known dissidents will not prohibit hiring, lead to harassment, demotion, or dismissal, or in any way affect the status or terms of employment in the industrial cooperation project.
The United States national should not discriminate in terms or conditions of employment in the industrial cooperation project against persons with past records of arrests or internal exile for nonviolent protest or membership in unofficial organizations committed to nonviolence.
Ensure that methods of production used in the industrial cooperation project do not pose an unnecessary physical danger to workers and neighboring populations and property and that the industrial cooperation project does not unnecessarily risk harm to the surrounding environment; and consult with community leaders regarding environmental protection with respect to the industrial cooperation project.
Strive to use business enterprises that are not controlled by the People's Republic of China or its authorized agents and departments as potential partners in the industrial cooperation project.
Prohibit any military presence on the premises of the industrial cooperation project.
Undertake to promote freedom of association and assembly among the employees of the United States national.
The United States national should protest any infringement by the Government of the People's Republic of China of these freedoms to the appropriate authorities of that government and to the International Labor Organization, which has an office in Beijing.
Use every possible channel of communication with the Government of the People's Republic of China to urge that government to disclose publicly a complete list of all those individuals arrested since March 1989, to end incommunicado detention and torture, and to provide international observers access to all places of detention in the People's Republic of China and Tibet and to trials of prisoners arrested in connection with the pro-democracy events of April through June of 1989 and the pro-democracy demonstrations which have taken place in Tibet since 1987.
Discourage or undertake to prevent compulsory political indoctrination programs from taking place on the premises of the operations of the industrial cooperation project.
Promote freedom of expression, including the freedom to seek, receive, and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless of frontiers, either orally, in writing or in print, in the form of art, or through any media.
To this end, the United States national should raise with appropriate authorities of the Government of the People's Republic of China concerns about restrictions on importation of foreign publications.
Undertake to prevent harassment of workers who, consistent with the United Nations World Population Plan of Action, decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children; and prohibit compulsory population control activities on the premises of the industrial cooperation project.
PROMOTION OF PRINCIPLES BY OTHER NATIONS.
The Secretary of State shall forward a copy of the principles set forth in section 2 to the member nations of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development and encourage them to promote principles similar to these principles.
In General.--Each United States national conducting an industrial cooperation project in the People's Republic of China or Tibet shall register with the Secretary of State and indicate whether the United States national agrees to implement the principles set forth in section 2.
No fee shall be required for registration under this subsection.
Effective Date.--The registration requirement of subsection (a) shall take effect 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``industrial cooperation project'' refers to a for-profit activity the business operations of which employ more than 25 individuals or have assets greater than $25,000; and (2) the term ``United States national'' means-- (A) a citizen or national of the United States or a permanent resident of the United States; and (B) a corporation, partnership, or other business association organized under the laws of the United States, any State or territory thereof, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.