SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Rural States Physician Recruitment and Retention Demonstration Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Rural States Physician Recruitment and Retention Demonstration Program.
Establishment of the Health Professions Database.
In this Act: (1) COGME.--The term ``COGME'' means the Council on Graduate Medical Education established under section 762 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 294o).
Demonstration program.--The term ``demonstration program'' means the Rural States Physician Recruitment and Retention Demonstration Program established by the Secretary under section 3(a).
Demonstration states.--The term ``demonstration States'' means the 2 States selected by the Secretary that, based upon 1998 data, have-- (A) an uninsured population above 20 percent (as determined by the Bureau of the Census); (B) a population eligible for medical assistance under the medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes) above 17 percent (as determined by the Health Care Financing Administration); (C) an unemployment rate above 4.8 percent (as determined by the Bureau of Labor Statistics); (D) an average per capita income below $21,200 (as determined by the Bureau of Economic Analysis); and (E) a geographic practice cost indices component of the reimbursement rate for physicians under the medicare program that is below the national average (as determined by the Health Care Financing Administration).
Eligible residency or fellowship graduate.--The term ``eligible residency or fellowship graduate'' means a graduate of an approved medical residency training program (as defined in section 1886(h)(5)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww(h)(5)(A))) in a shortage physician specialty.
Health professions database.--The term ``Health Professions Database'' means the database established under section 4(a).
Medicare program.--The term ``medicare program'' means the health benefits program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes).
MedPAC.--The term ``MedPAC'' means the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission established under section 1805 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395b-6).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Shortage physician specialties.--The term ``shortage physician specialty'' means a medical or surgical specialty identified in a demonstration State by the Secretary based on-- (A) an analysis and comparison of National data and demonstration State data; and (B) recommendations from appropriate Federal, State, and private commissions, centers, councils, medical and surgical physician specialty boards, and medical societies or associations involved in physician workforce, education and training, and payment issues.
RURAL STATES PHYSICIAN RECRUITMENT AND RETENTION DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a Rural States Physician Recruitment and Retention Demonstration Program for the purpose of ameliorating physician shortage, recruitment, and retention problems in rural States in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Consultation.--For purposes of establishing the demonstration program, the Secretary shall consult with-- (A) COGME; (B) MedPAC; (C) a representative of each demonstration State medical society or association; (D) the health workforce planning and physician training authority of each demonstration State; and (E) any other entity described in section 2(9)(B).
Duration.--The Secretary shall conduct the demonstration program for a period of 10 years.
Conduct of Program.-- (1) Funding of additional residency and fellowship positions.-- (A) In general.--As part of the demonstration program, the Secretary (acting through the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration) shall-- (i) waive any limitation under section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww) with respect to the number of residency and fellowship positions; (ii) increase by up to 15 percent of the total number residency and fellowship positions approved at each medical residency training program in each demonstration State the number of residency and fellowships in each shortage physician specialty; and (iii) subject to subparagraph (C), provide funding for such additional positions under subsections (d)(5)(B) and (h) of section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww).
Establishment of additional positions.-- (i) Identification.--The Secretary shall identify each additional residency and fellowship position created as a result of the application of subparagraph (A).
Negotiation and consultation.--The Secretary shall negotiate and consult with representatives of each approved medical residency training program in a demonstration State at which a position identified under clause (i) is created for purposes of supporting such position.
Contracts with residents and fellows.-- (i) In general.--The Secretary shall condition the availability of funding for each residency and fellowship position identified under subparagraph (B)(i) on the execution of a contract containing the provisions described in clause (ii) by each individual accepting such a residency or fellowship position.
Provisions described.--The provisions described in this clause provide that, upon completion of the residency or fellowship, the individual completing such residency or fellowship will practice in the demonstration State in which such residency or fellowship was completed that is designated by the contract for 1 year for each year of training under the residency or fellowship in the demonstration State.
Construction.--The period that the individual practices in the area designated by the contract shall be in addition to any period that such individual practices in an area designated under a contract executed pursuant to paragraph (2)(C).
Limitations.-- (i) Period of payment.--The Secretary may not fund any residency of fellowship position identified under subparagraph (B)(i) for a period of more than 5 years.
Phase-out of program.--The Secretary may not enter into any contract under subparagraph (C) after the date that is 5 years after the date on which the Secretary establishes the demonstration program.
Loan repayment and forgiveness program.-- (A) In general.--As part of the demonstration program, the Secretary (acting through the Administrator of Health Resources and Services Administration) shall establish a loan repayment and forgiveness program, through the holder of the loan, under which the Secretary assumes the obligation to repay a qualified loan amount for an educational loan of an eligible residency or fellowship graduate-- (i) for which the Secretary has approved an application submitted under subparagraph (D); and (ii) with which the Secretary has entered into a contract under subparagraph (C).
Qualified loan amount.-- (i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the Secretary shall repay not more than $25,000 per graduate per year of the loan obligation on a loan that is outstanding during the period that the eligible residency or fellowship graduate practices in the area designated by the contract entered into under subparagraph (C).
Limitation.--The aggregate amount under this subparagraph shall not exceed $125,000 for any graduate and the Secretary may not repay or forgive more than 30 loans per year in each demonstration State under this paragraph.
Contracts with residents and fellows.-- (i) In general.--Each eligible residency or fellowship graduate desiring repayment of a loan under this paragraph shall execute a contract containing the provisions described in clause (ii).
Provisions.--The provisions described in this clause are provisions that require the eligible residency or fellowship graduate to practice in a demonstration State during the period in which a loan is being repaid or forgiven under this section.
Application.-- (i) In general.--Each eligible residency or fellowship graduate desiring repayment of a loan under this paragraph shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Phase-out of loan repayment and forgiveness program.--The Secretary may not accept an application for repayment of any loan under this paragraph after the date that is 5 years after the date on which the demonstration program is established.
Construction.--Nothing in the section shall be construed to authorize any refunding of any repayment of a loan.
Prevention of double benefits.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this paragraph and any loan repayment or forgiveness program under title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 292 et sequentes).
Waiver of Medicare Requirements.--The Secretary is authorized to waive any requirement of the medicare program, or approve equivalent or alternative ways of meeting such a requirement, if such waiver is necessary to carry out the demonstration program, including the waiver of any limitation on the amount of payment or number of residents under section 1886 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ww).
Appropriations.-- (1) Funding of additional residency and fellowship positions.--Any expenditures resulting from the establishment of the funding of additional residency and fellowship positions under subsection (c)(1) shall be made from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i).
Loan repayment and forgiveness program.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the loan repayment and forgiveness program established under subsection (c)(2).
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HEALTH PROFESSIONS DATABASE.
Establishment of the Health Professions Database.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 7 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary (acting through the Administrator of Health Resources and Services Administration) shall establish a State-specific health professions database to track health professionals in each demonstration State with respect to specialty certifications, practice characteristics, professional licensure, practice types, locations, education, training, as well as obligations under the demonstration program as a result of the execution of a contract under paragraph (1)(C) or (2)(C) of section 3(c).
Data sources.--In establishing the Health Professions Database, the Secretary shall use the latest available data from existing health workforce files, including the AMA Master File, State databases, specialty medical society data sources and information, and such other data points as may be recommended by COGME, MedPAC, the National Center for Workforce Information and Analysis, or the medical society of the respective demonstration State.
Availability.-- (1) During the program.--During the demonstration program, data from the Health Professions Database shall be made available to the Secretary, each demonstration State, and the public for the purposes of-- (A) developing a baseline and to track changes in a demonstration State's health professions workforce; (B) tracking direct and indirect graduate medical education payments to hospitals; (C) tracking the forgiveness and repayment of loans for educating physicians; and (D) tracking commitments by physicians under the demonstration program.
Following the program.--Following the termination of the demonstration program, a demonstration State may elect to maintain the Health Professions Database for such State at its expense.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out this section.
Evaluation.-- (1) In general.--COGME and MedPAC shall jointly conduct a comprehensive evaluation of the demonstration program established under section 3.
Matters evaluated.--The evaluation conducted under paragraph (1) shall include an analysis of the effectiveness of the funding of additional residency and fellowship positions and the loan repayment and forgiveness program on physician recruitment, retention, and specialty mix in each demonstration State.
Progress Reports.-- (1) COGME.--COGME shall submit a report on the progress of the demonstration program to the Secretary and Congress 1 year after the date on which the Secretary establishes the demonstration program, 5 years after such date, and 10 years after such date.
MedPAC.--MedPAC shall submit biennial reports on the progress of the demonstration program to the Secretary and Congress.
Final Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which the demonstration program terminates, COGME and MedPAC shall submit a final report to the President, Congress, and the Secretary which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of COGME and MedPAC, together with such recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as COGME and MedPAC consider appropriate.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to COGME such sums as may be necessary for the purpose of carrying out this section.
For purposes of conducting the demonstration program and establishing and administering the Health Professions Database, the Secretary may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.