For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The term ``hazardous substance research centers'' means the hazardous substance research centers described in section 311(d) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9660(d)).
Such term shall include the Great Plains and Rocky Mountain Hazardous Substance Research Center, the Northeast Hazardous Substance Research Center, the Great Lakes and Mid-Atlantic Hazardous Substance Research Center, the South and Southwest Hazardous Substance Research Center, and the Western Region Hazardous Substance Research Center.
The term ``hazardous waste'' means-- (A) waste listed as hazardous waste pursuant to subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6921 et sequentes); (B) radioactive waste; and (C) mixed waste.
The term ``mixed waste'' means waste that contains a mixture of waste described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (3).
The term ``qualified individuals'' means qualified military personnel and qualified Department of Energy personnel.
The term ``qualified Department of Energy personnel'' means individuals who, during the 5-year period preceding the date of the enactment of this Act, have been employed by the Department of Energy and have been involved in the production of nuclear weapons, and whose employment at the Department of Energy during such 5-year period was scheduled for termination as a result of a significant reduction or modification in the programs or projects of the Department of Energy.
Such term shall not include any employee who terminates employment by taking early retirement or who otherwise voluntarily terminates employment.
The term ``qualified military personnel'' means members and former members of the Armed Forces of the United States who have training in site remediation, site characterization, waste management, waste reduction, recycling, engineering, or positions related to environmental engineering or basic sciences (including training for management positions).
Such term shall not include any former member of the Armed Forces whose service in the Armed Forces was terminated by dismissal (in the case of a former officer) or by discharge with a dishonorable discharge or a bad conduct discharge (in the case of a former enlisted member).
The term ``radioactive waste'' means solid, liquid, or gaseous material that contains radionuclides regulated under the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2011 et sequentes) of negligible economic value (considering the cost of recovery).
EDUCATION AND TRAINING PROGRAM.
In General.-- (1) Establishment of program.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretaries of Energy and Defense, shall establish an education and training program for qualified individuals in order to enable such individuals to acquire career training in environmental engineering, environmental sciences, or environmental project management in fields related to hazardous waste management and cleanup.
Development of academic program.--In carrying out the program, the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretaries of Energy and Defense, shall develop and implement an academic program for qualified individuals at institutions of higher education at both undergraduate and graduate levels, and which may lead to the awarding of an academic degree or a certification that is supplemental to an academic degree.
Program activities.-- (A) In General.--The program established pursuant to paragraph (1) may include educational activities and training related to-- (i) site remediation; (ii) site characterization; (iii) hazardous waste management (including such specialized activities and training relating specifically to radioactive waste as the Administrator determines to be appropriate); (iv) hazardous waste reduction (including such specialized activities and training relating specifically to radioactive waste as the Administrator determines to be appropriate); (v) recycling; (vi) process and materials engineering; (vii) training for positions related to environmental engineering, environmental sciences, or environmental project management (including training for management positions); and (viii) environmental engineering with respect to the construction of facilities to address the items described in clauses (i) through (vii).
Educational activities.--The program established pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include educational activities designed for personnel participating in a program to achieve specialization in the following fields: (i) Earth sciences.
Any other field that the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
Grant Program.-- (1) In general.--From the amounts made available under subsection (c), the Administrator shall award grants to the hazardous substance research centers to pay the Federal share of carrying out the development and implementation of the academic program described in subsection (a).
Grant awards.--The Federal share of each grant awarded under this subsection shall be 100 percent.
Funding.-- (1) Environmental protection agency.-- (A) In general.--Subject to the limitation described in subparagraph (B), 50 percent of the cost of carrying out this section shall be funded from amounts made available for fiscal year 1993 to the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
Limitation.--The limitation described in this subparagraph is that not more than 1 percent of the amounts made available for fiscal year 1993 to the Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes) may be used to carry out this section.
Special rule.--Amounts provided under this paragraph to hazardous substance research centers shall be used to supplement and not supplant other funds provided to such centers by the Environmental Protection Agency.
Department of defense.-- (A) In general.--Subject to the limitation described in subparagraph (B), 25 percent of the cost of carrying out this section shall be funded from amounts appropriated for fiscal year 1993 to the Defense Environmental Restoration Account established in section 2703 of title 10, United States Code.
Limitation.--The limitation described in this subparagraph is that not more than 1 percent of the amounts appropriated for fiscal year 1993 to the Defense Environmental Restoration Account may be used to carry out this section.
Transfer.--The Secretary of Defense shall transfer an amount determined in accordance with subparagraphs (A) and (B) to the Environmental Protection Agency, pursuant to the authority granted the Secretary under section 2703 of title 10, United States Code.
Department of energy.-- (A) In General.--Subject to the limitation described in subparagraph (B), 25 percent of the cost of carrying out this section shall be funded from amounts made available for fiscal year 1993 to the Department of Energy for the purpose of environmental cleanup.
Limitation.--The limitation described in this subparagraph is that not more than 1 percent of the amounts made available for fiscal year 1993 to the Department of Energy may be used to carry out this section.
Transfer.--The Secretary of Energy shall transfer an amount determined in accordance with subparagraphs (A) and (B) to the Environmental Protection Agency.
Special rule.--Amounts provided under this paragraph to hazardous substance research centers shall be used to supplement and not supplant other funds provided to such centers by the Department of Energy.