This Act may be cited as the ``National Health Museum Site Selection Act''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of General Services.
Excess property.--The term ``excess real property'' has the meaning given such term by section 3 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 472).
Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the National Health Museum, Incorporated, a District of Columbia nonprofit corporation exempt from Federal income taxation under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Property.--The term ``property'' means the excess real property identified under section 3(a)(1).
Authority to Convey.-- (1) Identification of property.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act and subject to the written concurrence of the Museum, the Administrator may identify a parcel of excess real property, including any improvements thereon, located in the District of Columbia to be conveyed under paragraph (2).
Conveyance.--Subject to the requirements of this Act, the Administrator may convey to the Museum all rights, title, and interest of the United States in and to the property identified under paragraph (1).
Relationship to Other Laws.--The authority of the Administrator under this section shall not be subject to-- (A) sections 202 and 203 of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 483, 484); (B) section 501 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11411); or (C) any other provision of law (other than Federal laws relating to environmental and historic preservation) inconsistent with this Act.
Purpose of Conveyance.--The purpose of the conveyance shall be to provide a site for the construction and operation of a new building to serve as the National Health Museum, including associated office, educational, conference center, and visitor and community services.
Prohibition on Lobbying Activities.--As a condition of the conveyance, the Museum shall agree that no part of the property will be used, during the 99-year period beginning on the date of conveyance, for activities to attempt to influence the passage or defeat of any legislation by Congress or the legislature of any State.
Date of Conveyance.-- (1) Notification.--If the Administrator identifies a parcel of property under subsection (a)(1), not later than 120 days after the date of such identification, the Museum shall notify the Administrator in writing of the date on which the Museum will accept conveyance of the property.
Date.--The date of conveyance shall be not less than 270 days and not more than 1 year after the date of the notice.
Effect of failure to notify.--If the Museum fails to provide the notice to the Administrator by the date described in paragraph (1), the property shall not be conveyed under this Act.
Maintenance of property.--The Administrator shall continue to maintain the property until the date of conveyance under this subsection.
Quitclaim Deed.--The property shall be conveyed to the Museum vacant and by quitclaim deed.
Conveyance Terms.-- (1) In general.--The conveyance shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the Administrator determines necessary to safeguard the interests of the United States.
Such terms and conditions shall be consistent with the terms and conditions set forth in this Act.
Purchase price.-- (A) In general.--The purchase price for the property shall be the fair market value of the property determined in accordance with uniform standards of appraisal practices based on the highest and best use of the property.
The purchase price shall be paid in full to the Administrator on or before the date of conveyance of the property and before occupancy of the property by the Museum.
Timing; appraisers.--The determination of fair market value shall be made in the 270-day period preceding the date of conveyance of the property.
The determination shall be made by a qualified appraiser selected by the Administrator.
Report to congress.--If the Administrator identifies a parcel of property under subsection (a)(1), Promptly upon the determination of the purchase price, and in any event at least 60 days in advance of the date of conveyance of the property, the Administrator shall transmit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate a report identifying the purchase price, together with a copy of the retention and disposal study conducted by Administrator with respect to the property.
Treatment of amounts received.--Net proceeds from the conveyance shall be deposited into, administered, and expended, subject to appropriations Acts, as part of the fund established by section 210(f) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 490(f)).
In this subparagraph, the term ``net proceeds from the conveyance'' means the proceeds from the conveyance minus the expenses incurred by the Administrator with respect to the conveyance.
Satellite museum.--As a condition of the conveyance, the Administrator shall receive assurances satisfactory to the Administrator that-- (A) the Museum will establish, operate, and maintain a satellite museum on Ellis Island, New Jersey, for the same purposes and subject to the same limitations as the National Health Museum; (B) such activities will be carried out in consultation with appropriate State and Federal departments and agencies and in conjunction with other redevelopment activities on Ellis Island; and (C) not later than 4 years after the date of the conveyance, in order to provide for the satellite museum, the Museum-- (i) will commence construction of the satellite museum; (ii) will commence renovation of a facility of the National Park Service and, upon completion of the renovation, will pay operation and maintenance costs associated with the facility; or (iii) has entered into an agreement to take occupancy of a facility of the National Park Service that has been renovated by the National Park Service and, upon taking such occupancy, will pay all rents associated with the facility.
Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed to authorize the conveyance of any right, title, or interest of the United States in or to real property on Ellis Island, New Jersey.
REVERSIONARY INTEREST IN THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--The property, at the option of the Administrator, may revert to the United States if-- (1) during the 3-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the Museum does not commence construction on the property, other than for a reason not within the control of the Museum; (2) during the 99-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the property is used for a purpose not authorized by section 3(b); (3) during the 99-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the property is used for a lobbying activity in violation of section 3(c); (4) during the 4-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the Museum does not commence construction of, or renovation of existing facilities for, a satellite museum under section 3(f)(3), other than for a reason not within the control of the Museum; (5) during the 50-year period beginning on the date of conveyance of the property, the satellite museum established under section 3(f)(3) is not operated in accordance with such section, other than for a reason not within the control of the Museum; or (6) the Museum ceases to be exempt from Federal income taxation as an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Repayment.--If the property reverts to the United States, the United States shall repay the Museum the lesser of-- (1) the full purchase price for the property (without interest) less any expenses incurred by the United States with respect to the reversion; or (2) the market value of the property on the date of the reversion (as determined by a qualified appraiser selected by the Administrator) less any expenses incurred by the United States with respect to the reversion.
Enforcing Reversion.--The Administrator shall perform all acts necessary to enforce any reversion of property to the United States under this section.
Inventory of Public Buildings Service.--Property that reverts to the United States under this section-- (1) shall be under the control of the General Services Administration; and (2) shall be assigned by the Administrator to the inventory of the Public Buildings Service.
AUTHORITY OF MUSEUM OVER PROPERTY.
After the date of conveyance of the property under this Act, the Museum may-- (1) demolish or renovate any existing or future improvement on the property; (2) build, own, operate, and maintain new improvements on the property; (3) finance and mortgage the property on customary terms and conditions; and (4) manage the property in furtherance of this Act.
Effect on Other Authority.--Nothing in this section may be construed to limit the authority of the National Capital Planning Commission or the Commission of Fine Arts.
Cooperation Concerning Zoning.-- (1) In general.--The United States shall cooperate with the Museum with respect to any zoning or other administrative matter relating to-- (A) the development or improvement of the property; or (B) the demolition of any improvement on the property as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Zoning applications.--Cooperation under paragraph (1) shall include making, joining in, or consenting to any application required to facilitate the zoning of the property.
Costs of remediation of any environmental hazards existing on the property before the date of conveyance of the property under this Act, including all asbestos-containing materials, shall be borne by the United States.
Environmental remediation shall begin as soon as practicable following identification of the property under section 3(a)(1) and shall be completed before the date of conveyance of the property.
The responsibilities of the United States under this section shall terminate on the date of conveyance of the property.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter until the expiration of the 2-year period following the date on which the satellite museum described in section 3(f)(3) opens to the public, the Museum shall submit a report on the status of the National Health Museum to the Administrator, the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to authorize the Administrator of General Services to convey excess real property in the District of Columbia to be used for construction of the National Health Museum, and for other purposes.