This Act may be cited as the ``Public Lands Corps Act of 1993''.
CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND PURPOSE.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) conserving or developing natural and cultural resources and enhancing and maintaining environmentally important lands and waters through the use of the Nation's young men and women in a Public Lands Corps can benefit those men and women by providing them with education and work opportunities, furthering their understanding and appreciation of the natural and cultural resources, and providing a means to pay for higher education or to repay indebtedness they have incurred to obtain higher education while at the same time benefiting the Nation's economy and its environment; (2) many facilities and natural resources located on public lands and on Indian reservations are in disrepair or degraded and in need of labor intensive rehabilitation, restoration, and enhancement work which cannot be carried out by Federal agencies at existing personnel levels; and.
youth conservation corps have established a good record of restoring and maintaining these kinds of facilities and resources in a cost effective and efficient manner, especially when they have worked in partnership arrangements with government land management agencies.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) perform, in a cost-effective manner, conservation, rehabilitation, restoration, and improvement work on public lands and Indian lands where that work will not be performed by existing employees, and to assist government and tribal land managing agencies in performing research and public education tasks associated with natural and cultural resources on public lands; (2) expose young men and women to public service while furthering their understanding and appreciation of the nation's natural and cultural resources; (3) expand educational opportunity by rewarding individuals who participate in national service with an increased ability to pursue higher education or job training; and (4) stimulate interest among the nation's young men and women in conservation careers by exposing them to conservation professionals in land managing agencies.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Corps'' means the Public Lands Corps established under section 4.
The term ``public lands'' means any lands or waters (or interest therein) owned or administered by the United States other than Indian lands.
The term ``qualified youth or conservation corps'' means any program established by a State or local government, by the governing body of any Indian tribe, or by a nonprofit organization that-- (A) is capable of offering meaningful, full-time, productive work for individuals between 16 and 25 years of age in a natural or cultural resource setting; (B) gives participants a mix of work experience, basic and life skills, education, training, and support services; and (C) provides participants with the opportunity to develop citizenship values and skills through service to their community and the United States.
The term ``Indian tribe'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other group which is recognized as an Indian tribe by the Secretary of the Interior.
Such term also includes any Native village corporation, regional corporation, and Native group established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
The term ``Indian'' means a person who is a member of an Indian tribe.
The term ``Indian lands'' means any real property owned by an Indian tribe, any real property held in trust by the United States for Indian tribes, and any real property held by Indian tribes which is subject to restrictions on alienation imposed by the United States.
The term ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
The term ``conservation, restoration, or rehabilitation project'' means any project for the conservation, restoration, or rehabilitation of natural, cultural, historic, archaeological, recreational, or scenic resources.
PUBLIC LANDS CORPS PROGRAM.
Establishment of Public Lands Corps.--There is hereby established in the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture a Public Lands Corps.
The Corps shall consist of young men and women between the ages of 16 and 25 who are enrolled in the Corps by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture under this Act.
Persons enrolled in the Corps shall be citizens or permanent residents of the United States, or of any territory or possession of the United States or of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico who have received a high school diploma or its equivalent or who agree to obtain a high school diploma or its equivalent and who did not drop out of an elementary or secondary school to enroll in the program.
Such persons shall be enrolled in the Corps without regard to the civil service and classification laws, rules, or regulations of the United States.
Qualified Youth or Conservation corps.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture are authorized to enter into contracts and cooperative agreements with any qualified youth or conservation corps to perform projects referred to in subsection (c).
Projects to be Carried Out.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture may each utilize the Public Lands Corps or any qualified youth or conservation corps to carry out any conservation, restoration, or rehabilitation project which such Secretary is authorized to carry out under other authority of law on public lands or Indian lands.
Preference for Certain Projects.--In selecting projects to be carried out under this Act, a preference shall be provided for those projects which-- (1) will provide long-term benefits to the public; (2) will instill in the enrollee involved a work ethic and a sense of public service; (3) will be labor intensive; (4) can be planned and initiated promptly; and (5) will provide academic, experiential, and environmental education opportunities.
Consistency.--All projects carried out under this Act on any public lands or Indian lands shall be consistent with the provisions of law and policies relating to the management and administration of such lands, with all other applicable provisions of law, and with all management, operational, and other plans and documents which govern the administration of the area.
Conservation Centers.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture are each authorized to provide such quarters, board, medical care, transportation, and other services, facilities, supplies, and equipment as such Secretary deems necessary in connection with the programs carried out under this section and to establish and use conservation centers owned and operated by such Secretary for purposes of such programs.
Each such Secretary may make arrangements with the Secretary of Defense to have logistical support provided by a military installation near any conservation center, where feasible, including the provision of temporary tent shelters where needed, transportation, and residential supervision.
Such Secretaries shall establish basic standards of health, nutrition, sanitation, and safety for all conservation centers and shall assure that such standards are enforced.
Where necessary or appropriate, such Secretaries may enter into contracts and other appropriate arrangements with State and local government agencies and private organizations for the management of such conservation centers.
Authorization.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture are each authorized to provide for the placement of qualified college students or recent college graduates in any Federal land managing agency under the jurisdiction of such Secretary as resource assistants to carry out such research or other technical functions on behalf of such agency as such Secretary deems appropriate.
Such persons shall be placed in the agency without regard to the civil service and classification laws, rules, or regulations of the United States.
Resource assistants participating in the program established under this section shall be recruited from colleges and universities throughout the United States, with particular attention given to ensure full representation of women and participants from historically black, Hispanic, and Native American schools.
Purposes.--The dual purposes of the Resource Assistant Program established under this section are to-- (1) augment the work force of the Federal land managing agencies through more extensive use of college students and recent college graduates, and (2) to enhance the college student or college graduate's exposure to the conservation agency work place as a potential career.
Existing Nonprofit Organizations.--Whenever 1 or more existing nonprofit organizations can, in the judgment of the agency, provide an appropriate level and quality of program to fulfill the requirements of this section, the agency is authorized and directed to implement this section through such existing organizations.
Private Sources of Funding.--Participating nonprofit organizations shall contribute to the expenses of providing and supporting the interns, through private sources of funding, at a level equal to 25 percent of the total costs of each participant in the Resource Assistant program who has been recruited and placed through that organization.
Any such participating nonprofit conservation service organization shall be required, by the respective land managing agency, to submit an annual report evaluating the scope, size, and quality of the program, including the value of work contributed by the Resource Assistants, to the mission of the agency.
LIVING ALLOWANCES AND TERMS OF SERVICE FOR PARTICIPANTS.
Living Allowances.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall provide each participant in the Public Lands Corps and each Resource Assistant participating in the program established under section 5 a living allowance which shall not exceed the maximum living allowance established for participants in the national service program established under title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes) (b) Terms of Service.--Each participant in the Public Lands Corps and each Resource Assistant participating in the program established under section 5 shall agree to participate in such program for a term of service established by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture, as the case may be, consistent with the terms of service required in the case of participants in the national service program established under the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes) SEC.
EDUCATIONAL BENEFITS OR AWARDS FOR PARTICIPANTS.
Educational Benefits and Awards.--Each participant in the Public Lands Corps and each Resource Assistant participating in the program established under section 5 shall be eligible for national service awards under title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes) if such participant complies with such requirements as may be established under this Act by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Agriculture respecting eligibility for such benefits and awards.
The period during which such benefits or awards may be used, the purposes for which such benefits or awards may be used, and the amount of such benefits and awards shall be determined as provided under such subtitle D. (b) Forbearance in the Collection of Stafford Loans.--For purposes of section 428 of the Higher Education Act of 1965, in the case of borrowers who are participants in the Public Lands Corps and Resource Assistants participating in the program established under section 5, upon written request, a lender shall grant a borrower forbearance on such terms as are otherwise consistent with the regulations of the Secretary of Education, during periods in which the borrower is serving as such a participant or Resource Assistant and eligible for a post service educational benefit or award under subsection (a).
The nondisplacement requirements of section 177 of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12637) shall be applicable to all activities carried out by the Public Lands Corps, to the program carried out under section 6, and to all activities carried out under this Act by a qualified youth or conservation corps.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Projects by qualified youth or conservation corps.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture are each authorized to pay not more than 75 percent of the costs of any project carried out pursuant to this Act on public lands by a qualified youth or conservation corps.
The remaining 25 percent of such costs may be provided from nonfederal sources in the form of funds, services, facilities, materials, equipment, or any combination of the foregoing.
No cost sharing shall be required in the case of any such project carried out on Indian lands.
Public Lands Corps.--A foundation associated with a Federal land managing agency may contribute to the costs of any project carried out by the Public Lands Corps established under this Act, but nothing in this Act shall be construed to require any cost sharing for any such project.
Funds Available Under National and Community Service Act.--For programs carried out under this section (including the Resource Assistant Program), the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall be eligible to receive funds available to any corps programs under the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12501 and following).
Such funds shall be provided to such Secretaries without regard to any restriction under section 122(b)(4) of such Act, or under any other provision of such Act, relating to the failure of a State to establish a corps program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.