This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Equal Protection Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Complaints of assault or abuse of children raised during custody proceedings or under other circumstances are often not pursued through criminal investigation and prosecution in the same manner and with the same vigor that similar complaints against adult victims are pursued.
Complaints are often adjudicated in family courts ill- equipped to, or jurisdictionally prohibited from, investigating criminal matters.
The failure by States, territories, and the District of Columbia to bring their full criminal investigatory and prosecutorial skills to bear regarding such complaints regarding alleged child victims places these alleged child victims at risk of further harm.
Children are a discrete and insular minority, within the Supreme Court's understanding of the Fourteenth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
Because of such status, children have been deprived of equal and adequate enforcement of the laws, and particularly those criminal laws prohibiting assault, battery, and torture.
It would be a violation of the alleged child victims' right to equal protection of law if enforcement actions are brought to bear regarding alleged adult victims but not brought to bear regarding child victims.
RIGHT TO PROTECTION; DUTY TO INTERVENE.
The Revised Statutes of the United States are amended by inserting after section 1979 the following: SEC.
RIGHT TO PROTECTION; DUTY TO INTERVENE.
Where the statutes, ordinances, regulations, custom, or usage of any State or territory or the District of Columbia provide for investigation and, where warranted, criminal prosecution in response to complaints of physical assault, sexual assault, sexual abuse, or sexual harassment of citizens or other persons within the jurisdiction thereof, these ordinances, regulations, customs, and usage shall be applied without regard to the age of the victim.
Neither the investigation and determination of facts for the purpose of awarding guardianship for or custody of a minor, nor the act of awarding such guardianship or custody shall relieve any State or territory or the District of Columbia of the duty to investigate and criminally prosecute valid complaints against child victims in the same vigorous and timely manner as complaints against adult victims.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to permit the public disclosure of any victim's identity.
To the contrary, to the maximum extent possible, the identity of all child victims shall be protected in any investigation and prosecution.
Every person who, under color of any statute, ordinance, regulation, custom, or usage, of any State or territory or the District of Columbia, fails to provide the affirmative protection or intervention required pursuant to subsection (a) to a citizen of the United States or other person within the jurisdiction thereof shall be liable to the party injured in an action at law, suit in equity, or other proper proceeding for redress.
Such protection and intervention as required by law shall not be limited to those cases in which the injured party is in the physical or constructive custody of such person.
The failure of a State, county, locality, or the District of Columbia to comply with this section shall act as an absolute disability to receipt of Federal grants for law-enforcement purposes as otherwise provided for in such laws as Congress may from time to time enact.
``An injured party under section 1979A may apply to the court for such relief as the court may grant in its discretion.
Such relief may include injunctive relief, restraining orders, and monetary damages.
Such relief may not include punitive damages.
Granting of such relief as the court may grant does not preclude criminal prosecution under the laws of a State or the United States.
Judgment entered on such action may be considered by the Department of Justice in its determination of whether a State, locality, or the District of Columbia has met the requirements of section 1979A.
``The court may not abstain from hearing a case under section 1979B until the completion of State court proceedings or exhaustion of State remedies unless the defendant demonstrate by clear and convincing evidence that delay of Federal proceedings will not endanger the injured party or deprive such party of the protection which is the subject of the proceeding.
In making any determination in a proceeding under this section, the court may, in its discretion, review all factual issues de novo, and shall not be limited by doctrines of res judicata or collateral estoppel, except that a final criminal conviction in a State or Federal court after a fully-litigated trial shall estop any review of the act or acts underlying such conviction.
``An action under section 1979B may be brought by the injured party, a guardian ad litem, a class of affected individuals, the Attorney General of the United States, or the attorney general of a State, commonwealth, territory.
A refusal by such attorneys general to prosecute shall not act as a bar to private action.
``In any action under section 1979B, the court, in its discretion, may allow the prevailing party, other than the United States or a State, territory or jurisdiction, a reasonable attorney's fee.