This Act may be cited as the ``Mount Pleasant National Scenic Area Act''.
The purposes of this Act with respect to the Mount Pleasant National Scenic Area are to-- (1) ensure appropriate protection and preservation of the scenic quality, water quality, natural characteristics, and water resources; (2) protect and manage vegetation to provide wildlife and fish habitat, consistent with paragraph (1) above; (3) provide areas that may develop characteristics of old- growth forests; and (4) provide a variety of recreation opportunities that are not inconsistent with the purposes set forth above.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL SCENIC AREA.
In General.--(1) There is hereby established in the George Washington National Forest, Virginia, the Mount Pleasant National Scenic Area (hereinafter referred to in this Act as the ``scenic area'').
The scenic area shall consist of certain lands in the George Washington National Forest, Virginia, which comprise seven thousand five hundred and eighty acres, more or less, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Mount Pleasant National Scenic Area--Proposed'', dated June 21, 1993.
Administration.--The Secretary of Agriculture, (hereinafter referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') shall administer the scenic area in accordance with this Act and the laws and regulations generally applicable to the National Forest System.
In the event of conflict between this Act and other laws and regulations, this Act shall take precedence.
Roads.--After the date of enactment of this Act, no new permanent roads shall be constructed within the scenic area: Provided, That this provision shall not be construed to deny access to private lands or interests therein in the scenic area.
Vegetation Management.--No timber harvest shall be allowed within the scenic area, except as may be necessary in the control of fire, insects, and diseases and to provide for public safety and trail access.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Secretary may engage in vegetation manipulation practices for maintenance of existing wildlife clearings and visual quality.
Firewood may be harvested for personal use along perimeter roads under such conditions as the Secretary may impose.
Motorized Travel.--Motorized travel shall be allowed on State Route 635 and on Forest Development Road 51, such Road 51 shall be subject to those motorized travel conditions the Secretary may impose.
Other than as provided above, motorized travel shall not be permitted within the scenic area, except that such travel may be permitted within the area as necessary for administrative use in furtherance of the purposes of this Act and on temporary routes in support of wildlife management projects.
Fire.--Wildfires shall be suppressed in a manner consistent with the purposes of this Act, using such means as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Insects and Disease.--Insect and disease outbreaks may be controlled in the scenic area to maintain scenic quality, prevent tree mortality, reduce hazards to visitors or to protect private lands.
Water.--The scenic area shall be administered so as to maintain or enhance existing water quality.
Maps and Descriptions.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and boundary description of the scenic area with the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the United States Senate and the Committee on Agriculture of the United States House of Representatives.
The map and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary is authorized to correct clerical and typographical errors in such boundary description and map.
Such map and boundary description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
In the case of any discrepancy between the acreage and the map description in subsection (a)(2), the map shall control.
Management Plan.--Within three years of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a management plan for the scenic area as an amendment to the Land and Resource Management Plan for the George Washington National Forest.
Such an amendment shall conform to the provisions of this Act.
Nothing in this Act shall require the Secretary to revise the Land and Resource Management Plan for the George Washington National Forest pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all federally owned lands within the scenic area are hereby withdrawn from disposition under the mining, mineral, and geothermal leasing laws, including all amendments thereto.