This Act may be cited as the ``Make College Affordable Act of 2001''.
DEDUCTION FOR HIGHER EDUCATION EXPENSES.
Deduction Allowed.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 222 as section 223 and by inserting after section 221 the following: ``SEC.
Allowance of Deduction.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the applicable dollar amount of the qualified higher education expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Applicable dollar amount.--The applicable dollar amount for any taxable year shall be determined as follows: Applicable ``Taxable year: dollar amount: 2002.......................................... $4,000 2003.......................................... $8,000 2004 and thereafter........................... $12,000.
Limitation Based on Modified Adjusted Gross Income.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount which would (but for this subsection) be taken into account under subsection (a) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount determined under paragraph (2).
Amount of reduction.-- ``(A) Ratio.--The amount determined under this paragraph equals the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount which would be so taken into account as-- ``(i) the excess of-- ``(I) the taxpayer's modified adjusted gross income for such taxable year, over ``(II) the applicable amount, bears to ``(ii) $15,000.
Applicable amount.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable amount with respect to the taxpayer is an amount equal to the &lt;plus-minus&gt;maximum taxable income amount in the 28- percent rate bracket in the table contained in section 1 applicable to the taxpayer.
Modified adjusted gross income.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `modified adjusted gross income' means the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year determined-- ``(A) without regard to this section and sections 911, 931, and 933, and ``(B) after the application of sections 86, 135, 219, 220, and 469.
For purposes of the sections referred to in subparagraph (B), adjusted gross income shall be determined without regard to the deduction allowed under this section.
Qualified Higher Education Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified higher education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means tuition and fees charged by an educational institution and required for the enrollment or attendance of-- ``(i) the taxpayer, ``(ii) the taxpayer's spouse, ``(iii) any dependent of the taxpayer with respect to whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151, or ``(iv) any grandchild of the taxpayer, as an eligible student at an institution of higher education.
Eligible courses.--Amounts paid for qualified higher education expenses of any individual shall be taken into account under subsection (a) only to the extent such expenses-- ``(i) are attributable to courses of instruction for which credit is allowed toward a baccalaureate degree by an institution of higher education or toward a certificate of required course work at a vocational school, and ``(ii) are not attributable to any graduate program of such individual.
Exception for nonacademic fees.--Such term does not include any student activity fees, athletic fees, insurance expenses, or other expenses unrelated to a student's academic course of instruction.
Eligible student.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `eligible student' means a student who-- ``(i) meets the requirements of section 484(a)(1) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1091(a)(1)), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section, and ``(ii) is carrying at least one-half the normal full-time work load for the course of study the student is pursuing, as determined by the institution of higher education.
Identification requirement.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) to a taxpayer with respect to an eligible student unless the taxpayer includes the name, age, and taxpayer identification number of such eligible student on the return of tax for the taxable year.
Institution of higher education.--The term `institution of higher education' has the same meaning given the term `eligible educational institution' in section 529(e).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) No double benefit.-- ``(A) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense for which a deduction is allowable to the taxpayer under any other provision of this chapter unless the taxpayer irrevocably waives his right to the deduction of such expense under such other provision.
Denial of deduction if credit elected.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for a taxable year with respect to the qualified higher education expenses of an individual if the taxpayer elects to have section 25A apply with respect to such individual for such year.
Dependents.--No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) to any individual with respect to whom a deduction under section 151 is allowable to another taxpayer for a taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Coordination with exclusions.--A deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for qualified higher education expenses only to the extent the amount of such expenses exceeds the amount excludable under section 135 or 530(d)(2) for the taxable year.
Limitation on taxable year of deduction.-- ``(A) In general.--A deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) for qualified higher education expenses for any taxable year only to the extent such expenses are in connection with enrollment at an institution of higher education during the taxable year.
Certain prepayments allowed.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to qualified higher education expenses paid during a taxable year if such expenses are in connection with an academic term beginning during such taxable year or during the first 3 months of the next taxable year.
Adjustment for certain scholarships and veterans benefits.--The amount of qualified higher education expenses otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to the education of an individual shall be reduced (before the application of subsection (b)) by the sum of the amounts received with respect to such individual for the taxable year as-- ``(A) a qualified scholarship which under section 117 is not includable in gross income, ``(B) an educational assistance allowance under chapter 30, 31, 32, 34, or 35 of title 38, United States Code, or ``(C) a payment (other than a gift, bequest, devise, or inheritance within the meaning of section 102(a)) for educational expenses, or attributable to enrollment at an eligible educational institution, which is exempt from income taxation by any law of the United States.
No deduction for married individuals filing separate returns.--If the taxpayer is a married individual (within the meaning of section 7703), this section shall apply only if the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse file a joint return for the taxable year.
Nonresident aliens.--If the taxpayer is a nonresident alien individual for any portion of the taxable year, this section shall apply only if such individual is treated as a resident alien of the United States for purposes of this chapter by reason of an election under subsection (g) or (h) of section 6013.
Regulations.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this section, including regulations requiring recordkeeping and information reporting.''.
Deduction Allowed in Computing Adjusted Gross Income.--Section 62(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after paragraph (17) the following: ``(18) Higher education expenses.--The deduction allowed by section 222.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the item relating to section 222 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments made in taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.
CREDIT FOR INTEREST ON HIGHER EDUCATION LOANS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
INTEREST ON HIGHER EDUCATION LOANS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the interest paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year on any qualified education loan.
Maximum Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $1,500.
Limitation based on modified adjusted gross income.-- ``(A) In general.--If the modified adjusted gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year exceeds $50,000 ($100,000 in the case of a joint return), the amount which would (but for this paragraph) be allowable as a credit under this section shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount which would be so allowable as such excess bears to $20,000.
Modified adjusted gross income.--The term `modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross income determined without regard to sections 911, 931, and 933.
Inflation adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning after 2003, the $50,000 and $100,000 amounts referred to in subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section (1)(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting `2002' for `1992'.
Rounding.--If any amount as adjusted under subparagraph (C) is not a multiple of $50, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50.
Dependents Not Eligible for Credit.--No credit shall be allowed by this section to an individual for the taxable year if a deduction under section 151 with respect to such individual is allowed to another taxpayer for the taxable year beginning in the calendar year in which such individual's taxable year begins.
Limit on Period Credit Allowed.--A credit shall be allowed under this section only with respect to interest paid on any qualified education loan during the first 60 months (whether or not consecutive) in which interest payments are required.
For purposes of this paragraph, any loan and all refinancings of such loan shall be treated as 1 loan.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified education loan.--The term `qualified education loan' has the meaning given such term by section 221(e)(1).
Dependent.--The term `dependent' has the meaning given such term by section 152.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Denial of double benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for any amount taken into account for any deduction under any other provision of this chapter.
Married couples must file joint return.--If the taxpayer is married at the close of the taxable year, the credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) only if the taxpayer and the taxpayer's spouse file a joint return for the taxable year.
Marital status.--Marital status shall be determined in accordance with section 7703.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Interest on higher education loans.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any qualified education loan (as defined in section 25B(e)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section) incurred on, before, or after the date of the enactment of this Act, but only with respect to any loan interest payment due after December 31, 2001.