Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) As the telecommunications industry has moved toward competition in the provision of long distance telephone services, consumers have increasingly elected to change the carriers that provide their long distance telephone services.
As many as 50,000,000 consumers now change long distance telephone service providers each year.
The fluid nature of the market for long distance telephone services has also allowed an increasing number of unauthorized changes of telephone service providers to occur.
Such changes have been called ``slamming'', a term which denotes any practice in which a consumer's long distance telephone service provider is changed without the consumer's knowledge or consent.
Slamming accounts for the largest number of consumer complaints received by the Common Carrier Bureau of the Federal Communications Commission.
As many as 1,000,000 consumers are subject to the unauthorized change of telephone service providers each year.
The increased costs which consumers face as a result of the unauthorized change of telephone service providers threaten to deprive consumers of the financial benefits created by a competitive marketplace in telephone services.
The burdens placed upon consumers by unauthorized changes of telephone service providers will expand exponentially as competition enters into the markets for intraLATA and local telephone services.
The Telecommunications Act of 1996 sought to combat unauthorized changes of telephone service providers by requiring that a provider who changes a subscriber without authorization pay the previously selected carrier an amount equal to all charges paid by the subscriber after the change.
The Federal Communications Commission has proposed regulations to implement this requirement.
Implementing these regulations will eliminate many of the financial incentives to execute unauthorized changes of telephone service providers.
However, under current and proposed regulations consumers have, and will continue to face, difficulty in securing proof of unauthorized changes.
Thus, enforcement of the regulations will be impeded by a lack of tangible proof of consumer consent to the change of telephone service providers.
The interests of consumers require that telephone service providers maintain evidence of their verification of consumer consent to changes in telephone service providers.
This evidence should take the form of a consumer's written consent or a recording of a consumer's oral consent obtained by the telephone service provider or a third party.
Both Congress and the Federal Communications Commission should continue to examine electronic means by which consumers could most readily change telephone service providers while ensuring that such changes would result only from consumer action evidencing express consent to such changes.
By providing consumers with a private right of action in State court, if State law permits, against those who have executed unauthorized changes of telephone service providers, Congress insures in a constitutional manner that neither Federal nor State courts will be overburdened with litigation, while also providing the proper forum for such actions given that competition will soon come to all segments of the telephone service market.
The majority of consumers who have been subject to the unauthorized change of telephone service do not seek redress through the Federal Communications Commission.
In light of the general responsibilities of the States for consumer protection, as well as the prosecutions against unauthorized changes already undertaken by the States, it is essential that the States be allowed to pursue actions on behalf of their citizens, while also preserving the proper role of the Federal Communications Commission in regulating the telecommunications industry.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to protect consumers from unauthorized changes of telephone service providers; (2) to allow the efficient prosecution of legal actions against telephone service providers who defraud consumers by transferring telephone service providers without consumer consent; and (3) to facilitate the ready selection of telephone service providers by consumers.
ENHANCEMENT OF PROTECTIONS AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED CHANGES IN SUBSCRIBER SELECTIONS OF TELEPHONE SERVICE PROVIDERS.
Verification of Authorization.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 258 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 258) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(a) Prohibition.--No telecommunications'' and inserting the following: ``(a) Prohibition.-- ``(1) In general.--No telecommunications''; (B) in paragraph (1), as so designated, by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Such procedures shall require the verification of a subscriber's selection of a provider in written or oral form (including a signature or voice recording) and shall require the retention of such verification in such manner and form and for such time as the Commission considers appropriate.
''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Verification.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the verification of a subscriber's selection of a telephone exchange service or telephone toll service provider shall take the form of a written or oral communication (in the same language as the solicitation of the selection) in which the subscriber-- ``(i) acknowledges the type of service to be changed as a result of the selection; ``(ii) affirms the subscriber's intent to select the provider as the provider of that service; ``(iii) affirms that the subscriber is authorized to select the provider of that service for the telephone number in question; ``(iv) acknowledges that the selection of the provider will result in a change in providers of that service; ``(v) acknowledges that only one provider may provide that service for that telephone number; and ``(vi) provides such other information as the Commission considers appropriate for the protection of the subscriber.
Requirements for oral verifications.--An oral verification of a change in telephone service providers under this paragraph-- ``(i) may not be made in the same communication in which the change is solicited; ``(ii) may be made only to a qualified and independent agent (as determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Commission) of the provider concerned; and ``(iii) shall include a prompt and clear disclosure by the agent that the purpose of the telephone call is to verify that the subscriber has consented to the change.
Confirmation of change.--A provider submitting or executing a change in telephone service providers shall notify the subscriber concerned by mail of the change not later than 5 business days after the date on which the change is executed.
The confirmation shall be provided in the language in which the change was solicited.
Availability of verifications.--A provider shall make available to a subscriber a copy of a verification under this paragraph upon the request of the subscriber or an authorized representative of the subscriber.''.
Regulations.--The Federal Communications Commission shall complete the adoption of the regulations required under section 258(a) of the Communications Act of 1934 by reason of the amendments made by paragraph (1) not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Additional Remedies.--Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Private Right of Action.-- ``(1) Private right.--A person or entity may, if otherwise permitted by the laws or rules of court of a State, bring in an appropriate court of that State-- ``(A) an action based on a violation of subsection (a) or the regulations prescribed under such subsection to enjoin such violation; ``(B) an action to recover for actual monetary loss from such a violation or to receive $1,000 in damages for each such violation, whichever is greater; or ``(C) both such actions.
Treble damages.--If the court finds that the defendant willfully or knowingly violated subsection (a) or the regulations prescribed under such subsection, the court may, in its discretion, increase the amount of the award to an amount equal to not more than 3 times the amount available under paragraph (1)(B).
Costs of litigation.--The court, in issuing any final order in an action brought pursuant to this subsection may award costs of litigation (including reasonable attorney and expert witness fees) to the prevailing plaintiff whenever the court determines that such award is appropriate.
Actions by States.-- ``(1) Authority of states.-- ``(A) In general.--Whenever the attorney general of a State, or an official or agency designated by a State, has reason to believe that any person has engaged or is engaging in an activity or practice of activities with respect to residents of that State in violation of subsection (a) or the regulations prescribed under such subsection, the State may bring a civil action on behalf of its residents to enjoin such activities, an action to recover for the greater of actual monetary loss or $1,000 in damages for each violation, or both such actions.
Treble damages.--If the court finds the defendant willfully or knowingly violated such subsection or regulations, the court may, in its discretion, increase the amount of the award to an amount equal to not more than 3 times the amount available under the subparagraph (A).
Exclusive jurisdiction of federal courts.-- ``(A) In general.--The district courts of the United States, the United States courts of any territory, and the District Court of the United States for the District of Columbia shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all civil actions brought under this subsection.
Additional relief.--Upon proper application, such courts shall also have jurisdiction to issue writs of mandamus, or orders affording like relief, commanding the defendant to comply with the provisions of subsection (a) or regulations prescribed under such subsection, including the requirement that the defendant take such action as is necessary to remove the danger of such violation.
Upon a proper showing, a permanent or temporary injunction or restraining order shall be granted without bond.
Rights of commission.-- ``(A) Notice.--The State shall serve prior written notice of any such civil action upon the Commission and provide the Commission with a copy of its complaint, except in any case where such prior notice is not feasible, in which case the State shall serve such notice immediately upon instituting such action.
Rights.--The Commission shall have the right-- ``(i) to intervene in any action covered by subparagraph (A); ``(ii) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein; and ``(iii) to file petitions for appeal.
Venue; service of process.--Any civil action brought under this subsection in a district court of the United States may be brought in the district wherein the defendant or victim is found, wherein the defendant is an inhabitant or transacts business, or wherein the violation occurred or is occurring, and process in such cases may be served in any district in which the defendant is an inhabitant or where the defendant may be found.
Investigatory powers.--For purposes of bringing a civil action under this subsection, nothing in this subsection shall prevent the attorney general of a State, or an official or agency designated by a State, from exercising the powers conferred on the attorney general or such official by the laws of such State to conduct investigations or to administer oaths or affirmations or to compel the attendance of witnesses or the production of documentary and other evidence.
Effect on state court proceedings.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit any official authorized by State law from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation of any civil or criminal statute of such State.
Limitation.--Whenever the Commission has instituted a civil action for violation of subsection (a) or the regulations prescribed under such subsection, no State may, during the pendency of such action instituted by the Commission, subsequently institute a civil action against any defendant named in the Commission's complaint for any violation as alleged in the Commission's complaint.
Definition.--In this subsection, the term `attorney general' means the chief legal officer of a State.''.
REPORT ON ELECTRONIC MEANS FOR VERIFYING SUBSCRIBER AUTHORIZATIONS OF SELECTIONS OF TELEPHONE SERVICE PROVIDERS.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Communications Commission shall submit to Congress a report on the technological feasibility and practicability of permitting subscribers to authorize changes in telephone service providers by electronic means (including authorization by electronic mail or by use of personal identification numbers or other security mechanisms) without thereby increasing the likelihood of unauthorized changes in such providers.