This Act may be cited as the ``National Park Bonds and Capital Improvements Act of 1997''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``National Park Capital Improvement Fund'' means the fund established under this Act containing the revenues collected by the National Park Service from all park units in the National Park System and held in trust by the Department of the Treasury for the purpose of paying the debt service on the National Park Capital Improvement bonds.
The term ``National Park Capital Improvement bonds'' means bonds sold by the Department of the Treasury under this Act to generate capital to make appropriate capital improvements of National Park units as specified in this Act.
The term ``capital improvements'' means more than physical construction projects such as roads, visitor centers, and other infrastructure projects.
The term includes one-time and periodic projects such as resource inventories, monitoring activities, and educational and interpretive programs, as well as transportation systems.
The term also includes data gathering and planning needed to design projects aimed at protecting park resources.
The term ``National Park System'' has the meaning provided in section 2(a) of the Act of August 8, 1953 (16 United States Code 1c(a)).
Congress finds the following: (1) Our Nation's parks are among our Nation's greatest treasure and an integral part of our national heritage.
We have an obligation to protect them for future generations to enjoy, learn from, and experience.
Unfortunately, in recent years we have failed to take proper care of our parks.
In particular, more and more people are visiting our parks and fewer and fewer real dollars are being spent to protect the resources for which they were set aside--their spectacular vistas, clean and clear water, significant wildlife habitats, historic buildings, etc.
While it is incumbent upon Congress to appropriate adequate funds for the operation of our national parks, the backlog of natural and cultural resource protection needs together with other needs for transportation improvements, building repairs, etc., is now so great that a new source of funding to meet these needs must be found.
All park needs, however, are not equal.
Of utmost importance and urgency is the need to protect the cultural, historic, and natural resources for which our parks were set aside to protect.
These resources are our parks' capital.
Unless we preserve them, there will be little reason for Americans and visitors from other countries to visit our parks.
Projects that are needed to prevent ongoing or threatened harm to the resources of our parks must be given the highest priority when funding priorities are set.
Similarly, projects designed to rehabilitate damage done in the past to park resources should be given the next highest priority.
In considering the needs of our parks, care must be taken to avoid exacerbating problems, particularly those involving visitors.
Emphasis must be placed now, and into the future, on designing and implementing transportation systems which will minimize use of private cars and resultant traffic problems within the parks, while providing safe, reliable, and flexible alternatives.
In considering the needs of our parks, activities which do not require on the ground construction must not be slighted.
In particular, educational and interpretive programs are central to the mission of our parks.
Similarly, reliable and sound information is central to the solution of the problems facing them.
Accordingly, these kinds of projects should be recognized as essential investments in our parks.
NATIONAL CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND AND BONDS ISSUED BY SECRETARY OF TREASURY.
Fund.--There is hereby established in the Treasury a National Park Capital Improvement Fund.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit all the revenues collected by the National Park Service from all park units in the National Park System in such Fund.
Such Fund shall be held in trust by the Secretary of the Treasury for the purpose of paying the debt service on the National Park Capital Improvement bonds.
Bonds.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall issue taxable bonds, the interest on which shall be paid from the National Park Capital Improvement Fund.
The Secretary of the Interior shall enter into a memorandum of agreement with the Secretary of the Treasury for the purpose of managing the National Park Capital Improvement Fund and issuing National Park Capital Improvement bonds.
The memorandum shall specify each of the following: (1) The aggregate face amount of the bonds issued.
Such amount may not exceed $1,500,000,000.
The maturity of the bonds, not to exceed 20 years.
The per capita amount required to amortize the bond issue, pay the interest on the bonds, and maintain a sufficient reserve consistent with Department of the Treasury standards.
The kinds of projects that will be funded with the bond proceeds.
NATIONAL PARK CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT FUND.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized and directed to credit all funds collected from the following to the National Park Capital Improvement Fund: (1) Funds collected pursuant to section 4 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 4601-6a).
Funds collected from the operation of concessions within the entire National Park System under the National Park Concessions Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 20 and following).
Funds collected as special use fees pursuant to the National Park Organic Act of 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1,2,3, and 4) and the National Park Administration Act (16 United States Code 1b, 1c, and 1d.
Use.--The National Park Capital Improvement Fund or a set-aside portion thereof shall be used by the Secretary of the Treasury to amortize the bond issue, pay the interest on the bonds, and maintain a sufficient reserve consistent with industry standards.
Excess Funds.--Any funds collected in excess of the amount necessary to amortize the bond issue and maintain a sufficient reserve, as determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, shall be held for use in amortizing and paying the interest on future National Park Capital Improvement bonds for the benefit of all units of the National Park System.
USE OF BOND PROCEEDS.
Eligible Projects.-- (1) In general.--Subject to such allocation of funding as may be provided in annual appropriations legislation, and subject to paragraph (2), bond proceeds under this Act may be used for projects that will-- (A) protect the natural, historic, cultural, scenic, and other resources of a park including activities which do not require on the ground construction such as obtaining reliable and sound information; (B) provide educational and interpretative programs to enrich the park resource based experience of visitors; and (C) rehabilitate, replace, or repair existing facilities or design and construct new facilities in a park unit provided that it does not create or exacerbate damage to park resources nor degrade the experience of visitors.
Limitation.--A project referred to in paragraph (1) shall be consistent with-- (A) the laws governing the national Park System; (B) any law governing the park unit; (C) the general management plan for the park; and (D) the current list of priority projects necessary to meet park needs.
In developing the list referred to in subparagraph (D) and in carrying out projects, the resources to be protected by each project shall always be specifically identified and the highest priority shall be given, first, to projects designed to prevent ongoing resource harm and second, to rehabilitate past damage.
The next highest priority shall be given to projects that protect resources and enhance the experience of visitors.
In considering the needs of our parks, care must be taken to avoid exacerbating problems particularly those involving visitors.
Emphasis must be placed on designing and implementing transportation systems which will minimize use of private cars and resultant traffic.
No project shall be approved for funding or funded pursuant to this Act if harm to any park resources will result therefrom.
Interest on Bond Proceeds.--Any interest earned on bond proceeds shall be transferred into the National Park Capital Improvement Fund.
Joint Regulations.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Treasury shall jointly issue regulations to carry out this Act.
Priorities.--The Secretary of the Interior shall issue regulations for the identification and prioritization of projects to be funded pursuant to this Act.