DENIAL OF ACCELERATED DEPRECIATION FOR ELECTRIC GENERATING FACILITIES HAVING EXCESS PROFITS.
In General.--Section 168 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to accelerated cost recovery system) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Denial of Accelerated Depreciation for Certain Electric Generating Facilities.-- ``(1) In general.--If there are excess profits with respect to an electric generating facility for any taxable year-- ``(A) the depreciation deduction provided by section 167(a) for such taxable year with respect to any property which is part of such facility shall be determined under the alternative depreciation system of subsection (g) (as if such system applied to such property for all previous taxable years), and ``(B) any previously allowed accelerated benefits with respect to any such property shall be recaptured by including the amount of such benefits in the gross income of the taxpayer for such taxable year.
Excess profits.--There are excess profits with respect to an electric generating facility for any taxable year if the facility has a pretax rate of return for such taxable year in excess of 15 percent.
Pretax rate of return.--The pretax rate of return for any taxable year with respect to any electric generating facility is the percentage obtained by dividing-- ``(A) the taxpayer's net income from such facility for such taxable year, by ``(B) the average of the taxpayer's net investment in the facility as of the beginning of each month in the taxable year.
Net investment.--The net investment in any facility is the excess of the aggregate adjusted bases of the property which is part of such facility over the taxpayer's indebtedness allocable to such facility.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, indebtedness that is incurred to construct, improve, or acquire property, and that is secured by an interest in such property shall be allocated to such property.
All other indebtedness of the taxpayer shall be allocated among the items of property held by the taxpayer based on their respective adjusted bases.
Net income.-- ``(A) In general.--The net income of the taxpayer from the operation of an electric generating facility is the excess of-- ``(i) gross income from the sale of electricity produced at such facility, over ``(ii) the deductions allowable by this subtitle which are directly allocable to the operations of such facility.
Sales to related persons.--If a sale of electricity is to a related person (within the meaning of section 482), the sale shall be treated for purposes of this paragraph as being made at the price at which the electricity is first sold to a person who is not a related person (as so defined), minus transmission costs.
Determination adjusted basis, etc.--For purposes of this paragraph and paragraph (4), adjusted bases and depreciation deductions shall be determined as if the alternative system of subsection (g) applied to the facility for all taxable years and only interest on indebtedness allocable to the facility shall be taken into account.
Previously allowed accelerated benefits.--The previously allowed accelerated benefits with respect to property are the excess of-- ``(A) depreciation deduction allowable under section 167(a) with respect to such property for all prior taxable years, over ``(B) the amount that would have been so allowable if such deductions had been determined under the alternative depreciation system of subsection (g) for all prior taxable years.
Treatment of recaptured amount.--The adjusted basis of any property with respect to which there is an amount included in gross income under paragraph (1)(B) shall be increased by the amount so included.
Exemptions for facilities using renewable energy.-- This subsection shall not apply to any facility producing electricity from renewable sources.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, renewable sources are wind, sun, or water power.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.