This Act may be cited as the ``Essential Air Service Modernization Act of 2003''.
Section 41742(a)(2) is amended by striking ``$15,000,000'' and inserting ``$75,000,000''.
Section 41733 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following-- ``(f) Termination Notice.--If the Secretary decides to terminate basic essential service to an eligible place, the Secretary shall notify the affected community not less than 90 days before such service is to be terminated.''.
In General.--Section 41740 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary shall facilitate and assist in establishing negotiations between major and national air carriers and air carriers that provide essential air service to an eligible place in order to determine equitable joint fares.''.
Report.--Not later than 12 months after enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit a report to Congress regarding the progress and effectiveness of implementation of the amendment made by subsection (a).
COMMUNITY AND REGIONAL CHOICE PROGRAM.
In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Community and regional choice program ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish an alternate essential air service program in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Compensation to Eligible Places.--In carrying out the program, the Secretary, instead of paying compensation to an air carrier to provide essential air service to an eligible place, may pay compensation directly to a unit of local government having jurisdiction over the eligible place or a State within the boundaries of which the eligible place is located.
Use of Compensation.--A unit of local government or State receiving compensation for an eligible place under the program shall use the compensation for any of the following purposes: ``(1) To provide assistance to an air carrier to provide scheduled air service to and from the eligible place, without being subject to the requirements of 41732(b).
To provide assistance to a person to provide scheduled or on-demand air taxi service to and from the eligible place and a non-hub or a small, medium, or large hub.
To provide assistance to a person to provide scheduled or on-demand surface transportation to and from the eligible place and a non-hub or a small, medium, or large hub.
In combination with other units of local government in the same region, to provide transportation services to and from all the eligible places in that region at an airport or other transportation center that can serve all the eligible places in that region.
Applications.-- ``(1) In general.--A unit of local government or State seeking to participate in the program for an eligible place shall submit to the Secretary an application in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Required information.--At a minimum, the application shall include-- ``(A) a statement of the amount of compensation required; and ``(B) a description of how the compensation will be used.
Participation Requirements.--An eligible place for which compensation is received under the program in a fiscal year shall not be eligible to receive in that fiscal year the essential air service that it would otherwise be entitled to under this subchapter.
Subsequent Participation.--A unit of local government participating in the program under this section in a fiscal year shall not be prohibited from participating in the basic essential air service program under this chapter in a subsequent fiscal year if such unit is otherwise eligible to participate in such basic program.
Funding.--Amounts appropriated or otherwise made available to carry out the essential air service program under this subchapter shall be available to carry out this section.
Compensation for units of local government ``Of the amounts made available under section 41742(a) the Secretary shall pay directly to a unit of local government having jurisdiction over the eligible place not less than $5,000 for such fiscal year to promote public use of the air service or transportation for which compensation is being paid.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 41744 the following: ``41745.
Community and regional choice program.
Compensation for units of local government.