This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Wildlife Disease Testing Acceleration Act of 2002''.
In this Act: (1) Chronic wasting disease.--The term ``chronic wasting disease'' means the animal disease that afflicts deer and elk-- (A) that is a transmissible disease of the nervous system resulting in distinctive lesions in the brain; and (B) that belongs to the group of diseases-- (i) that is known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies; and (ii) that includes scrapie, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, and Cruetzfeldt- Jakob disease.
Epizootic hemorrhagic disease.--The term ``epizootic hemorrhagic disease'' means the animal disease afflicting deer and other wild ruminants-- (A) that is an insect-borne transmissible viral disease; and (B) that results in spontaneous hemorraging in the muscles and organs of the afflicted animals.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Task force.--The term ``Task Force'' means the Interagency Task Force on Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease established by section 4(a).
CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE SAMPLING GUIDELINES AND TESTING PROTOCOL.
Sampling Guidelines.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue guidelines for the collection of animal tissue by Federal, State, tribal, and local agencies for testing for chronic wasting disease.
Requirements.--Guidelines issued under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) include procedures for the stabilization of tissue samples for transport to a laboratory for assessment; and (B) be updated as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Testing Protocol.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall issue a protocol to be used in the laboratory assessment of samples of animal tissue that may be contaminated with chronic wasting disease.
Laboratory Certification and Inspection Program.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish a program for the certification and inspection of Federal and non-Federal laboratories (including private laboratories) under which the Secretary shall authorize laboratories certified under the program to conduct tests for chronic wasting disease.
Verification.--In carrying out the program established under paragraph (1), the Secretary may require that the results of any tests conducted by private laboratories shall be verified by Federal laboratories.
Development of New Tests.--Not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall accelerate research into-- (1) the development of animal tests for chronic wasting disease, including-- (A) tests for live animals; and (B) field diagnostic tests; and (2) the development of testing protocols that reduce laboratory test processing time.
INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON EPIZOOTIC HEMORRHAGIC DISEASE.
In General.--There is established a Federal interagency task force to be known as the ``Interagency Task Force on Epizootic Hemorrhagic Disease'' to coordinate activities to prevent the outbreak of epizootic hemorrhagic disease and related diseases in the United States.
Membership.--The Task Force shall be composed of-- (1) the Secretary, who shall serve as the chairperson of the Task Force; (2) the Secretary of the Interior; (3) the Secretary of Commerce; (4) the Secretary of Health and Human Services; (5) the Secretary of the Treasury; (6) the Commissioner of Food and Drugs; (7) the Director of the National Institutes of Health; (8) the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; (9) the Commissioner of Customs; and (10) the heads of any other Federal agencies that the President determines to be appropriate.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Task Force shall submit to Congress a report that-- (1) describes any activities that are being carried out, or that will be carried out, to prevent-- (A) the outbreak of epizootic hemorrhagic disease and related diseases in the United States; and (B) the spread or transmission of epizootic hemorrhagic disease and related diseases to dairy cattle or other livestock; and (2) includes recommendations for-- (A) legislation that should be enacted or regulations that should be promulgated to prevent the outbreak of epizootic hemorrhagic disease and related diseases in the United States; and (B) coordination of the surveillance of and diagnostic testing for epizootic hemorrhagic disease, chronic wasting disease, and related diseases.
To carry out this Act, the Secretary may use funds made available to the Secretary for administrative purposes.