INVESTIGATIONS OF SUICIDES COMMITTED BY MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.
Investigations Required.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 80 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Investigations of suicides committed by members of the Armed Forces ``(a) In General.--In the event of a suicide by a member of the Armed Forces on active duty, the Secretary concerned shall provide for the conduct of an investigation into the suicide in accordance with this section.
Suicide Investigation Board.--(1) Each investigation into a suicide under this section shall be conducted by a board (to be known as a `suicide investigation board') established by the Secretary concerned for purposes of the investigation.
The head of a suicide investigation board under this subsection shall be a commissioned officer of the Armed Forces concerned on active duty in the grade of brigadier general or higher, or rear admiral (lower half) or higher in the case of the Navy, who is assigned for that purpose by the Secretary concerned.
Each suicide investigation board under this subsection shall consist of four additional commissioned officers on active duty, who are outside the chain of command of the member of the Armed Forces who committed suicide, who are assigned for that purpose by the Secretary concerned.
Investigations.--(1) The suicide investigation board established under subsection (b) shall conduct a thorough investigation of the causes contributing to the suicide, including an examination and assessment of actions that could have been taken to prevent the suicide.
(A) Each investigation under this subsection shall be conducted in accordance with such procedures as the Secretary concerned shall prescribe in regulations.
The Secretary of Defense shall ensure, to the extent practicable, that the procedures prescribed for purposes of this paragraph are uniform across the military departments.
The procedures under subparagraph (A) shall include mechanisms to preserve and protect the privacy and confidentiality of individuals concerned with or participating in investigations under this section, and shall be separate from any criminal investigation.
The Secretary concerned shall take appropriate actions to ensure that members of the Armed Forces assigned to a board under this section are proficient with the procedures applicable to the board under this paragraph before their participation in a suicide investigation board.
(A) No person or authority may censure, reprimand, or admonish a board conducting an investigation under this section, or the head or any member of the board, with respect to the actions of the board in conducting the investigation or with the findings or recommendations of the board as a result of the investigation.
No person or authority may attempt to coerce, or by any unauthorized means, influence the action of a board conducting an investigation under this section, or the head or any member of the board, in reaching the findings or recommendations of the board as a result of the investigation.
A board's investigation of a suicide under this section shall, to the extent practicable, be completed not later than 30 days after the date of the suicide.
Construction With Other Investigations.--The investigation of a suicide under this section is in addition to any other investigation, including any investigation for criminal purposes, otherwise authorized or required by law.
Reports on Investigations.--(1) Each board conducting an investigation under this section into the suicide of a member of the Armed Forces shall submit to the Secretary concerned reports as follows: ``(A) An interim report, not later than 30 days after the date of the suicide of the member, setting forth the preliminary findings of the board as a result of the investigation as of the date of such report.
A final report, not later than 60 days after the date of the suicide of the member, setting forth the final findings and recommendations of the board as a result of the investigation.
The recommendations of a board under paragraph (1)(B) may include such recommendations as the board considers appropriate for actions to be taken in order to reduce the incidence of suicide in members of the Armed Forces.
A board conducting an investigation may at any time submit to the Secretary concerned such other findings or recommendations as the board considers appropriate in order to reduce the incidence of suicide in members of the Armed Forces.
A report under this subsection may not be treated as a public document and, except as provided in subsection (f), may not be released to the public.
Public Summaries of Reports on Investigations.--(1) Not later than 60 days after the receipt of a final report of a board under subsection (e)(1)(B) on an investigation under this section, the Secretary concerned shall make available to the public a summary of the report, including the findings and recommendation of the board as a result of the investigation.
The summary shall, upon the request of any individual concerned with or participating in the investigation, redact any personal information of the individual, and shall redact such other personal and other information as the Secretary concerned considers appropriate to preserve the privacy, confidentiality, and integrity of the proceedings of the investigation and of investigations generally under this section.
The Secretary concerned shall permit public comment on each summary made public under paragraph (1) during the 45-day period beginning on the date such summary is made public.
The Secretary concerned shall provide for the review of any public comments received on a summary under paragraph (2) by such independent party as the Secretary shall select for purposes of the review.
Department of Defense-Wide Actions.--(1) The Secretary concerned shall transmit each report submitted to such Secretary under subsection (e)(1)(B), and any report submitted to such Secretary under subsection (e)(3), to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs.
The Assistant Secretary shall take appropriate actions to ensure the dissemination throughout the Department of Defense of any findings and recommendations in the reports submitted to the Assistant Secretary under paragraph (1) that the Assistant Secretary considers appropriate to reduce the incidence of suicide in members of the Armed Forces.
The Assistant Secretary shall take appropriate actions to ensure the implementation of the findings and recommendations disseminated under paragraph (2).
Such actions shall include the following: ``(A) The establishment and maintenance of an electronic database for monitoring the implementation of such findings and recommendations.
A requirement that all officials responsible for implementing such recommendations update the Assistant Secretary, not less often than once every six months, on the current status of the implementation of such recommendations.
Not less often than once every six months, each Secretary concerned shall, in coordination with the Assistant Secretary, update any programs and activities of the department concerned relating to the prevention of suicide in members of the Armed Forces in order to ensure that such programs and activities incorporate the recommendations of investigations conducted under this section and such other matters as are appropriate to reduce the incidence of suicide in members of the Armed Forces.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 80 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``1567.
Investigations of suicides committed by members of the Armed Forces.''.
Regulations.--The regulations required under section 1567 of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), shall be prescribed not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.