SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Family Fairness Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
ADDITIONAL EARNED INCOME CREDIT FOR MARRIED INDIVIDUALS.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 32(a) (relating to earned income credit) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) in the case of an eligible individual, an amount equal to the credit percentage of so much of the taxpayer's earned income for the taxable year as does not exceed the earned income amount, and ``(B) in the case of an eligible married individual, the applicable percentage of $1,000.''.
Applicable Percentage.--Section 32(b) (relating to percentages and amounts) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Applicable percentage.--The applicable percentage for any taxable year is equal to 100 percent reduced (but not below 0 percent) by 10 percentage points for each $1,000 (or fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's earned income for such taxable year exceeds $16,000.''.
Eligible Married Individuals.--Section 32(c) (relating to definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Eligible married individuals.--The term `eligible married individual' means an eligible individual-- ``(A) who is married (as defined in section 7703) and who has lived together with the individual's spouse at all times during such marriage during the taxable year, and ``(B) has earned income for the taxable year of at least $8,500.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 32(a)(2) is amended by striking ``paragraph (1)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)(A)''.
Section 32(j) is amended to read as follows: ``(j) Inflation Adjustments.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of any taxable year beginning after the applicable calendar year, each dollar amount referred to in paragraph (2)(B) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3), for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, by substituting for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof-- ``(i) `calendar year 1993' in the case of the dollar amounts referred to in paragraph (2)(B)(i), and ``(ii) `calendar year 1995' in the case of the dollar amounts referred to in paragraph (2)(B)(ii).
Definitions, etc.--For purposes of paragraph (1)-- ``(A) Applicable calendar year.--The term `applicable calendar year' means-- ``(i) 1994 in the case of the dollar amounts referred to in paragraph (2)(B)(i), and ``(ii) 1996 in the case of the dollar amounts referred to in paragraph (2)(B)(ii).
Dollar amounts.--The dollar amounts referred to in this subparagraph are-- ``(i) each dollar amount contained in subsection (b)(2)(A), and ``(ii) the $16,000 amount contained in subsection (b)(3) and the dollar amount contained in subsection (c)(4)(B).
Rounding.--If any dollar amount after being increased under paragraph (1) is not a multiple of $10, such dollar amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $10 (or, if such dollar amount is a multiple of $5, such dollar amount shall be increased to the next higher multiple of $10).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
EARNED INCOME CREDIT DENIED TO INDIVIDUALS NOT AUTHORIZED TO BE EMPLOYED IN THE UNITED STATES.
In General.--Section 32(c)(1) (relating to individuals eligible to claim the earned income tax credit) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Identification number requirement.--The term `eligible individual' does not include any individual who does not include on the return of tax for the taxable year-- ``(i) such individual's taxpayer identification number, and ``(ii) if the individual is married (within the meaning of section 7703), the taxpayer identification number of such individual's spouse.''.
Special Identification Number.--Section 32 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(l) Identification Numbers.--Solely for purposes of paragraphs (1)(F) and (3)(D) of subsection (c), a taxpayer identification number means a social security number issued to an individual by the Social Security Administration (other than a social security number issued pursuant to clause (II) (or that portion of clause (III) that relates to clause (II)) of section 205(c)(2)(B)(i) of the Social Security Act).''.
Extension of Procedures Applicable to Mathematical or Clerical Errors.--Section 6213(g)(2) (relating to the definition of mathematical or clerical errors) is amended by striking ``and' at the end of subparagraph (D), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (E) and inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) an omission of a correct taxpayer identification number required under section 23 (relating to credit for families with younger children) or section 32 (relating to the earned income tax credit) to be included on a return.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
REPEAL OF EARNED INCOME CREDIT FOR INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT CHILDREN.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 32(c)(1) (defining eligible individual) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible individual' means any individual who has a qualifying child for the taxable year.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Each of the tables contained in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 32(b) are amended by striking the items relating to no qualifying children.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
RULES RELATING TO DENIAL OF EARNED INCOME CREDIT ON BASIS OF DISQUALIFIED INCOME.
Definition of Disqualified Income.--Paragraph (2) of section 32(i) (defining disqualified income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, and'' and by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: ``(D) capital gain net income, ``(E) the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) the aggregate income from all passive activities for the taxable year (determined without regard to any amount described in a preceding subparagraph), over ``(ii) the aggregate losses from all passive activities for the taxable year (as so determined), and ``(F) amounts includible in gross income under section 652 or 662 for the taxable year to the extent not taken into account under any preceding subparagraph.
For purposes of subparagraph (E), the term `passive activity' has the meaning given such term by section 469.''.
Decrease in Amount of Disqualified Income Allowed.--Paragraph (1) of section 32(i) (relating to denial of credit) is amended by striking ``$2,350'' and inserting ``$1,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
MODIFICATION OF ADJUSTED GROSS INCOME DEFINITION FOR EARNED INCOME CREDIT.
In General.--Subparagraph (B) of section 32(a)(2) (relating to limitation) is amended by striking ``adjusted gross income'' and inserting ``modified adjusted gross income''.
Modified Adjusted Gross Income Defined.--Section 32(c) (relating to definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Modified adjusted gross income.--The term `modified adjusted gross income' means adjusted gross income, increased by the sum of-- ``(A) social security benefits (as defined in section 86(d)) received to the extent not includible in gross income, ``(B) amounts received by (or on behalf of) a spouse pursuant to a divorce or separation instrument (as defined in section 71(b)(2)) which, under the terms of the instrument, are fixed as payable for the support of the children of the payor spouse (as determined under section 71(c)), ``(C) interest received or accrued during the taxable year which is exempt from tax imposed by this chapter, and ``(D) any amount received by a participant or beneficiary under a qualified retirement plan (as defined in section 4974(c)) to the extent not includible in gross income.
Subparagraph (D) shall not apply to any amount received if the recipient transfers such amount in a rollover contribution described in section 402(c), 403(a)(4), 403(b)(8), or 408(d)(3).''
Study.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall conduct a study of the Federal tax treatment of child support payments to determine whether or not changes in such treatment are necessary.
The Secretary shall report to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives the results of the study, including recommendations (if any) which the Secretary determines appropriate to encourage payment of child support liabilities by parents and to make both parents more responsible for a child's economic well-being.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
EARNED INCOME CREDIT NOT ALLOWED UNTIL RECEIPT OF EMPLOYER'S WITHHOLDING STATEMENT.
In General.--Section 6401(b) (relating to excessive credits treated as overpayments) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Special rule for earned income credit.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the earned income credit allowed under section 32 shall not be treated as a credit allowable under subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 unless the Secretary is able to verify the amount of such credit by comparing it with-- ``(A) information returns filed with the Secretary under section 6051(d) by employees of the individual claiming the credit, ``(B) self-employment tax returns filed with the Secretary under section 6017, or ``(C) both.
The preceding sentence shall apply to any advanced payment of the earned income credit under section 3507.''
Effective Date; Study.-- (1) In general.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
Study.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall conduct a study to determine the delays (if any) which would result in the processing of Federal income tax returns by reason of the amendment made by this section.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report the results of the study to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, including recommendations (if any) on ways to shorten any delay.
PREVENTION OF FRAUD IN ELECTRONIC RETURNS.
In General.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall provide that any person applying to be an electronic return originator on or after the date of the enactment of this Act shall not be approved unless the applicant provides fingerprints and credit information to the satisfaction of the Secretary.
Past Applicants.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall apply the requirements described in subsection (a) to electronic return originators whose applications were approved before the date of the enactment of this Act without fingerprints and credit check information being provided.