This Act may be cited as the ``Cumberland Island Preservation Act''.
CUMBERLAND ISLAND NATIONAL SEASHORE AND CUMBERLAND ISLAND WILDERNESS, GEORGIA.
Boundary Adjustments for Land Exchange.-- (1) Exclusion of conveyed lands.--If the proposed land exchange described in subsection (b) is agreed to by the Secretary of the Interior, any lands to be conveyed by the United States as part of the land exchange shall be excluded from the boundaries of the Cumberland Island Wilderness or potential wilderness area designated by section 2 of Public Law 97-250 (96 United States Statutes at Large 709; 16 United States Code 1132 note).
Inclusion of acquired lands.--All lands acquired by the United States as part of the land exchange described in subsection (b) shall be included in, and managed as part of, the Cumberland Island Wilderness designated by section 2 of Public Law 97-250 (96 United States Statutes at Large 709; 16 United States Code 1132 note).
Upon acquisition of the lands, the Secretary of the Interior shall adjust the boundaries of the Cumberland Island Wilderness to include the acquired lands.
Description of Land Exchange.--The land exchange referred to in subsection (a) is a land exchange with regard to Cumberland Island National Seashore, which is established under Public Law 92-536 (16 United States Code 459i et sequentes), and Cumberland Island Wilderness that is being negotiated by the Secretary of the Interior with the Nature Conservancy and High Point, Inc., for the purpose of acquiring privately owned lands on Cumberland Island, which have substantial wilderness characteristics, in exchange for Federal lands located at the north end of the island.
Treatment of Main Road.-- (1) Findings.--The main road at Cumberland Island National Seashore is included on the register of national historic places.
The continued existence and use of the main road, as well as a spur road that provides access to Plum Orchard mansion at Cumberland Island National Seashore, is necessary for maintenance and access to the natural, cultural, and historical resources of Cumberland Island National Seashore.
The inclusion of these roads both on the register of national historic places and in the Cumberland Island Wilderness or potential wilderness area is incompatible and causes competing mandates on the Secretary of the Interior for management.
Exclusion from wilderness.--The main road on Cumberland Island (as described on the register of national historic places), the spur road that provides access to Plum Orchard mansion, and such limited area on each side of these roads as the Secretary of the Interior considers necessary, are hereby excluded from the boundaries of the Cumberland Island Wilderness and the potential wilderness area designated by section 2 of Public Law 97-250 (96 United States Statutes at Large 709; 16 United States Code 1132 note).
Effect of exclusion.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to affect the inclusion of the main road on the register of national historic places or the authority of the Secretary of the Interior to impose reasonable restrictions on the use of the main road or spur road to minimize any adverse impacts on the Cumberland Island Wilderness or potential wilderness area.
Restoration of Plum Orchard Mansion.-- (1) Restoration required.--Using funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in paragraph (4), the Secretary of the Interior shall restore Plum Orchard mansion at Cumberland Island National Seashore so that the condition of the restored mansion is at least equal to the condition of the mansion when it was donated to the United States.
The Secretary may also accept donations of money and in-kind contributions for the purpose of restoring the mansion.
Subsequent maintenance.--The Secretary of the Interior shall endeavor to enter into an agreement with public and private persons to provide for the maintenance of Plum Orchard mansion following its restoration.
Restoration plan.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to Congress a comprehensive plan for the repair, stabilization, and restoration of Plum Orchard mansion to the condition the mansion was in when acquired by the United States.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for the restoration of Plum Orchard mansion under paragraph (1).
Archaeological and Historic Sites.--The Secretary of the Interior shall identify, document, and protect archaeological sites located on Federal land within Cumberland Island National Seashore.
The Secretary shall prepare and implement a plan to preserve designated national historic sites within the seashore.
Designation of Additional Wilderness Area.-- (1) Designation.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), a parcel of Federal lands within Cumberland Island National Seashore, which comprises approximately ____ acres on the southern portion of Cumberland Island, as depicted on the map entitled ``Cumberland Island Wilderness Addition, Proposed'', dated ________, 1998, is hereby designated as wilderness and therefore as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System.
Administration.--The parcel designated by paragraph (1) shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior in accordance with the Wilderness Act as part of the Cumberland Island Wilderness designated by section 2 of Public Law 97-250 (96 United States Statutes at Large 709; 16 United States Code 1132 note).
The Secretary shall adjust the boundaries of the Cumberland Island Wilderness to include the parcel.
Existing rights and uses.--The designation of the wilderness area under paragraph (1) shall be subject to valid existing rights and pre-existing uses of the designated parcel.