This Act may be cited as the ``Still Saving Women's Lives Act of 2002''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The renewed commitment of the world community to the formulation of government policies that contribute to global population stabilization and to improvements in the status of women owes much to the efforts of the United Nations and its specialized agencies and organizations, particularly the United Nations Population Fund (hereinafter referred to as the ``UNFPA'').
Over one-half of the UNFPA's assistance is devoted to maternal and child health programs, including the provision of family planning services, and it is a major supplier of modern methods of contraception.
UNFPA also supports efforts aimed at preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS and other sexually- transmitted diseases and activities aimed specifically at enhancing the status of women.
UNFPA does not fund abortion services, rather, UNFPA seeks to reduce the incidence of abortion by improving access to contraceptive services and to reduce deaths and injuries related to unsafe abortion by supporting treatment of women suffering from its complications.
The United States contribution to UNFPA last year provided an estimated 870,000 women in the developing world with effective modern contraception, thereby preventing 500,000 unintended pregnancies, 200,000 abortions, and thousands of maternal and child deaths.
Many global environmental problems, including water shortages, pollution, tropical deforestation, and the loss of wildlife habitat are linked to rapid population growth.
UNFPA has assisted countries around the world plan for and slow population growth, thereby reducing its effects on the environment.
Assistance provided by UNFPA conforms to the principle, affirmed at the 1994 International Conference on Population and Development by 180 nations, including the United States, that ``all couples and individuals have the basic right to decide freely and responsibly the number and spacing of their children and to have the information, education, and means to do so.''.
UNFPA opposes coercion in any form.
All of UNFPA's programs are designed in conformity with universally recognized human rights principles.
An appropriate way to express the legitimate concerns of the United States Government about the population policies of the People's Republic of China is by placing those concerns on the bilateral agenda along with other important human rights issues, not by singling out a United Nations agency by withholding all funding thereby punishing the women and families around the world who depend on its humanitarian aid.
UNFPA plays a constructive role in helping to reduce the incidence of coercive practices in China through its country program which has been successful in eliminating targets and quotas and promoting voluntary family planning and informed consent in the 32 program counties.
By improving contraceptive method choice, expanding the range of reproductive health services, and enhancing the status of women, the UNFPA country program will help to enable the Chinese to implement the human rights approach of the International Conference on Population and Development.
The United States Government provided a voluntary contribution of $21,500,000 to UNFPA for fiscal year 2001 and President Bush's budget request for fiscal year 2002 allocated $25,000,000 for UNFPA.
In the winter of 2001, the Secretary of State submitted written testimony to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate expressing support for the invaluable work of UNFPA and for securing funding for the organization.
The United States Government, as part of its efforts to improve the dire health conditions of Afghan women, pledged in October 2001 an additional $600,000 to UNFPA to address the reproductive health care needs of Afghan refugees in surrounding nations and of the internally displaced within Afghanistan.
Congress demonstrated its strong bipartisan support for a voluntary United States contribution to UNFPA of up to $34,000,000 in adopting the fiscal year 2002 foreign operations appropriations bill, which was passed by the House of Representatives on a vote of 357 to 66 and by the Senate by unanimous consent and signed into law (Public Law 107-115) by the President on January 10, 2002.
The President decided not to obligate the funds.
On February 12, 2002, Representatives Hastert, Armey, and Delay sent a letter to the President urging him to investigate UNFPA programs in China and urging him to stop funds from going to China.
In May 2002, the President sent a 3-person delegation, including Ambassador (retired) William A.
Brown, Ms. Bonnie L. Glick, and Dr. Theodore G. Tong, to investigate UNFPA programs in China and allegations that the agency was involved in coercive abortion practices.
This independent team returned and concluded that the allegations were untrue.
On May 29, 2002, the team sent a letter to Secretary of State Colin Powell stating the following: ``First Finding: We find no evidence that UNFPA has knowingly supported or participated in the management of a program of coercive abortion or involuntary sterilization in the PRC.
``First Recommendation: We therefore recommend that not more than $34,000,000 which has already been appropriated be released to UNFPA.''.
Regrettably, the Administration overruled the recommendation of its own delegation and invoked an overly broad interpretation of the law in order to eliminate funding for UNFPA.
This bill is a response to this harmful decision.
PERMANENT GUIDELINES FOR UNITED STATES VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE UNFPA.
Section 301 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2221) is amended by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) For fiscal years after fiscal year 2002, funds appropriated to the President or the Department of State under any law for a voluntary contribution to the United Nations Population Fund (UNFPA) and funds appropriated to the President or the Department of State under any law and available only for a voluntary contribution to the UNFPA shall be obligated and expended for such purpose not more than 30 days after such funds become available unless the President certifies that the UNFPA performs coercive abortions or involuntary sterilizations.
The certification authority of the President under this subsection may not be delegated.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR UNITED STATES VOLUNTARY CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE UNFPA.
In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of chapter 3 of part 1 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for the fiscal year 2003 for United States voluntary contributions to the UNFPA.