In General.--Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes), is amended-- (1) by redesignating part X as part Y; (2) by redesignating section 2401 as section 2501; and (3) by inserting after part W the following: ``PART X--SAFE SCHOOLS ASSISTANCE ``SEC.
In General.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, may make grants to local educational agencies for the purpose of providing assistance to such agencies most directly affected by crime and violence.
Model Project.--The Director, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, shall develop a written safe schools model in English and in Spanish in a timely fashion and make such model available to any local educational agency that requests such information.
``Grants made by the Director under this part shall be used-- ``(1) to fund anticrime and safety measures and to develop education and training programs for the prevention of crime, violence, and illegal drugs and alcohol; ``(2) for counseling programs for victims of crime within schools; ``(3) for crime prevention equipment, including metal detectors and video-surveillance devices; and ``(4) for the prevention and reduction of the participation of young individuals in organized crime and drug and gang- related activities in schools.
In General.--In order to be eligible to receive a grant under this part for any fiscal year, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Director in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Requirements.--Each application under subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) a request for funds for the purposes described in section 2402; ``(2) a description of the schools and communities to be served by the grant, including the nature of the crime and violence problems within such schools; ``(3) assurances that Federal funds received under this part shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this part; and ``(4) statistical information in such form and containing such information that the Director may require regarding crime within schools served by such local educational agency.
Comprehensive Plan.--Each application shall include a comprehensive plan that shall contain-- ``(1) a description of the crime problems within the schools targeted for assistance; ``(2) a description of the projects to be developed; ``(3) a description of the resources available in the community to implement the plan together with a description of the gaps in the plan that cannot be filed with existing resources; ``(4) an explanation of how the requested grant will be used to fill gaps; ``(5) a description of the system the applicant will establish to prevent and reduce crime problems; and ``(6) a description of educational materials to be developed in Spanish.
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS; LIMITATIONS ON GRANTS.
Administrative Cost Limitation.--The Director shall use not more than 5 percent of the funds available under this part for the purposes of administration and technical assistance.
Renewal of Grants.--A grant under this part may be renewed for up to 2 additional years after the first fiscal year during which the recipient receives its initial grant under this part, subject to the availability of funds, if-- ``(1) the Director determines that the funds made available to the recipient during the previous year were used in a manner required under the approved application; and ``(2) the Director determines that an additional grant is necessary to implement the crime prevention program described in the comprehensive plan as required by section 2403(c).
Selection of Recipients.--The Director, in consultation with the Secretary of Education, shall consider the following factors in awarding grants to local educational agencies: ``(1) Crime problem.--The nature and scope of the crime problem in the targeted schools.
Need and ability.--Demonstrated need and evidence of the ability to provide the services described in the plan required under section 2403(c).
Population.--The number of students to be served by the plan required under section 2403(c).
Geographic Distribution.--The Director shall attempt, to the extent practicable, to achieve an equitable geographic distribution of grant awards.
Report to Director.--Local educational agencies that receive funds under this part shall submit to the Director a report not later than March 1 of each year that describes progress achieved in carrying out the plan required under section 2403(c).
Report to Congress.--The Director shall submit to the House Committee on Education and Labor, the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, and the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives a report by October 1 of each year in which grants are made available under this part which shall contain a detailed statement regarding grant awards, activities of grant recipients, a compilation of statistical information submitted by applicants under 2403(b)(4), and an evaluation of programs established under this part.
``For the purpose of this part: ``(1) The term `Director' means the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
The term `local educational agency' means a public board of education or other public authority legally constituted within a State for either administrative control or direction of, or to perform a service function for, public elementary and secondary schools in a city, county, township, school district, or other political subdivision of a State, or such combination of school districts of counties as are recognized in a State as an administrative agency for its public elementary and secondary schools.
Such term includes any other public institution or agency having administrative control and direction of a public elementary or secondary school.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et seq.
), is amended by striking the matter relating to part X and inserting the following: ``Part X--Safe Schools Assistance ``Sec.
Allocation of funds; limitations on grants.
``Part Y--Transition; Effective Date; Repealer ``Sec.
Continuation of rules, authorities, and proceedings.''.
Section 1001(a) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793), is amended by adding after paragraph (17) the following: ``(18) There are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out the projects under part X.