This Act may be cited as the ``Financial Accounting Fairness Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Financial Accounting Standards Board was established in 1972 as a private sector body to establish and improve financial accounting principles.
In 1973, the Securities and Exchange Commission, which is statutorily empowered to prescribe accounting principles to be used in financial statements filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission and otherwise used pursuant to the Federal securities laws, established a presumption that financial statements that do not comply with financial accounting principles promulgated by the Financial Accounting Standards Board would be misleading and therefore in violation of those laws.
Since 1973, financial accounting principles established by the Financial Accounting Standards Board accordingly have generally had the full force and effect of Securities and Exchange Commission regulations.
Questions have been raised as to whether under these circumstances persons aggrieved by a Financial Accounting Standards Board pronouncement of financial accounting principles would have the right to judicial review thereof, and whether such pronouncements must comply with statutory and other requirements applicable to the promulgation of Securities and Exchange Commission.
Congress believes it appropriate to provide that, under these circumstances, such promulgations by the Financial Accounting Standards Board are covered by statutory and other requirements relating to the adoption of regulations by the Securities and Exchange Commission, including provisions relating to judicial review and provisions, among other things, requiring that the Commission consider whether proposed regulations would promote efficiency, competition, and capital formation.
AVAILABILITY OF JUDICIAL REVIEW.
Section 19 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78s) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of the heading of such section the following: ``; oversight of accounting principles''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Review of Financial Accounting Principles.-- ``(1) Express approval of accounting principles required.-- The Commission shall not treat any proposed accounting principle of any accounting standards board as a generally accepted accounting principle for purposes of any financial statement, report, or other document required under any of the securities laws unless such proposed accounting principle has been approved by the Commission in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
The Commission shall not treat any such statement, report, or document as being without substantial authoritative support because of the failure of such statement, report, or document to comply with any proposed accounting principle until such proposed accounting principle has been approved by the Commission in accordance with the requirements of this subsection, or the Commission has otherwise expressly provided by rule or regulation.
Review of accounting principles.--Each accounting standards board shall file with the Commission, in accordance with such rules as the Commission may prescribe, copies of any proposed accounting principle or any proposed change in, addition to, or deletion from the accounting principles of such board (hereinafter in this subsection collectively referred to as a `proposed accounting principle') accompanied by a concise general statement of the basis and purpose of such proposed accounting principle.
The Commission shall, upon the filing of any proposed accounting principle, publish notice thereof together with the terms of substance of the proposed accounting principle or a description of the subjects and issues involved.
The Commission shall give interested persons a reasonable opportunity to submit written data, views, and arguments concerning such proposed accounting principle.
Procedure for review.--Within 35 days of the date of publication of notice of the filing of a proposed accounting principle in accordance with paragraph (2) of this subsection, or within such longer period as the Commission may designate up to 90 days of such date if it finds such longer period to be appropriate and publishes its reasons for so finding or as to which the accounting standards board consents, the Commission shall-- ``(A) by order approve such proposed accounting principle, or ``(B) institute proceedings to determine whether the proposed accounting principle should be disapproved.
Such proceedings shall include notice of the grounds for disapproval under consideration and opportunity for hearing and be concluded within 180 days of the date of publication of notice of the filing of the proposed accounting principle.
At the conclusion of such proceedings the Commission, by order, shall approve or disapprove such proposed accounting principle.
The Commission may extend the time for conclusion of such proceedings for up to 60 days if it finds good cause for such extension and publishes its reasons for so finding or for such longer period as to which the accounting standards board consents.
The Commission shall not approve any proposed accounting principle prior to the 30th day after the date of publication of notice of the filing thereof, unless the Commission finds good cause for so doing and publishes its reasons for so finding.
Grounds for approval.--The Commission shall approve a proposed accounting principle of a board if it finds that such proposed accounting principle is consistent with the public interest and the protection of investors.
The Commission shall disapprove a proposed accounting principle of a board if it does not make such finding.
In determining whether such proposed accounting principle is consistent with the public interest, the Commission shall also consider, in addition to the protection of investors, whether the principle will promote efficiency, competition, and capital formation.
The Commission shall not approve a proposed accounting principle that would impose a burden on competition not necessary or appropriate in furtherance of the purposes of this title.
Consultation with banking agencies.--In reviewing any proposed accounting principle that will apply to any persons subject to examination by or reporting requirements of a Federal banking agency, the Commission shall consult with and consider the views of each such Federal banking agency.
If a Federal banking agency comments in writing on a proposed accounting principle that has been published for comment, the Commission shall respond in writing to such written comment before approving or disapproving the proposed accounting principle.
The Commission shall, at the request of a Federal banking agency, publish such comment and response in the Federal Register at the time of approving or disapproving the proposed accounting principle.
Agency record.--At the time of filing any proposed accounting principle under paragraph (2), an accounting standards board shall submit to the Commission the record of its proceedings in connection with such principle.
Such record shall include all written comments or statements filed with the accounting standards board with respect to the proposed accounting principle and all written communications between the accounting standards board and any person relating to the proposed accounting principle.
The Commission, in reviewing a proposed accounting principle, shall keep in a public file and make available for copying the record submitted by the accounting standards board and all written statements filed with the Commission with respect to the proposed accounting principle and all written communications between the Commission and any person relating to the proposed accounting principle.
The Commission shall not be required to keep in a public file or make available for copying any such statement or communication that it may withhold from the public in accordance with section 552 of title 5, United States Code.
Judicial review available.--Any proposed accounting principle that the Commission has approved under paragraph (4) shall, for purposes of section 25 of this title, be considered to be a rule of the Commission promulgated pursuant to this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection: ``(A) Proposed accounting principle.-- ``(i) Accounting principle.--The term `accounting principle' means a statement or interpretation of a standard or concept of, or guidance with respect to, financial accounting or reporting, but does not include any technical bulletin, discussion memorandum, invitation to comment, special or research report, or response to an inquiry or other request.
Proposed accounting principle.--The term `proposed accounting principle' means an accounting principle that has been formally adopted or ratified by the standard-setting body of an accounting standards board.
Accounting standards board.--The term `accounting standards board' means an accounting standards-setting organization whose principles are, pursuant to rules or regulations of the Commission, treated by Commission as generally accepted accounting principles for purposes of any financial statement, report, or other document required to be filed under any of the securities laws.
Federal banking agency.--The term `Federal banking agency' has the meaning provided in section 3(z) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1813(z)).
Effective Date.--The provisions of this subsection shall apply with respect to any accounting principle that is formally adopted or ratified by the standard-setting body of an accounting standards board on or after January 1, 1998.