This Act may be cited as the ``Coastal Jobs Creation Act of 2010''.
The purpose of this Act is to provide employment opportunities for coastal communities by increasing support for-- (1) cooperative research and monitoring; (2) the revitalization of coastal infrastructure; (3) recreational fishing registry programs; (4) marine debris removal; and (5) restoration of coastal resources.
COASTAL JOBS CREATION GRANT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Commerce (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall use funds made available under this Act to implement a Coastal Jobs Creation Grant Program using the authorities listed in subsection (b).
The Secretary shall expend such funds as quickly as possible consistent with prudent management.
Authorities.--The authorities referred to in subsection (a) are authorities under the following laws: (1) Section 306A of the Coastal Zone Management Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1455a).
Section 315(e) of the Coastal Zone Management Act (16 United States Code 1461(e)).
Section 204 of the Coral Reef Conservation Act (16 United States Code 6403).
Section 12304 of the Integrated Coastal and Ocean Observation System Act of 2009 (33 United States Code 3603).
Section 318 of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1867).
Section 401(g) of the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1881(g)).
Section 3 of the Marine Debris Research, Prevention, and Reduction Act (33 United States Code 1952).
Section 408 of the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1421f-1).
Section 311 of the National Marine Sanctuaries Act (16 United States Code 1442).
Section 205 of the National Sea Grant College Program Act (33 United States Code 1124).
Activities.--Activities funded under the Coastal Jobs Creation Grant Program shall include the following: (1) Cooperative research to collect and compile economic and social data related to recreational and commercial fisheries management.
Cooperative research to identify habitat areas of particular concern and for habitat restoration and conservation.
Improving the quality and accuracy of information generated by the Marine Recreational Fishery Statistics Survey.
Establishment and implementation of State recreational fishing registry programs.
Training and deploying observers authorized or required under the Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes).
Preservation or restoration of coastal resources identified for their conservation, recreational, ecological, historic, or aesthetic values.
Redevelopment of deteriorating and underutilized working waterfronts and ports.
Research and monitoring within the National Estuarine Research Reserve System, the National Marine Sanctuary System, and coral reef ecosystems, and under the National Sea Grant College Program.
Implementation of local strategies developed by State or Federal agencies to conserve coral reef ecosystems.
Research to develop, test, and deploy innovations and improvements in coastal and ocean observation technologies.
Cooperative research to collect data to improve, supplement, or enhance fishery and marine mammal stock assessments.
Cooperative research to assess the amount and type of bycatch and to engineer gear types designed to reduce bycatch.
Reducing and preventing the occurrence and adverse impacts of marine debris on the marine environment and navigation safety.
Funding Criteria.--The Secretary may not make funds available under this Act for a proposed project unless the project, to the maximum extent practicable-- (1) provides the greatest employment opportunities for coastal communities and benefits commercial and recreational fishing industries; (2) replicates or builds upon a successful local, State, Federal, or tribal project; (3) utilizes existing fishing community infrastructure, including idled fishing vessels; (4) supports research and monitoring that improves science- based management decisions; or (5) contributes to restoring, protecting, or preserving coastal and ocean ecosystems.
Guidelines.--Within 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop guidelines necessary to implement the Coastal Jobs Creation Grant Program.
AMENDMENT OF MAGNUSON-STEVENS FISHERY CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT ACT.
Section 401(g) of Magnuson-Stevens Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1881(g)) is amended by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5), and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Funding.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of appropriations, shall enter into contracts with, or provide grants to, States for the purpose of establishing and implementing a registry program to meet the requirements for exemption under paragraph (2).''.
To carry out the Coastal Jobs Creation Grant Program there is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce $80,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2011 through 2015, of which no more than 5 percent may be used each fiscal year for administrative expenses of such program.