Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Right To Know Act of 1996''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Patients cannot make appropriate health care decisions without access to all relevant information relating to those decisions.
Restrictions on the ability of physicians and other health care providers to provide full disclosure of all relevant information to patients making health care decisions violate the principles of informed consent and the ethical standards of the health care professions.
Serious concerns have been raised about the use by health plans of contractual clauses or policies that interfere with communications between physicians and other health care providers and their patients and the impact of such clauses and policies on the quality of care received by those patients.
The offering and operation of health plans affects commerce among the States, health care providers located in one State serve patients who reside in other States as well as that State, and, in order to provide for uniform treatment of health care providers and patients among the States, it is necessary to cover health plans operating in one State as well as those operating among the several States.
PROHIBITION OF INTERFERENCE WITH CERTAIN MEDICAL COMMUNICATIONS.
In General.-- (1) Prohibition of contractual provision.--An entity offering a health plan (as defined in subsection (d)(2)) may not provide, as part of any contract or agreement with a health care provider, any restriction on or interference with any medical communication, as defined in subsection (b).
Prohibition of adverse action.--An entity offering a health plan may not take any of the following actions against a health care provider on the basis of a medical communication: (A) Refusal to contract with the health care provider.
Termination or refusal to renew a contract with the health care provider.
Refusal to refer patients to or allow others to refer patients to the health care provider.
Refusal to compensate the health care provider for covered services.
Any other retaliatory action against the health care provider.
Nullification.--Any provision that is prohibited under paragraph (1) is null and void.
Medical Communication Defined.--In this section, the term ``medical communication''-- (1) means any communication, other than a knowing and willful misrepresentation, made by the health care provider-- (A) regarding the mental or physical health care needs or treatment of a patient and the provisions, terms, or requirements of the health plan or another health plan relating to such needs or treatment, and (B) between-- (i) the provider and a current, former, or prospective patient (or the guardian or legal representative of a patient), (ii) the provider and any employee or representative of the entity offering such plan, or (iii) the provider and any employee or representative of any State or Federal authority with responsibility for the licensing or oversight with respect to such entity or plan; and (2) includes communications concerning-- (A) any tests, consultations, and treatment options, (B) any risks or benefits associated with such tests, consultations, and options, (C) variation among any health care providers and any institutions providing such services in experience, quality, or outcomes, (D) the basis or standard for the decision of an entity offering a health plan to authorize or deny health care services or benefits, (E) the process used by such an entity to determine whether to authorize or deny health care services or benefits, and (F) any financial incentives or disincentives provided by such an entity to a health care provider that are based on service utilization.
Enforcement Through Imposition of Civil Money Penalty.-- (1) In general.--Any entity that violates paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) shall be subject to a civil money penalty of-- (A) up to $25,000 for each violation, or (B) up to $100,000 for each violation if the Secretary determines that the entity has engaged, within the 5 years immediately preceding such violation, in a pattern of such violations.
Procedures.--The provisions of subsections (c) through (l) of section 1128A of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320a-7a) shall apply to civil money penalties under this paragraph in the same manner as they apply to a penalty or proceeding under section 1128A(a) of such Act.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Health care provider.--The term ``health care provider'' means anyone licensed under State law to provide health care services.
Health plan.--The term ``health plan'' means any public or private health plan or arrangement (including an employee welfare benefit plan) which provides, or pays the cost of, health benefits, and includes an organization of health care providers that furnishes health services under a contract or agreement with such a plan.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Coverage of third party administrators.--In the case of a health plan that is an employee welfare benefit plan (as defined in section 3(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974), any third party administrator or other person with responsibility for contracts with health care providers under the plan shall be considered, for purposes of this section, to be an entity offering such health plan.
Non-Preemption of State Law.--A State may establish or enforce requirements with respect to the subject matter of this section, but only if such requirements are more protective of medical communications than the requirements established under this section.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as-- (1) as requiring an entity offering a health plan to enter into or renew a contract or agreement with any willing health care provider, or (2) preventing an entity from acting on information relating to treatment actually provided to a patient or the failure of a health care provider to comply with legal standards relating to the provision of care.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Contracts.--Subsection (a)(1) shall apply to contracts or agreements entered into or renewed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, and to contracts and agreements entered into before such date as of 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Retaliatory actions.--Subsection (a)(2) shall apply to actions taken on or after the date of the enactment of this Act, regardless of when the communication on which the action is based occurred.
Nullification.--Subsection (a)(3) shall apply to provisions as of the date of the enactment of this Act.