This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Choice and Reproductive Health Protection Act of 1995''.
Congress finds that-- (1) reproductive rights are central to the ability of women to exercise full enjoyment of rights secured to women by Federal and State law; (2) abortion has been a legal and constitutionally protected medical procedure throughout the United States since 1973 and has become part of mainstream medical practice as is evidenced by the positions of medical institutions including the American Medical Association, the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, and the American Medical Women's Association; (3) the availability of abortion services is diminishing throughout the United States, as evidenced by-- (A) the fact that 84 percent of counties in the United States have no abortion provider; and (B) the fact that between 1982 and 1992 the number of abortion providers decreased in 45 States; and (4) at a minimum, Congress must retain the following policies, which currently preserve the choice and reproductive health of women: (A) Funding through the medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et seq.)
for abortion services for victims of rape or incest.
Protection from clinic violence.
Full implementation of contraceptive and infertility research programs.
Authorization of family planning programs.
the prohibition of any gag rule on information pertaining to reproductive medical services.
The evaluation of the drug called Mifepristone or RU-486.
The establishment of breast cancer, cervical cancer, and chlamydia screening programs in all 50 States.
The fundamental right to choose, as stated in the Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade, 410 United States Reports 113 (1973).
The ability of military personnel overseas to purchase abortion services at military facilities with private funds.
SENSE OF CONGRESS WITH RESPECT TO CERTAIN REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH ISSUES.
Rape and Incest Victim Protection.--It is the sense of Congress that current provisions of law (in effect as of October 1, 1993) requiring Federal and State governments to provide funding for abortion services in cases of life endangerment, and for victims of rape or incest, to women eligible for assistance through the medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes) are essential to the health and well-being of the women and must not be repealed.
Clinic Violence.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) Federal resources are necessary to ensure that women have safe access to reproductive health facilities and that health professionals can deliver services in a secure environment free from violence and threats of force; and (2) it is necessary and appropriate to use Federal resources to combat the nationwide campaign of violence and harassment against reproductive health centers.
Preventive Health Measures Regarding Breast and Cervical Cancer.--It is the sense of Congress that the program of grants under title XV of the Public Health Service Act should receive a level of funding that is adequate for all States to receive grants under such title.
Programs Regarding Contraception and Infertility.-- (1) Research centers.--It is the sense of Congress that the program of research centers under section 452A of the Public Health Service Act should receive a level of funding that is adequate for a reasonable number of research centers to be operated under the program.
Loan repayment program regarding conduct of research.-- It is the sense of Congress that the program of loan-repayment contracts under section 487B of the Public Health Service Act should receive a level of funding that is adequate for a reasonable number of individuals to conduct research under the program.
Section 1001(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) For the purpose of grants and contracts under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $220,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $250,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1998 through 2000.''.
FREEDOM OF FULL DISCLOSURE.
Title XI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000h et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
INFORMATION ABOUT AVAILABILITY OF REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE SERVICES.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no governmental authority shall, in or through any program or activity that is administered or assisted by such authority and that provides health care services or information, limit the right of any person to provide, or the right of any person to receive, nonfraudulent information about the availability of reproductive health care services, including family planning, prenatal care, adoption, and abortion services.
Definition.--As used in this section the term `governmental authority' means any authority of the United States.''.
FAIRNESS IN EVALUATION OF RU-486.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall-- (1) assure that the Food and Drug Administration evaluates the drug called Mifepristone or RU-486 only on the basis provided by law; and (2) assess initiatives by which the Department of Health and Human Services can promote the testing, licensing, and manufacturing in the United States of the drug or other antiprogestins.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v. Wade, 410 United States Reports 113 (1973) established constitutionally based limits on the power of States to restrict the right of a woman to choose to terminate a pregnancy.
Under the strict scrutiny standard enunciated in the Roe v. Wade decision, States were required to demonstrate that laws restricting the right of a woman to choose to terminate a pregnancy were the least restrictive means available to achieve a compelling State interest.
Since 1989, the Supreme Court has no longer applied the strict scrutiny standard in reviewing challenges to the constitutionality of State laws restricting such rights.
As a result of the recent modification by the Supreme Court of the strict scrutiny standard enunciated in the Roe v. Wade decision, certain States have restricted the right of women to choose to terminate a pregnancy or to utilize some forms of contraception, and the restrictions operate cumulatively to-- (A)(i) increase the number of illegal or medically less safe abortions, often resulting in physical impairment, loss of reproductive capacity, or death to the women involved; (ii) burden interstate and international commerce by forcing women to travel from States in which legal barriers render contraception or abortion unavailable or unsafe to other States or foreign nations; (iii) interfere with freedom of travel between and among the various States; (iv) burden the medical and economic resources of States that continue to provide women with access to safe and legal abortion; and (v) interfere with the ability of medical professionals to provide health services; (B) obstruct access to and use of contraceptive and other medical techniques that are part of interstate and international commerce; (C) discriminate between women who are able to afford interstate and international travel and women who are not, a disproportionate number of whom belong to racial or ethnic minorities; and (D) infringe on the ability of women to exercise full enjoyment of rights secured to the women by Federal and State law, both statutory and constitutional.
Although Congress may not by legislation create constitutional rights, Congress may, where authorized by the enumerated powers of Congress and not prohibited by a constitutional provision, enact legislation to create and secure statutory rights in areas of legitimate national concern.
Congress has the affirmative power under section 8 of article I of the Constitution and under section 5 of the 14th amendment to the Constitution to enact legislation to prohibit State interference with interstate commerce, liberty, or equal protection of the laws.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to establish, as a statutory matter, limitations on the power of a State to restrict the freedom of a woman to terminate a pregnancy in order to achieve the same limitations as were provided, as a constitutional matter, under the strict scrutiny standard of review enunciated in the Roe v. Wade decision and applied in subsequent cases from 1973 through 1988.
In General.--A State-- (1) may not restrict the freedom of a woman to choose whether or not to terminate a pregnancy before fetal viability; (2) may restrict the freedom of a woman to choose whether or not to terminate a pregnancy after fetal viability unless such a termination is necessary to preserve the life or health of the woman; and (3) may impose requirements on the performance of abortion procedures if such requirements are medically necessary to protect the health of women undergoing such procedures.
Rules of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to-- (1) prevent a State from protecting unwilling individuals or private health care institutions from being required to participate in the performance of abortions to which the individuals or institutions are conscientiously opposed; (2) prevent a State from declining to pay for the performance of abortions; or (3) prevent a State from requiring a minor to involve a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult before terminating a pregnancy.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and each other territory or possession of the United States.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no Federal law shall be construed to prohibit a provider of health insurance from offering coverage for the full range of reproductive health care services, including abortion services.
ABORTIONS IN FACILITIES OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES NOT PROHIBITED IF NOT FEDERALLY FUNDED.
Section 1093 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) Limitation.--'' before ``Funds''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Abortions in Facilities Overseas.--Subsection (a) does not limit the performing of an abortion in a facility of the uniformed services located outside the 48 contiguous States of the United States if-- ``(1) the cost of performing the abortion is fully paid from a source or sources other than funds available to the Department of Defense; ``(2) abortions are not prohibited by the laws of the jurisdiction where the facility is located; and ``(3) the abortion would otherwise be permitted under the laws applicable to the provision of health care to members and former members of the uniformed services and their dependents in such facility.