This Act may be cited as the ``Corps of Engineers River Stewardship Independent Investigation and Review Act''.
In this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Corps of Engineers River Stewardship Independent Investigation and Review Commission established under section 3(a).
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' has the meaning given the term in section 4 of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b).
Session day.--The term ``session day'' means a day on which both Houses of Congress are in session.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall establish a commission to be known as the ``Corps of Engineers River Stewardship Independent Investigation and Review Commission''.
Membership.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of not to exceed 22 members, and shall include-- (A) individuals appointed by the President to represent-- (i) the Department of the Army; (ii) the Department of the Interior; (iii) the Department of Justice; (iv) environmental interests; (v) hydropower interests; (vi) flood control interests; (vii) recreational interests; (viii) navigation interests; (ix) the Council on Environmental Quality; and (x) such other affected interests as are determined by the President to be appropriate; (B) 6 governors from States representing different regions of the United States, as determined by the President; and (C) 6 representatives of Indian tribes representing different regions of the United States, as determined by the President.
Date of appointments.--The appointment of a member of the Commission shall be made not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Term; Vacancies.-- (1) Term.--A member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission-- (A) shall not affect the powers of the Commission; and (B) shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment was made.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold the initial meeting of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.-- (1) In general.--The President shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
No corps representative.--The Chairperson and the Vice Chairperson shall not be representatives of the Department of the Army (including the Corps of Engineers).
INVESTIGATION OF CORPS OF ENGINEERS.
Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall complete an investigation and submit to Congress a report on the management of rivers in the United States by the Corps of Engineers, with emphasis on-- (1) compliance with environmental laws in the design and operation of river management projects, including-- (A) the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (16 United States Code 661 et sequentes); (B) the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes); and (C) the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes); (2) compliance with the cultural resource laws that protect Native American graves, traditional cultural properties, and Native American sacred sites in the design and operation of river management projects, including-- (A) the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes); (B) the Archaeological Resources Protection Act of 1979 (16 United States Code 470aa et sequentes); (C) the Native American Graves Protection Act and Repatriation Act (25 United States Code 3001 et sequentes); (D) Executive Order 13007 (61 Fed.
26771; relating to Indian sacred sites); (E) identification of opportunities for developing tribal cooperative management agreements for erosion control, habitat restoration, cultural resource protection, and enforcement; (F) review of policy and guidance regarding nondisclosure of sensitive information on the character, nature, and location of traditional cultural properties and sacred sites; and (G) review of the effectiveness of government-to- government consultation by the Corps of Engineers with Indian tribes and members of Indian tribes in cases in which the river management functions and activities of the Corps affect Indian land and Native American natural and cultural resources; (3) the quality and objectivity of scientific, environmental, and economic analyses by the Corps of Engineers, including the use of independent reviewers of analyses performed by the Corps; (4) the extent of coordination and cooperation by the Corps of Engineers with Federal and State agencies (such as the United States Fish and Wildlife Service) and Indian tribes in designing and implementing river management projects; (5) the extent to which river management studies conducted by the Corps of Engineers fairly and effectively balance the goals of public and private interests, such as wildlife, recreation, navigation, and hydropower interests; (6) whether river management studies conducted by the Corps of Engineers should be subject to independent review; (7) whether river planning laws (including regulations) should be amended; and (8) whether the river management functions of the Corps of Engineers should be transferred from the Department of the Army to a Federal civilian agency.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out this Act.
Information From Federal Agencies.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from a Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Provision of information.--On request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the department or agency shall provide the information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or personal property.
Compensation of Members.-- (1) Non-federal employees.--A member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Federal employees.--A member of the Commission who is an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation in addition to the compensation received for the services of the member as an officer or employee of the Federal Government.
Travel Expenses.--A member of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws (including regulations), appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as are necessary to enable the Commission to perform the duties of the Commission.
Confirmation of executive director.--The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
Compensation.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates.
Maximum rate of pay.--The rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of Federal Government Employees.-- (1) In general.--An employee of the Federal Government may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement.
Civil service status.--The detail of the employee shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services in accordance with section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals that do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of that title.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2005, to remain available until expended.
The Commission shall terminate on the date on which the Commission submits the report to Congress under section 4(a).