This Act may be cited as the ``Detaining Terrorists to Secure America Act of 2011'' SEC.
Congress makes the following finding: (1) The United States and its international partners are in an armed conflict with violent Islamist extremist groups, including al Qaeda and associated terrorist organizations, that are committed to killing Americans and our allies.
In the last 2 years, terrorists have repeatedly attempted to kill Americans both here at home and abroad, including the following attacks, plots, or alleged plots and attacks: (A) A September 2009 plot by Najibullah Zazi--who received training from al Qaeda in Pakistan--to conduct a suicide bomb attack on the New York, New York, subway system.
A November 2009 attack by Nidal Malik Hasan at Fort Hood, Texas, that killed 13 people and wounded 32.
A Christmas Day 2009 attempt by Umar Farouk Abdulmutallab to detonate a bomb sewn into his underwear on an international flight to Detroit, Michigan.
A May 2010 attempt by Faisal Shahzad to bomb Times Square in New York, New York, on a crowded Saturday evening, an attack that was unsuccessful only because the car bomb failed to detonate.
An October 2010 attempt by terrorists in Yemen to send, via commercial cargo flights, 2 packages of explosives to Jewish centers in Chicago, Illinois.
A February 2011 plot by Khaled Aldawsari, a Saudi-born student, to manufacture explosives and potentially attack New York, New York, the Dallas, Texas, home of former President George W. Bush, as well as hydroelectric dams, nuclear power plants, and a nightclub.
Since the September 11, 2001, attacks on our Nation, the United States and allied forces have captured thousands of individuals fighting for or supporting al Qaeda and associated terrorist organizations that do not abide by the law of war, including detainees at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, who served as planners of those attacks, trainers of terrorists, financiers of terrorists, bomb makers, bodyguards for Osama bin Laden, recruiters of terrorists, and facilitators of terrorism.
Many of the detainees at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay provided valuable intelligence that gave the United States insight into al Qaeda and its methods, prevented terrorist attacks, and saved lives.
Intelligence obtained from detainees at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay was critical to eventually identifying the location of Osama bin Laden.
In a February 17, 2011, hearing of the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate, the Secretary of Defense confirmed that approximately 25 percent of detainees released from the detention facility at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay are confirmed to have reengaged in hostilities or are suspected of having reengaged in hostilities against the United States or our allies.
Al Qaeda in the Arabian Peninsula, an organization that includes former detainees at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay among its leadership and ranks, has claimed responsibility for several of the recent plots and attacks against the United States.
Detention according to the law of war is a matter of national security and military necessity and has long been recognized as legitimate under international law.
Detaining unprivileged enemy belligerents prevents them from returning to the battlefield to attack United States and allied military personnel and engaging in future terrorist attacks against innocent civilians.
The Joint Task Force-Guantanamo provides for the humane, legal, and transparent care and custody of detainees at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, notwithstanding regular assaults on the guard force by some detainees.
The International Committee of the Red Cross visits detainees at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay on a quarterly basis.
The detention facility at United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay benefits from robust oversight by Congress.
REAFFIRMATION OF AUTHORITY TO MAINTAIN UNITED STATES NAVAL STATION, GUANTANAMO BAY, CUBA, AS A LOCATION FOR THE DETENTION OF UNPRIVILEGED ENEMY BELLIGERENTS HELD BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
Reaffirmation of Authority as Location for Detention of Unprivileged Enemy Belligerents.--United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, is and shall be a location for the detention of individuals in the custody or under the control of the Department of Defense who have engaged in, or supported, hostilities against the United States or its coalition partners on behalf of al Qaeda, the Taliban, or an affiliated group to which the Authorization for Use of Military Force (Public Law 107-40) applies.
Maintenance as an Operational Facility for Detention.--The Secretary of Defense shall take appropriate actions to maintain United States Naval Station, Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, as an open and operating facility for the detention of current and future individuals as described in subsection (a).
Permanent Extension of Certain Limitations Relating to Detainees and Detention Facilities.-- (1) Limitation on transfer of detainees to foreign entities.--Section 1033(a)(1) of the Ike Skelton National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2011 (Public Law 111- 383; 124 United States Statutes at Large 4351) is amended by striking ``during the one- year period'' and all that follows through ``by this Act'' and inserting ``the Secretary of Defense may not use any amounts authorized to be appropriated''.
Prohibition on construction of detention facilities in united states.--Section 1034(a) of such Act (124 United States Statutes at Large 4353) is amended by striking ``None of the funds authorized to be appropriated by this Act'' and inserting ``No funds authorized to be appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense, or to or for any other department or agency of the United States Government,''.
Supersedure of Executive Order.--Sections 3, 4(c)(2), 4(c)(3), 4(c)(5), and 7 of Executive Order No.
13492, dated January 22, 2009, shall have no further force or effect.