This Act may be known as the ``National Firearms Exchange Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the Nation is afflicted with an enormous problem relating to crimes of violence; (2) there are more than 200,000,000 firearms on the Nation's streets; (3) such firearms are the cause of numerous deaths and injuries to the Nation's citizens; and (4) it is essential that the Nation act to rid itself of such firearms and protect the safety of its citizens.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is-- (1) to authorize the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance to approve local programs that exchange merchandise vouchers for firearms; (2) to authorize the Director to make grants to the programs; (3) to provide amnesty from certain Federal statutes concerning firearms for individuals who surrender, or are in the process of surrendering, firearms under the programs; and (4) to allow a tax deduction for taxpayers who donate merchandise vouchers for use in the programs.
TITLE I--PROGRAMS TO EXCHANGE VOUCHERS FOR FIREARMS SEC.
APPROVAL AND FUNDING OF PROGRAMS TO EXCHANGE VOUCHERS FOR FIREARMS.
In General.--Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part Q as part R; (2) by redesignating section 1701 as section 1801; and (3) by inserting after part P the following new part: ``PART Q--PROGRAMS TO EXCHANGE MERCHANDISE VOUCHERS FOR FIREARMS ``SEC.
APPROVAL OF PROGRAMS TO EXCHANGE MERCHANDISE VOUCHERS FOR FIREARMS.
In General.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance shall establish procedures under which any unit of local government may apply for approval, under this section, of a program to exchange merchandise vouchers for firearms.
The Director shall establish criteria and procedures to determine whether any such program should be approved under this part.
Factors To Be Considered.--In determining whether or not to approve a program under this section, the Director shall consider-- ``(1) the characteristics of the unit of local government in which the program will be located; ``(2) the kinds of firearms included in the program; ``(3) the manner in which the program will dispose of firearms that are surrendered; ``(4) whether the program will accept firearms from residents of other States and units of local government; ``(5) whether and to what extent the program will protect the anonymity of individuals who surrender firearms to the program; ``(6) whether and to what extent the State in which the program is located will provide that any individual who surrenders, or is in the process of surrendering, a firearm to the program will not be prosecuted under State law-- ``(A) for possession, transportation, storage, or concealment of the firearm (occurring before or after the date of the enactment of this part); ``(B) for transfer, delivery, shipment, or surrender of the firearm to the program; ``(C) for surrender of the firearm to the program in exchange for a voucher; or ``(D) for making the firearm or for obliterating, removing, changing, or altering the serial number or other required identification of the firearm; ``(7) the manner in which the program will recruit participation by individuals and businesses; and ``(8) any other factor that the Director considers appropriate.
Disposal of Firearms.-- ``(1) Destruction of firearms.--The Director may not approve under this section any program that does not provide that all firearms surrendered to the program will be destroyed.
Use of firearms for evidentiary and investigative purposes.--Paragraph (1) shall not be interpreted to require the destruction of a firearm that is surrendered to an approved program and is needed for investigatory or evidentiary purposes, until the firearm is no longer needed for such purposes.
Timing of Approval Process and Duration of Approval Status.-- ``(1) Timing of approval process.--The Director shall approve or disapprove each program for which an application is submitted under subsection (a) within 60 days after the application is submitted.
Duration of approval status.--A program shall be considered approved for the 2-year period beginning on the date that the program is approved under this section, and may reapply for approval for subsequent 2-year periods.
Effort to Secure State Amnesty Regarding Approved Programs.-- The Director shall make every effort possible to secure from State governments, for individuals who surrender or are in the process of surrendering a firearm to a program approved under this section, provisions of amnesty that are similar to the amnesty described in section 925(h) of title 18, United States Code, regarding State offenses that are the same as or substantially similar to the Federal offenses for which amnesty is provided in such section.
GRANTS TO APPROVED PROGRAMS.
Grant Authorization.--The Director may make grants to programs that are approved under section 1701.
Applications, Criteria, and Allocation.--The Director shall establish procedures under which a unit of local government whose program is approved under section 1701 may apply for a grant for the program.
The Director shall establish procedures and criteria to determine whether any such program should receive such a grant.
ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS.
In General.--As part of the annual report required by section 810, the Director shall submit to the Congress an assessment of the effectiveness of this part and of approved programs.
The Director's assessment may include recommendations that the Director finds appropriate.
Criteria Regarding Effectiveness.--In order to complete the assessment required by subsection (a), the Director shall establish criteria for evaluating the effectiveness of this part and of approved programs.
Evaluation of Factors.--The assessment required by subsection (a) also shall include-- ``(1) a statement showing the manner in which the Director used the factors referred to in section 1701(b) in deciding whether to approve and fund programs under this part; and ``(2) for each of the factors referred to in section 1701(b), a statement of the manner in which the program characteristics included in the factor predict a program's effectiveness.
Recommendation Regarding This Part.--In the annual report, referred to in section (a), that is submitted to the Congress 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall make a recommendation regarding whether approval and funding of programs under this part should continue.
``For purposes of this part: ``(1) The term `approved program' means a program approved by the Director under section 1701.
The term `Director' means the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
The term `firearm' has the meaning given such term in section 921(a)(3)(A) of title 18, United States Code.
The term `program' means a program of a unit of local government to exchange merchandise vouchers for firearms.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1001(a) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out part Q.''.
Additional Amendments.--Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 801(b), by striking ``and O'' and inserting ``O, and Q''; (2) in the first sentence of section 802(b), by striking ``or O'' and inserting ``O, or Q''; and (3) in section 1001(a)(3), by striking ``and O'' and inserting ``O, and Q''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 prec.)
is amended by striking the items relating to part Q and inserting the following new items: ``Part Q--Programs To Exchange Merchandise Vouchers For Firearms ``Sec.
Approval of programs to exchange merchandise vouchers for firearms.
Grants to approved programs.
Annual report to Congress.
``Part R--Transition--Effective Date--Repealer ``Sec.
Continuation of rules, authorities, and proceedings.''.
AMNESTY FOR INDIVIDUALS SURRENDERING FIREARMS.
In General.--Section 925 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h)(1)(A) If an individual surrenders, or is in the process of surrendering, a firearm to a program approved under section 1701 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, section 922 of this title (except section 922(q)(1)(A)), and section 5861 of the National Firearms Act, shall not apply to the individual's-- ``(i) possession, transportation, storage, or concealment of the firearm (whether before or after the date of the enactment of this subsection); ``(ii) transfer, delivery, shipment, or surrender of the firearm to such a program; ``(iii) surrender of the firearm to such a program in exchange for a voucher; or ``(iv) making of the firearm in violation of the National Firearms Act, or obliteration, removal, change, or alteration of the serial number of the firearm (or other identification of the firearm) required by the National Firearms Act.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to an individual's conduct regarding a firearm if, at the time that the individual surrenders, or is in the process of surrendering, the firearm to a program approved under section 1701 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968-- ``(i) the individual is the subject of a complaint made, an indictment or information filed, an arrest made, or a summons issued, to begin a prosecution, for a violation of a provision referred to in subparagraph (A), regarding the firearm; or ``(ii) the individual knows that the individual is the subject of a criminal investigation concerning the individual's violation of a provision referred to in subparagraph (A) with regard to the firearm.
(A) Possession of a firearm in a school zone in order to surrender the firearm to a program, approved under section 1701 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, that is located in the school zone shall not be a violation of section 922(q)(1)(A) of this title.
Bringing a firearm to a Federal facility, or possessing a firearm in a Federal facility, in order to surrender the firearm to a program, approved under section 1701 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, that is located in the Federal facility shall not be a violation of section 930(a) of this title.''.
Cross Reference.--The National Firearms Act (26 United States Code 5801 et seq.)
is amended by inserting after section 5861 the following new section: ``SEC.
``For applicability of section 5861 to individuals surrendering firearms to programs approved under section 1701 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, see section 925(h)(1) of title 18, United States Code.''.
TITLE II--TAX DEDUCTION FOR TAXPAYERS WHO DONATE MERCHANDISE VOUCHERS SEC.
CHARITABLE DEDUCTION MODIFIED TO ALLOW DEDUCTION FOR FAIR MARKET VALUE OF CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS IN CONNECTION WITH GUN EXCHANGE PROGRAMS.
General Rule.--Subsection (e) of section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain contributions of ordinary income and capital gain property) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) Deduction allowed for full market value of certain contributions in connection with gun exchange programs.-- ``(A) In general.--The deduction under subsection (a) for any qualified gun exchange program contribution shall be an amount equal to its fair market value, and no reduction under paragraph (1)(A) shall be made in the amount of such contribution.
Qualified gun exchange program contribution.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified gun exchange program contribution' means any charitable contribution of property described in paragraph (1) of section 1221 or of a voucher which may be used to acquire property so described if-- ``(i) the property (or voucher) is to be transferred by the donee to individuals surrendering firearms in a gun exchange program which is determined by the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance to be approved under section 1701 of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968, and ``(ii) the taxpayer received from the donee a written statement that the property (or voucher) was transferred as provided in clause (i).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to contributions made after the date of the enactment of this Act.