This Act may be cited as the ``Anaktuvuk Pass Land Exchange and Wilderness Redesignation Act of 1994''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (a) On December 2, 1980, the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (94 United States Statutes at Large 2371) established Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve and Gates of the Arctic Wilderness.
The village of Anaktuvuk Pass, located in the highlands of the central Brooks Range, is virtually surrounded by these national park and wilderness lands and is the only village located within the boundary of a National Park System unit in Alaska.
Unlike most other Alaskan Native communities, the village of Anaktuvuk Pass is not located on a major river, lake, or coastline that can be used as a means of access.
The residents of Anaktuvuk Pass have relied increasingly on snow machines in winter and all-terrain vehicles in summer as their primary means of access to pursue caribou and other subsistence resources.
In a 1983 land exchange agreement, linear easements were reserved by the Inupiat Eskimo people for use of all- terrain vehicles across certain national park lands, mostly along stream and river banks.
These linear easements proved unsatisfactory, because they provided inadequate access to subsistence resources while causing excessive environmental impact from concentrated use.
The National Park Service and the Nunamiut Corporation initiated discussions in 1985 to address concerns over the use of all-terrain vehicles on park and wilderness land.
Those discussions resulted in an agreement, originally executed in 1992 and thereafter amended in 1993 and 1994, among the National Park Service, the Nunamiut Corporation, the City of Anaktuvuk Pass, and the Arctic Slope Regional Corporation.
Full effectuation of this agreement, as amended, requires ratification by the Congress.
Ratification.-- (1) In general.--The terms, conditions, procedures, covenants, reservations and other provisions set forth in the document entitled ``Donation, Exchange of Lands and Interests in Lands and Wilderness Redesignation Agreement Among Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, Nunamiut Corporation, City of Anaktuvuk Pass and the United States of America'' (hereinafter referred to in this Act as ``the Agreement''), executed by the parties on December 17, 1992, as amended, are hereby incorporated in this Act, are ratified and confirmed, and set forth the obligations and commitments of the United States, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, Nunamiut Corporation and the City of Anaktuvuk Pass, as a matter of Federal law.
Land acquisition.--Lands acquired by the United States pursuant to the Agreement shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') as part of the Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve, subject to the laws and regulations applicable thereto.
Maps.--The maps set forth as Exhibits C1, C2, and D through I to the Agreement depict the lands subject to the conveyances, retention of surface access rights, access easements and all-terrain vehicle easements.
These lands are depicted in greater detail on a map entitled ``Land Exchange Actions, Proposed Anaktuvuk Pass Land Exchange and Wilderness Redesignation, Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve'', Map No.
185/80,039, dated April 1994, and on file at the Alaska Regional Office of the National Park Service and the offices of Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve in Fairbanks, Alaska.
Written legal descriptions of these lands shall be prepared and made available in the above offices.
In case of any discrepancies, Map No.
185/80,039, shall be controlling.
NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM WILDERNESS.
Redesignation.--Section 701(2) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (94 United States Statutes at Large 2371, 2417) establishing the Gates of the Arctic Wilderness is hereby amended with the addition of approximately fifty-six thousand eight hundred and twenty-five acres as wilderness and the rescission of approximately seventy-three thousand nine hundred and ninety-three acres as wilderness, thus revising the Gates of the Arctic Wilderness to approximately seven million thirty- four thousand eight hundred and thirty-two acres.
Maps.--The lands redesignated in subsection (a) are depicted on a map entitled ``Wilderness Actions, Proposed Anaktuvuk Pass Land Exchange and Wilderness Redesignation, Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve'', Map No.
185/80,040, dated April 1994 and on file at the Alaska Regional Office of the National Park Service and the office of Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve in Fairbanks, Alaska.
CONFORMANCE WITH OTHER LAW.
Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.--All of the lands, or interests therein, conveyed to and received by Arctic Slope Regional Corporation or Nunamiut Corporation pursuant to the Agreement shall be deemed conveyed and received pursuant to exchanges under section 22(f) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, as amended (43 United States Code 1601, 1621(f)).
All of the lands or interests in lands conveyed pursuant to the Agreement shall be conveyed subject to valid existing rights.
Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act.--Nothing in this Act or in the Agreement shall be construed to enlarge or diminish the rights, privileges or obligations of any person, except to the extent specifically set forth in this Act or the Agreement, including specifically the preference for subsistence uses and access to subsistence resources provided under title VIII of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, as amended (94 United States Statutes at Large 2371, 2422).