This Act may be cited as the ``Women and AIDS Research Initiative Amendments of 1996''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF GENERAL PROGRAM OF RESEARCH REGARDING WOMEN AND ACQUIRED IMMUNE DEFICIENCY SYNDROME.
Part B of title XXIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300cc-11 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
In General.--With respect to cases of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus, the Secretary shall establish a program for the purpose of conducting biomedical and behavioral research on such cases in women, including research on the prevention of such cases.
The Secretary may conduct such research directly, and may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for the conduct of the research.
Certain Forms of Research.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide for research on the following: ``(1) The manner in which the human immunodeficiency virus is transmitted to women, including the relationship between cases of infection with such virus and other cases of sexually transmitted diseases, including clinical trials which examine the question of how much human immunodeficiency virus infection can be prevented by finding and treating sexually transmitted diseases in women.
Measures for the prevention of exposure to and the transmission of such virus, including research on the following: ``(A) The prevention of any sexually transmitted disease that may facilitate the transmission of the virus.
Rapid, inexpensive, easy-to-use sexually transmitted disease diagnostic tests for women.
Inexpensive single dose therapy for treatable sexually transmitted diseases.
The development of methods of prevention for use by women.
The development and dissemination of prevention programs and materials whose purpose is to reduce the incidence of substance abuse among women.
The development and progression of symptoms resulting from infection with such virus, including research regarding gynecological infections as well as breast changes, hormonal changes, and menses and menopause changes, whose occurrence becomes probable as a result of the deterioration of the immune system.
The treatment of cases of such infection, including clinical research.
Behavioral research on the prevention of such cases and research on model educational programs for such prevention.
Research leading to an understanding of social, economic, and legal factors whose impact contributes to an increased risk of such infection.
Research leading to an understanding of social, economic, and legal factors whose impact contributes to-- ``(A) low levels of participation by women in clinical trials; or ``(B) inadequate access to health care services, or inadequate utilization of such services.
Clinical Research.-- ``(1) Gynecological evaluations.--In clinical trials regarding the human immunodeficiency virus in which women participate as subjects, the Secretary shall ensure-- ``(A) that the designs of the trials include adequate evaluation of prospective subjects prior to enrollment, and adequate evaluation of subjects during the course of the trials, including evaluation of the reproductive tract, and appropriate follow-up services regarding such evaluations; and ``(B) the conduct of studies related to the propensity for cases of infection with such virus to cause abnormalities in the reproductive tract, or to alter the natural history of other reproductive-tract infections and diseases.
Standard treatments for gynecological conditions.-- The Secretary shall conduct or support clinical trials under subsection (a) to determine whether standard methods of treating gynecological conditions are effective in the case of such conditions that arise as a result of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus.
Effectiveness of certain treatment protocols.--With respect to cases of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus, the Secretary shall conduct or support clinical research under subsection (a) to determine the effectiveness, on such cases in women, of approved treatment protocols.
Support services.-- ``(A) In conducting or supporting clinical trials regarding the human immunodeficiency virus in which women participate as subjects, the Secretary shall take into account factors that can facilitate such participation, including consideration of employment schedules and the provision of support services.
The Secretary may provide such services accordingly, including transportation services, child care services, medical and mental health services, treatment for drug abuse, social services (including services addressing domestic violence), and other support services.
Services under subparagraph (A) shall include services designed to respond to the particular needs of women with respect to participation in the clinical trials involved, including, as appropriate, training of the individuals who conduct the trials.
Prevention Programs.-- ``(1) Sexual transmission.-- ``(A) With respect to preventing the sexual transmission of the human immunodeficiency virus and other sexually transmitted diseases, the Secretary shall conduct or support research under subsection (a) on topical microbicide and physical barrier methods of prevention that women can use without their sexual partner's cooperation or knowledge.
In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall-- ``(i) give priority to carrying out the topical microbicide research agenda of the National Institutes of Health, including agendas regarding basic research, product development, and clinical evaluation of new and existing products; and ``(ii) give special consideration to research on topical microbicides that are not spermicides and that otherwise are methods that do not pose a threat to the ability of women to conceive and bear healthy children.
Epidemiological research.--The Secretary shall conduct or support epidemiological research under subsection (a) to determine the factors of risk regarding infection with the human immunodeficiency virus that are particular to women, including research regarding-- ``(A) the use of spermicides and other contraceptive methods; ``(B) the use of vaginal products, including douches, tampons, and vaginal medications; ``(C) the relationship between such infection and other sexually transmitted diseases; ``(D) the relationship between such infection and various forms of substance abuse (including use of the form of cocaine commonly known as crack); and ``(E) the relationship between such infection and noncoital forms of sexual activity.
Interagency Study.--With respect to the study (known as the Women's Interagency HIV Study) that, as of March 1996, is being carried out by the Secretary through various agencies of the Public Health Service for the purpose of monitoring the progression in women of infection with the human immunodeficiency virus, and determining whether such progression is different in women than in men, the following applies: ``(1) The Secretary shall ensure that not less than 2,500 women with such infection are included in the study, and that the demographic variability of the cohort is maintained.
The Secretary shall ensure that the study period is extended for a minimum of 5 years.
With respect to markers of human immunodeficiency virus disease progression and viral activity (including the cells commonly known as CD4 cells and including quantitative viral load measures), the Secretary shall ensure that the study adequately addresses the relationship between such markers and the development of serious illnesses in such women.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the study shall address gynecological conditions, and other conditions particular to women, that are not currently included in the list of conditions arising from such infection that, for surveillance purposes, is maintained by the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the term `human immunodeficiency virus' means the etiologic agent for acquired immune deficiency syndrome.
Authorizations of Appropriations.-- ``(1) Clinical research.--In addition to any other authorizations of appropriations that are available for the following purposes: ``(A) For the purpose of carrying out subsection (c)(1), there are authorized to be appropriated $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 1999.
For the purpose of carrying out subsection (c)(2), there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 1999.
For the purpose of carrying out subsection (c)(3), there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 1999.
For the purpose of carrying out subsection (c)(4), there are authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 and 1999.
Prevention programs.--In addition to any other authorizations of appropriations that are available for the following purposes: ``(A) For the purpose of carrying out subsection (d)(1), there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 1999.
For the purpose of carrying out subsection (d)(2), there are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 1999.
Interagency study.--In addition to any other authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purpose of carrying out subsection (e), there are authorized to be appropriated for such purpose $6,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 1999.