This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan Commission on Campaign Practices Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) for Congress to address the existing problems in the Federal election laws, Congress must act in a nonpartisan manner and engage in a debate based on academic studies and empirical findings instead of partisan rhetoric; (2) when addressing Federal election laws, Congress must be cognizant of the freedoms of speech and association protected under the Constitution; and (3) the current Federal election laws unduly favor incumbent Members of Congress, and, in previous years, Congress has not been able to eliminate this bias when addressing the reform of the Federal election laws.
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF COMMISSION.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Bipartisan Commission on Campaign Practices'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
The purposes of the Commission are to study the laws relating to elections for Federal office and to report and recommend legislation to reform those laws.
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members appointed within 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among individuals who are not incumbent Members of Congress and who are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of education, training, or experience.
In making appointments, the President shall consult-- (1) the Speaker of the House of Representatives with respect to the appointment of 3 members, one of whom is not affiliated with either the Republican Party or the Democratic Party; (2) the majority leader of the Senate with respect to the appointment of 3 members, one of whom is not affiliated with either the Republican Party or the Democratic Party; (3) the minority leader of the House of Representatives with respect to the appointment of 2 members, one of whom is not affiliated with either the Republican Party or the Democratic Party; and (4) the minority leader of the Senate with respect to the appointment of 2 members, one of whom is not affiliated with either the Republican Party or the Democratic Party.
Chairman.--At the time of the appointment, the President shall designate one member of the Commission as Chairman of the Commission.
The Chairman may not be affiliated with either the Republican Party or the Democratic Party.
Terms.--The members of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 4 members of the Commission may be of the same political party.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Quorum.--Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
A majority of the full Commission is required when approving all or a portion of the recommended legislation.
Any member of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take under this section.
Pay and Travel Expenses of Members.--(1) Each member of the Commission, other than the Chairman, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
The Chairman shall be paid for each day referred to in the preceding sentence at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Members of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a staff director, who shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Commission; Services.-- (1) In general.--Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the Chair, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classifications and General Schedule pay rates, may appoint such personnel as the chair considers necessary, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Temporary and intermittent services.--The Chair may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDED LEGISLATION.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the selection of the Chair of the Commission, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report of the activities of the Commission.
Recommendations.--The report under subsection (a) shall include any recommendations for changes in the laws (including regulations) governing the conducting and financing of Federal campaigns, including any changes in the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, to which 7 or more members of the Commission may agree.
Preparation of Legislation.--If 7 or more members concur on a recommendation submitted under subsection (b), those members shall prepare and submit with the report under subsection (a) legislation to implement the recommendation.
Expedited Congressional Consideration of Legislation.-- (1) In general.--If any legislation is introduced the substance of which implements a recommendation of the Commission submitted under subsection (b), subject to paragraph (2), the provisions of section 2908 (other than subsection (a)) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 shall apply to the consideration of the legislation in the same manner as such provisions apply to a joint resolution described in section 2908(a) of such Act.
Special rules.--For purposes of applying paragraph (1) with respect to such provisions, the following rules shall apply: (A) Any reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives shall be deemed a reference to the Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives and any reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate shall be deemed a reference to the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate.
Any reference to the date on which the President transmits a report shall be deemed a reference to the date on which the recommendation involved is submitted under subsection (b).
Notwithstanding subsection (d)(2) of section 2908 of such Act-- (i) it shall be in order to consider an amendment in the nature of a substitute to the legislation offered by the majority leader of the House of Representatives or the Senate (as the case may be); (ii) it shall be in order to consider an amendment in the nature of a substitute to the legislation offered by the minority leader of the House of Representatives or the Senate (as the case may be); (iii) a separate vote shall be taken in each House on adoption of each of the amendments offered and on the legislation as introduced; and (iv) if more than one version of the legislation is adopted by a House pursuant to clause (iii), the version receiving the greatest number of votes in favor of adoption shall be deemed to be legislation passed by that House.
PRIMARY OBJECTIVES OF THE COMMISSION.
In formulating its draft of legislation under section 7, the Commission shall consider the following to be its primary objectives: (1) Encouraging fair and open Federal elections that provide voters with meaningful information about candidates and issues.
Eliminating the disproportionate influence of special interest financing of Federal elections.
Creating a system in which incumbent Members of Congress do not possess an inherent advantage over challengers.
The Commission shall cease to exist 60 days after the date of the submission of its report under section 7.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as are necessary to carry out its duties under this Act.