Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the 3 elementary schools available for the children of employees of Yosemite National Park are administered by the Bass Lake Joint Union Elementary School District and the Mariposa Unified School District; (2) the elementary schools are in remote mountainous areas that are long distances from other educational and administrative facilities of the local school districts; (3) because of the remote locations of and relatively small number of students at the elementary schools serving the children of employees of the Park, the elementary schools provide fewer services in more basic facilities than other schools located in the local school districts; and (4) because of the long distances involved and adverse weather and road conditions that occur during much of the school year, it is impractical for the children of employees of the Park who live in or near the Park to attend other schools located in the local school districts.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to provide supplemental funding and other services that are necessary to assist the State of California or local educational agencies in the State in providing educational services for students attending schools located in Yosemite National Park.
In this Act: (1) District.--The term ``District'' means-- (A) the Bass Lake Joint Union Elementary School District; and (B) the Mariposa Unified School District.
Educational service.--The term ``educational service'' includes-- (A) maintenance and minor upgrades of Park school facilities; and (B) transportation to and from Park schools.
Eligible student.--The term ``eligible student'' means a student who-- (A) is a dependent of a person engaged in the administration, operation, and maintenance of the Park; or (B) lives at or near the Park on real property of the United States.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Park.--The term ``Park'' means Yosemite National Park, California.
Park school.--The term ``Park school'' means a school in the Park that serves eligible students.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of California.
FUNDING FOR EDUCATIONAL SERVICES.
In General.--For each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007, the Secretary may provide to the Districts funding for educational services for eligible students.
Amount.-- (1) In general.--Amounts made available to the Districts under this section for any fiscal year shall not exceed the lesser of-- (A) $750,000; or (B) the amount necessary to provide eligible students with educational services that are normally provided and generally available to students who attend other public schools in the State.
Adjustments.--Subject to paragraph (1), the Secretary may adjust the amounts made available under this section if the State or the appropriate local educational agencies do not provide, for any fiscal year, amounts for educational services at Park schools at per student levels that are equal to or greater than the amounts provided for the fiscal year before the date of enactment of this Act.
Limitations on Use of Funds.--Amounts provided by the Secretary to the Districts under this section may not be used by the Districts-- (1) for construction commenced after the date of enactment of this Act, construction contracts, or major capital improvements; or (2) to pay public employees for providing educational services not authorized by this Act.
Source of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary may use amounts made available to the National Park Service from appropriations, donations, or fees to provide funding to Districts under this section.
Exceptions.--The Secretary may not provide funding under this section from amounts made available from-- (A) the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-4 et sequentes); (B) the recreational fee demonstration program established under section 315 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (16 United States Code 460l-6a note; Public Law 104-134); (C) the national park passport program established under section 602 of the National Parks Omnibus Management Act of 1998 (16 United States Code 5992); and (D) emergency appropriations for Park flood recovery.
AUTHORIZATION FOR PARK FACILITIES TO BE LOCATED OUTSIDE THE BOUNDARIES OF YOSEMITE NATIONAL PARK.
Section 814(c) of the Omnibus Parks and Public Lands Management Act of 1996 (16 United States Code 346e) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence-- (A) by inserting ``and Yosemite National Park'' after ``Zion National Park''; and (B) by inserting ``transportation systems and'' before ``the establishment of''; and (2) by striking ``park'' each place it appears and inserting ``parks''.
Golden Gate National Recreation Area Advisory Commission.-- Section 5 of Public Law 92-589 (16 United States Code 460bb-4) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)-- (A) by striking ``(b) The Commission'' and inserting the following: ``(b) Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission''; (B) by striking ``Provided, That the'' and all that follows through the period; and (C) by inserting after paragraph (1) (as designated by subparagraph (A)) the following: ``(2) Considerations.--In appointing members to the Commission, the Secretary shall ensure that the members represent the interests of local, historic recreational users of the recreation area.
''; and (2) in subsection (g), by striking ``thirty'' and inserting ``40''.
Manzanar National Historic Site Advisory Commission.--Section 105(h) of Public Law 102-248 (16 United States Code 461 note) is amended by striking ``10 years after the date of enactment of this title'' and inserting ``on December 31, 2012''.