This Act may be cited as the ``Head Start and Early Childhood Development Amendments of 1993''.
Definition.--Section 637 of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9832) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(12) The term `1993 fiscal year appropriation' means the funds actually appropriated for fiscal year 1993 under section 639(a).
The term `age of compulsory school attendance' or `compulsory school age' means the age (not to exceed the age of 6) that a child is eligible for enrollment in a public school in a State.''.
Allotment of Funds.--Section 640(a) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9835) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), (C), and (D) as clauses (i), (ii), (iii), and (iv), respectively; (B) by striking ``(2) The'' and inserting ``(2)(A) The''; and (C) by inserting immediately after clause (iv) (as so redesignated) the following new subparagraph: ``(B) For any fiscal year for which the amount appropriated under section 639(a) exceeds the 1993 fiscal year appropriation, the Secretary shall reserve the following: ``(i) Eight percent of the total amount in excess of such appropriation for Head Start infants and toddler programs described in section 642(d)(1).
Eight percent of the total amount in excess of such appropriation to carry out the Head Start Transition Project Act (42 United States Code 9855 et sequentes).
Five percent of the total amount in excess of such appropriation for Head Start program services for children and their parents described in section 642(d)(2).
Two percent of the total amount in excess of such appropriation for the provision of scholarship assistance for early childhood education training under section 596 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1117).
Two percent of the total amount in excess of such appropriation for the provision of education awards to teachers in Head Start programs or early childhood development programs that are similar to Head Start programs.
Two percent of the total amount in excess of such appropriations for the provision of post-service benefits for national service participants who are eligible for such benefits under section 144A of the National and Community Service Act of 1990.
''; and (2) by striking ``No funds reserved under this paragraph'' in the matter preceding paragraph (3) and inserting: ``(C) No funds reserved under paragraph (2)(A).''.
Powers and Functions of Head Start Agencies.--Section 642 of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9837) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Subject to a review of a local community assessment plan (as prescribed by regulation) of an agency that is eligible for designation as a Head Start agency under section 641 by the Regional Office of the Administration for Children and Families, such agency may in accordance with Head Start performance standards developed for infants and toddlers under section 651(b), provide-- ``(1) infant and toddler Head Start program services to children from birth to compulsory school age; or ``(2) a fully integrated program of services to children from birth to compulsory school age and their parents that are similar to the core services provided to children and their families through the Parent-Child Centers under section 640(a)(4)(B) and the child development projects under section 670N(a) of the Comprehensive Child Development Act (42 United States Code 9881(a)).''.
Educational Awards.--The Head Start Act (42 United States Code 983 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Education may provide educational awards to individuals who are employed in the early childhood development field to assist such individuals in the repayment of outstanding student loans.
Amount.--The amount of an educational award under subsection (a) shall not exceed $10,000 for a term of service completed under subsection (f).
Limitation.--An individual shall only be awarded one educational award under subsection (a).
Application.--An individual who desires to receive an educational award shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information, as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive an educational award under subsection (a), an individual shall-- ``(1) have completed a term of service under subsection (f) in an approved education position described in subsection (g); ``(2) currently serve in an approved education position described in subsection (g); and ``(3) have-- ``(A) an outstanding student loan from Federal or non-Federal sources; or ``(B) enrolled in and completed, an early childhood development program at an institution of higher education.
Term of Service.-- ``(1) In general.--The term of service for an approved education position shall be not less than 2 years.
Commencement.--No term of service under paragraph (1) shall begin prior to the date of enactment of this section.
Types of Educational Positions Eligible for Approval for Education Awards.--The Secretary shall approve each of the following positions as an approved educational position: ``(1) A full-time teacher position or other staff position in a Head Start program.
A full-time teacher position or other staff position in an early childhood development program that provides services similar to Head Start programs.''.
Review.--Not later than September 30, 1994, the Secretary of Education, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Governor of each State, shall review the use of funds under chapter 1 of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2701 et sequentes) to determine whether such funds can be used to provide services to Head Start children in transition to elementary school.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--Section 639(c) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9834(c)) is repealed.
Evaluation.--Section 651(g)(3) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9846(g)(3)) is amended by striking ``640(a)(2)'' and inserting ``640(a)(2)(A)''.
COMPREHENSIVE CHILD DEVELOPMENT ACT.
Section 670T(a) of the Comprehensive Child Development Act (42 United States Code 9887(a)) is amended by striking ``1993, and 1994'' and inserting ``and 1993, and $60,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1997,''.
NATIONAL AND COMMUNITY SERVICE ACT OF 1990.
Subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12572 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 144 the following new section: ``SEC.
SUPPLEMENTAL POST-SERVICE BENEFITS FOR PARTICIPANTS SERVING IN EARLY CHILDHOOD DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMS.
In General.--In addition to the provision of post-service benefits under section 146, the Commission shall provide to each full- time participant who has performed community service in an early childhood development program and who meets the eligibility criteria under subsection (b), a nontransferable post-service benefit that is equal in value to $5,000 to use for the purpose described in subsection (c).
Eligibility.--A participant may receive a post-service benefit under subsection (a) if such participant-- ``(1) has completed a full-time term of service in an early childhood development program receiving assistance under this subtitle; ``(2) has enrolled in and completed a graduate program in early childhood development at an institution of higher education; and ``(3) after completion of such graduate program, has served in the early childhood development field for not less than 2 years.
Use of Post-Service Benefits.--A post-service benefit provided under subsection (a) shall only be used for payment of a student loan from Federal or non-Federal sources.''.
STUDY OF PENSION PROGRAM FOR HEAD START EMPLOYEES.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct a study and prepare a report on the establishment of a pension program for Head Start employees, including the feasibility of such employees' participation in the Federal Employees Retirement System.
Not later than October 1, 1995, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress such report with recommendations on options for extending retirement pension coverage to Head Start employees.