TASK FORCE ON BASE CLOSURE REFORM.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a commission to be known as the ``Task Force on Base Closure Reform'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Purpose.--The purpose of the Task Force is to review the base closure process (including the recommendation and approval of installations for closure and the closure of installations) under the 1990 base closure law in order to recommend improvements, and potential alternatives, to the base closure process under that law.
Membership.--(1) The Task Force shall be composed of 10 members, appointed from among individuals described in paragraph (2) as follows: (A) Three members shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Two members shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Three members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two members shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Members of the Task Force shall be appointed from among retired members of the Armed Forces, or other private United States citizens, who have one or more of the following qualifications: (A) Past membership on a commission established under the 1990 base closure law or under title II of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Past service on the staff of a commission referred to in subparagraph (A).
Experience with military force structure planning and strategic planning.
Past membership in the legislative branch or service on the staff of the legislative branch.
Appointment.--(1) All members of the Task Force shall be appointed not later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
(A) Members of the Task Force shall be appointed for the life of the Task Force.
A vacancy in the membership of the Task Force shall not affect the powers of the Task Force, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Chairman.--The members of the Task Force shall choose one of the members to serve as chairman of the Task Force.
In General.--The Task Force shall-- (1) carry out a review of the base closure process under the 1990 base closure law in accordance with subsection (b); (2) carry out an assessment of the impact of the number of base closure rounds on the base closure process under that law in accordance with subsection (c); (3) carry out a comparative analysis of various means of disposing of excess or surplus property in accordance with subsection (d); and (4) make recommendations in accordance with subsection (e).
Review.--In carrying out a review of the base closure process under subsection (a)(1), the Task Force shall-- (1) review the activities, after action reports, and recommendations of each commission established under the 1990 base closure law in the 1991, 1993, and 1995 base closure rounds under that law; (2) review the activities and after action reports of the Department of Defense and the military departments with respect to each such base closure round under that law, which shall include an assessment of the compliance of the military departments with the provisions of that law in each such round; and (3) assess the effectiveness of the provisions of that law in providing guidance to each such commission, the Department of Defense, and the military departments with respect to subsequent closures of military installations.
Assessment.--In carrying out an assessment of the impact of the number of base closure rounds on the base closure process under subsection (a)(2), the Task Force shall-- (1) review the activities of the Department of Defense and the military departments in preparing for and carrying out the closure of installations approved for closure in each base closure round under the 1990 base closure law, including-- (A) the capacity of the Department of Defense and the military departments to process the data required to make recommendations with respect to the closure of installations in each such round; and (B) the effectiveness of the activities undertaken by the Department of Defense and the military departments to dispose of property and equipment at such installations upon approval of closure; and (2) assess the impact of the number of installations recommended for closure in each such round on-- (A) the accuracy of data provided by the Secretary of Defense to the commission established under that law in such round; (B) the capacity of such commission to process such data; and (C) the ability of such commission to consider fully the concerns of the communities likely to be effected by the closure of the installations recommended for closure.
Comparative Analysis.--In carrying out a comparative analysis under subsection (a)(3), the Task Force shall-- (1) compare the law and experience of the United States in disposing of surplus and excess property with the law and experience of similar nations in disposing of such property; and (2) compare the law (including any regulations, policies, and directives) of the United States relating to the closure of military installations with the law of similar nations relating to the closure of such installations.
Recommendations.--In making recommendations under subsection (a)(4), the Task Force shall-- (1) recommend such modifications to the 1990 base closure law as the Task Force considers appropriate in light of its activities under this section; (2) compare the merits of requiring one additional round of base closures under that law with the merits of requiring more than one additional round of base closures under that law; and (3) recommend any alternative methods of eliminating excess capacity in the military installations inside the United States that the Task Force considers appropriate in light of its activities under this section.
Report.--Not later than March 15, 1999, the Task Force shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on National Security of the House of Representatives a report on its activities under this Act.
Elements.--The report shall include the results of the activities of the Task Force under section 3, including the recommendations required by subsection (e) of that section.
Meetings.--(1) The Task Force shall hold its first meeting not later than 30 days after the date on which all members have been appointed.
The Task Force shall meet upon the call of the chairman.
A majority of the members of the Task Force shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold meetings.
Authority of Individuals To Act for Task Force.--Any member or agent of the Task Force may, if authorized by the Task Force, take any action which the Task Force is authorized to take under this section.
Hearings.--The Task Force may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Task Force considers advisable to carry out its duties.
Availability of Government Information.--The Task Force may secure directly from the Department of Defense and any other department or agency of the Federal Government such information as the Task Force considers necessary to carry out its duties.
Upon the request of the chairman of the Task Force, the head of a department or agency shall furnish the requested information expeditiously to the Task Force.
Postal Services.--The Task Force may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
TASK FORCE PERSONNEL MATTERS.
Pay and Expenses of Members.--(1) Each member of the Task Force who is not an employee of the Government shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in performing the duties of the Task Force.
Members and personnel of the Task Force may travel on aircraft, vehicles, or other conveyances of the Armed Forces when travel is necessary in the performance of a duty of the Task Force except when the cost of commercial transportation is less expensive.
The members of the Task Force may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Task Force.
(A) A member of the Task Force who is an annuitant otherwise covered by section 8344 or 8468 of title 5, United States Code, shall not by reason of membership on the Task Force be subject to the provisions of such section with respect to such Task Force.
A member of the Task Force who is a member or former member of a uniformed service shall not be subject to the provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 5532 of such title with respect to membership on the Task Force.
Staff and Administrative Support.--(1) The chairman of the Task Force may, without regard to civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and up to three additional staff members as necessary to enable the Task Force to perform its duties.
The chairman of the Task Force may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter 53, of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay may not exceed the maximum rate of pay for grade GS-15 under the General Schedule.
Upon the request of the chairman of the Task Force, the head of any department or agency of the Federal Government may detail, without reimbursement, any personnel of the department or agency to the Task Force to assist in carrying out its duties.
A detail of an employee shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
SUPPORT OF TASK FORCE.
Temporary Services.--The chairman of the Task Force may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals that do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of such title.
Department of Defense Support.--The Secretary of Defense shall furnish to the Task Force such administrative and support services as may be requested by the chairman of the Task Force.
The Task Force shall terminate 30 days after the date on which it submits the report required by section 4.
Upon the request of the chairman of the Task Force, the Secretary of Defense shall make available to the Task Force, out of funds appropriated for the Department of Defense, such amounts as the Task Force may require to carry out its duties.
In this Act, the term ``1990 base closure law'' means the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note).