PULP AND PAPER ENERGY SECURITY TASK FORCE.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The terms ``Department'' and ``Secretary'' mean the Department of Energy and the Secretary thereof, respectively.
The term ``task force'' means the task force established under subsection (b).
Energy Task Force.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a task force, to be known as the Pulp and Paper Energy Security Task Force, to address the energy needs of the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations.
Duties.--The task force shall-- (A) identify-- (i) the energy needs of the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations; (ii) the programs and services provided by the Federal Government, State governments, and nongovernment organizations that may serve to lower energy costs, including through the introduction or increased use of renewable fuels in papermaking operations and allied industries; (B) assess the extent to which the programs and services identified under subparagraph (A)(ii) serve the needs identified under subparagraph (A)(i); (C) make recommendations to the Secretary on how to more effectively serve the needs identified under subparagraph (A)(i) through-- (i) programs and services identified under subparagraph (A)(ii); (ii) new programs and services promoted by the task force; and (iii) statutory changes.
make recommendations on how the Secretary may promote-- (i) new programs and services that the task force recommends under subparagraph (C)(ii); and (ii) programs and services identified under subparagraph (A)(ii); (E) make recommendations on how the Secretary may inform and educate with respect to-- (i) the needs identified under subparagraph (A)(i); (ii) new programs and services that the task force recommends under subparagraph (C)(ii); and (iii) programs and services identified under subparagraph (A)(ii); (F) make recommendations on how the Secretary may more effectively work with public and private interests to address the energy needs of the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations; and (G) make recommendations on the creation of a permanent advisory board that would make recommendations to the Secretary on how to address the energy needs of the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations.
Internet website recommendations.--The task force shall make recommendations to the Secretary relating to the establishment of an Internet website to be used by the Department to receive and dispense information and resources with respect to the needs identified under paragraph (2)(A)(i) and the programs and services identified under paragraph (2)(A)(ii).
As part of the recommendations, the task force shall identify the Internet sites of appropriate programs, services, and organizations, both public and private, to which the Internet website should link.
Education programs.--The task force shall make recommendations to the Secretary relating to developing additional education materials and programs with respect to the needs identified under paragraph (2)(A)(i).
Existing materials-.--The task force shall organize and distribute existing materials that inform and educate with respect to the needs identified under paragraph (2)(A)(i) and the programs and services identified under paragraph (2)(A)(ii).
Coordination with public and private sector.--In carrying out its responsibilities under this section, the task force shall coordinate with, and may accept materials and assistance as it determines appropriate from-- (A) any subordinate officer of the Secretary; (B) other Federal agencies, their officers, or employees; and (C) any other organization, entity, or person not described in subparagraph (A) or (B).
Chair and vice-chair.--The task force shall have-- (A) a Chair, appointed by the Secretary; and (B) a Vice-Chair, appointed by the Secretary, in consultation with appropriate nongovernmental organizations, entities, or persons.
Members.-- (A) Chair and vice-chair.--The Chair and the Vice- Chair shall serve as members of the task force.
Additional members.-- (i) In general.--The task force shall have additional members, each of whom shall be appointed by the Chair, with the approval of the Secretary.
Number of members.--The number of additional members shall be determined by the Chair, in consultation with the Secretary, except that-- (I) the additional members shall include, for each of the groups specified in subparagraph (C), at least 1 member appointed from within that group; and (II) the number of additional members shall not exceed 13.
Groups represented.--The groups specified in this subparagraph are-- (i) subject matter experts; (ii) labor unions representing employees of the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations; (iii) vendors of energy technologies to the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations; (iv) academics with expertise in the use of energy technologies within the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations; (v) the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations trade associations; (vi) Federal, State, or local agencies engaged in energy improvements and cost reductions at within the forest product industry and similar manufacturing operations.
Meetings.-- (A) Frequency.--The task force shall meet at least 2 times per year, and more frequently if necessary to perform its duties.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the task force shall constitute a quorum.
Location.--The Secretary shall designate, and make available to the task force, a location at a facility under the control of the Secretary for use by the task force for its meetings.
Minutes.-- (i) In general.--Not later than 90 days after each meeting, the task force shall publish the minutes of the meeting and shall submit to Secretary any findings or recommendations approved at the meeting.
Submission to congress.--Not later than 60 days after the date that the Secretary receives minutes under clause (i) the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives such minutes, together with any comments the Secretary considers appropriate.
Findings.-- (i) In general.--Not later than the date that the task force terminates under paragraph (13) the task force shall submit to the Secretary a final report on any findings and recommendations of the task force approved at a meeting of the task force.
Submission to congress.--Not later than 90 days after the date that the Administrator receives the report under clause (i), the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives the full text of the report submitted under clause (i), together with any comments the Secretary considers appropriate.
Personnel matters.-- (A) Compensation of members.--Each member of the task force shall serve without pay for their service on the task force.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the task force shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of department of energy employees.--The Secretary may detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of the Department to the task force to assist it in carrying out its duties.
Such a detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil status or privilege.
Department of energy support of the task force.--Upon the request of the task force, the Secretary shall provide to the task force the administrative support services that the Secretary and the Chair jointly determine to be necessary for the task force to carry out its duties.
Federal advisory committee act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the task force.
Startup.--The initial appointment of the members of the task force shall be completed not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section and the first meeting of the task force shall be not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section.
Termination.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the task force shall terminate at the end of fiscal year 2012.
Exception.--If, as of the termination date under subparagraph (A), the task force has not complied with paragraph (9)(D) with respect to 1 or more meetings, then the task force shall continue after the termination date for the sole purpose of achieving compliance with paragraph (9)(D) with respect to those meetings.
Authorization of funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $200,000 for each of fiscal years 2009 through 2012.