This Act may be cited as the ``Computer Security Enhancement and Research Act of 2001''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The National Institute of Standards and Technology has responsibility for developing standards and guidelines needed to ensure the cost-effective security and privacy of sensitive information in Federal computer systems.
The application of best security practices developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology is important for protecting sensitive, but unclassified, information controlled by Federal agencies.
The Federal Government has an important role in supporting research and education activities needed to ensure the security of future networked information systems in both the public and private sectors.
Technology, including applications of cryptography, exists that can be readily provided by private sector companies to ensure the confidentiality, authenticity, and integrity of information in electronic form associated with public and private activities.
The development and use of encryption technologies by industry should be driven by market forces rather than by Government-imposed requirements.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) establish research programs focused on improving the security of networked information systems; (2) promote the development of a vigorous academic research community engaged in leading edge research on computer and communications security; (3) reinforce the role of the National Institute of Standards and Technology in ensuring the security of unclassified information in Federal computer systems; and (4) promote technology solutions based on private sector offerings to protect the security of Federal computer systems.
RESEARCH ON THE SECURITY OF NETWORKED INFORMATION SYSTEMS.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology Act is amended-- (1) by moving section 22 to the end of the Act and redesignating it as section 32; and (2) by inserting after section 21 the following new section: ``research program ``Sec.
Establishment.--The Director shall establish a program to support research at institutions of higher education (where the term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001)), for-profit research organizations, or consortia of such institutions, to improve the security of networked information systems.
The program shall-- ``(1) include multidisciplinary, long-term, high-risk research; ``(2) include directed research to address needs identified through the activities of the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board under section 20(e)(2) of this Act; and ``(3) promote the development of a substantial academic research community working at the leading edge of knowledge in subject areas relevant to the security of networked information systems.
Fellowships.--(1) In order to help meet the requirement of subsection (a)(3), the Director shall provide support for post-doctoral research fellowships and for senior research fellowships.
Support for such fellowships shall be made available through research projects funded under the program established by subsection (a) and through a separate fellowship program described in paragraph (2) of this subsection.
Senior fellowships shall be made available for established researchers who seek to change research fields and pursue studies related to the security of networked information systems.
The Director is authorized to establish a program to award post-doctoral research fellowships and senior research fellowships to individuals seeking research positions at institutions, including the Institute, engaged in research activities related to the security of networked information systems.
To be eligible for an award under this paragraph, an individual shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Director may require.
Under this subsection, the Director is authorized to provide stipends for senior research fellowships at levels consistent with support for a faculty member in a sabbatical position and post-doctoral research fellowships at the level of the Institute's Post Doctoral Research Fellowship Program.
Awards; Applications.--The Director is authorized to award grants or cooperative agreements to institutions of higher education to carry out the program established under subsection (a).
To be eligible for such an award, an institution of higher education shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Director may require.
The application shall include a description of-- ``(1) the number of graduate students anticipated to participate in the research project and the level of support to be provided to each; ``(2) the number of post-doctoral research fellowships included under the project and the level of support to be provided to each; and ``(3) the number of senior research fellows anticipated to participate in the research project and the level of support to be provided to each.
The Director shall ensure that a major consideration for making such awards shall be the emphasis and commitment demonstrated by the application to meeting the program requirement specified by subsection (a)(3).
Program Managers.--The Director shall designate employees of the Institute to serve as program managers for the program established under subsection (a).
Program managers so designated shall be responsible for-- ``(1) establishing broad research goals for the program and publicizing the goals to the academic research community; ``(2) soliciting applications for specific research projects to address the goals developed under paragraph (1); ``(3) selecting research projects for support under the program from among applications submitted to the Institute, following consideration of-- ``(A) the novelty and scientific and technical merit of the proposed projects; ``(B) the demonstrated capabilities of the individual or individuals submitting the applications to successfully carry out the proposed research; and ``(C) other criteria determined by the Director, based on information specified for inclusion in applications under subsection (c); and ``(4) monitoring the progress of research projects supported under the program.
Review of Program.--(1) The Director shall-- ``(A) provide for periodic reviews by the senior staff of the Institute of the portfolio of research awards monitored by each program manager designated in accordance with subsection (d); and ``(B) seek the advice of the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, established under section 21, on the appropriateness of the research goals and on the quality and relevance of research projects managed by program managers in accordance with subsection (d).
The Director shall also contract with the National Research Council for a comprehensive review of the program established under subsection (a) during the 5th year of the program.
Such review shall include an assessment of the scientific quality of the research conducted, the relevance of the research results obtained to the goals of the program, and the progress of the program in promoting the development of a substantial academic research community working at the leading edge of knowledge in the field.
The Director shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the review under this paragraph no later than six years after the initiation of the program.''.
Section 20 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278g-3) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (f); and (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) As part of the research activities conducted in accordance with subsection (b)(4), the Institute shall-- ``(1) conduct research to address emerging technologies associated with composing a networked computer system from components while ensuring it maintains desired security properties; and ``(2) carry out multidisciplinary, long-term, high-risk research on ways to improve the security of networked information systems.''.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for the National Institute of Standards and Technology-- (1) for activities under section 22 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act, as added by section 3 of this Act, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, $40,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, $55,000,000 for fiscal year 2005, $70,000,000 for fiscal year 2006, $85,000,000 for fiscal year 2007, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2008 through 2012; and (2) for activities under section 20(d) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act, as added by section 4 of this Act, $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, $5,200,000 for fiscal year 2004, $5,400,000 for fiscal year 2005, $5,600,000 for fiscal year 2006, and $5,800,000 for fiscal year 2007.
COMPUTER SECURITY REVIEW, PUBLIC MEETINGS, AND INFORMATION.
Section 20 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278g-3), as amended by this Act, is further amended by inserting after subsection (d), as added by section 4 of this Act, the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) The Institute shall solicit the recommendations of the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, established by section 21, regarding standards and guidelines that are being considered for submittal to the Secretary in accordance with subsection (a)(4).
The recommendations of the Board shall accompany standards and guidelines submitted to the Secretary.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $1,030,000 for fiscal year 2002 and $1,060,000 for fiscal year 2003 to enable the Computer System Security and Privacy Advisory Board, established by section 21, to identify emerging issues, including research needs, related to computer security, privacy, and cryptography and to convene public meetings on those subjects, receive presentations, and publish reports, digests, and summaries for public distribution on those subjects.