DEDUCTION FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE ATTAINED AGE 55 FOR REAL PROPERTY TAX INSURANCE WITH RESPECT TO PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
DEDUCTION FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE ATTAINED AGE 55 FOR REAL PROPERTY TAX INSURANCE WITH RESPECT TO PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE.
In General.--In the case of an individual who has attained age 55 before the close of the taxable year, there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the premiums paid or incurred during the taxable year for any qualified real property tax insurance contract with respect to the principal residence of such individual.
Qualified Real Property Tax Insurance Contract.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified real property tax insurance contract' means any insurance contract-- ``(A) which permits premiums to be paid for such insurance only after the policyholder attains age 55 and before the policyholder attains age 65, ``(B) which pays, at the election of the policyholder-- ``(i) the excess of-- ``(I) the amount of the State and local real property taxes imposed on the principal residence of the policyholder for each real property tax year in the insured period, over ``(II) the amount of such taxes imposed on such residence for the last real property tax year beginning before the insured period (or, if later, the first real property tax year for which the policyholder was liable for such taxes imposed on such residence), or ``(ii) the amount of the State and local real property taxes imposed on the principal residence of the policyholder for each real property tax year in the insured period, ``(C) which provides for a refund of the cash value of the insurance contract (if any) if-- ``(i) the residence is sold or exchanged before the end of the insured period, or ``(ii) the insured period ends by reason of the last sentence of paragraph (2), and ``(D) in the case of a husband and wife who are joint policyholders, which provides for a waiver of premiums for such insurance after the death of either spouse.
Insured period.--The term `insured period' means-- ``(A) in the case of an election to have paragraph (1)(B)(i) apply, the 10 real property tax years beginning after the date the policyholder attains age 65, and ``(B) in the case of an election to have paragraph (1)(B)(ii) apply, the number of real property tax years (beginning after the date the policyholder attains age 65) selected by the policyholder but only if the number selected is 5, 10, 15, or 20.
In no event shall the insured period end after the close of the real property tax year in which the last policyholder dies.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the meaning given to such term by section 1034.
State and local real property taxes.--The term `State and local real property taxes' means any real property tax which is a State or local tax (within the meaning of section 164(b)(2)); except that such term shall not include any amount for which a deduction is not allowable by reason of section 164(c)(1).
Premium Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an insurance contract shall be treated as a qualified real property tax insurance contract only if the annual premium for any year does not exceed the amount equal to 150 percent of the amount of the State and local real property taxes imposed on the principal residence of the policyholder for the real property tax year ending during the preceding year.
Single premiums permitted in certain cases.-- Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any premium paid during any calendar year if-- ``(A) not less than the amount of such premium is paid or distributed during such year to the taxpayer from any individual retirement plan of the taxpayer, or ``(B) the taxpayer receives during such year a lump sum distribution (as defined in section 402(d)(4)) in an amount not less than the amount of such premium.
This paragraph shall not apply if the amount of any premium paid, when added to premiums previously paid, exceeds the amount reasonably necessary (as determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary) to fund the payments referred to in subsection (b)(1)(B).
Special Rules for Married Individuals.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a husband and wife who are joint policyholders, this section shall be applied by taking into account only the age of the older spouse.
Property of deceased spouse.--If-- ``(A) an individual's spouse died during the period applicable under subsection (b)(1)(A), ``(B) such spouse was the older spouse, and ``(C) any premium for any qualified real property tax insurance contract was paid by either spouse before the date of such death, the age the older spouse would have been shall continue to be the only age taken into account for purposes of this section.
Other Special Rules.-- ``(1) Tax treatment of refund of cash value.--Any refund of the cash value of any qualified real property tax insurance contract shall be includible in gross income for the taxable year in which received.
Denial of deduction for payment of taxes.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any payment of tax under any qualified real property tax insurance contract.
Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--A rule similar to the rule of section 1034(f) shall apply for purposes of this section.''
Deduction Allowed Whether or Not Taxpayer Itemizes Other Deductions.--Subsection (a) of section 62 of such Code is amended by inserting after paragraph (15) the following new paragraph: ``(16) Qualified real property tax insurance premiums.--The deduction allowed by section 220.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Deduction for individuals who have attained age 55 for real property tax insurance with respect to principal residence.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.