This Act may be cited as the ``Stronger Tobacco Warning Labels to Save Lives Act''.
AMENDMENT TO FEDERAL CIGARETTE AND LABELING ADVERTISING ACT.
Amendment.--The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 United States Code 1331 et sequentes) is amended by striking section 4 and inserting the following: ``SEC.
Label.-- ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, or import for sale or distribution within the United States any cigarettes the package of which fails to bear, in accordance with the requirements of this section, a warning label.
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations describing the warning label required by paragraph (1).
Content of label.--The regulations promulgated under paragraph (2) shall ensure that the text of each warning label addresses one of the following: ``(A) Diseases or fatal health conditions caused by cigarette smoking.
Any physical addiction that results from cigarette smoking.
The influence that cigarette smoking by adults has on young children and teenagers and the consequences of such use.
The health hazards of secondhand smoke from cigarettes.
Graphics.-- ``(A) In general.--The regulations promulgated under paragraph (2) shall ensure that each warning label contains a color graphic or picture that illustrates or emphasizes to the greatest practicable extent the message of the text of the corresponding warning label.
Contents.--The graphics described in subparagraph (A) shall enhance the message of the text of the warning label and may include a color picture of one of the following: ``(i) A diseased lung, heart, or mouth.
An individual suffering from addiction.
Children watching an adult smoke a cigarette.
An individual adversely affected by secondhand smoke from a cigarette, including pregnant women or infants.
Advertising.--It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer or importer of cigarettes to advertise or cause to be advertised within the United States any cigarette unless the advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements of this section, one of the warning label statements required by subsection (a).
Requirements for Labeling.-- ``(1) Location.--Each label statement required by subsection (a) shall be located on the upper portion of the front and back panels of the cigarette package (or carton) and occupy not less than 50 percent of each panel.
Type and color.--Each label statement required by subsection (a) shall be printed in at least 17 point type with adjustments as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
All the letters in the label shall appear in conspicuous and legible type, in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material on the package, and be printed in a black-on-white or white-on-black format as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Requirements for Advertising.-- ``(1) Location.--Each label statement required by subsection (b) shall occupy not less than 50 percent of the area of the advertisement involved.
Type and color.-- ``(A) Type.--Each label statement required by subsection (b) shall be printed in a point type that is not less than the following types: ``(i) With respect to whole page advertisements on broadsheet newspaper--45 point type.
With respect to half page advertisements on broadsheet newspaper--39 point type.
With respect to whole page advertisements on tabloid newspaper--39 point type.
With respect to half page advertisements on tabloid newspaper--27 point type.
With respect to DPS magazine advertisements--31.5 point type.
With respect to whole page magazine advertisements--31.5 point type.
With respect to 28cm x 3 column advertisements--22.5 point type.
With respect to 20cm x 2 column advertisements--15 point type.
The Secretary may revise the required type sizes as the Secretary determines appropriate within the 50 percent requirement.
Color.--All the letters in the label under this paragraph shall appear in conspicuous and legible type, in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material and be printed in an alternating black-on-white and white-on-black format as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Rotation of Label Statements.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the label statements specified in subsections (a) and (b) shall be rotated by each manufacturer or importer of cigarettes quarterly in alternating sequence on packages of each brand of cigarettes manufactured by the manufacturer or importer and in the advertisements for each such brand of cigarettes in accordance with a plan submitted by the manufacturer or importer and approved by the Federal Trade Commission.
The Federal Trade Commission shall approve a plan submitted by a manufacturer or importer of cigarettes which will provide the rotation required by this subsection and which assures that all of the labels required by subsections (a) and (b) will be displayed by the manufacturer or importer at the same time.
Application of other rotation requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--A manufacturer or importer of cigarettes may apply to the Federal Trade Commission to have the label rotation described in subparagraph (C) apply with respect to a brand style of cigarettes manufactured or imported by such manufacturer or importer if-- ``(i) the number of cigarettes of such brand style sold in the fiscal year by the manufacturer or importer preceding the submission of the application is less than \1/ 4\ of 1 percent of all the cigarettes sold in the United States in such year; and ``(ii) more than \1/2\ of the cigarettes manufactured or imported by such manufacturer or importer for sale in the United States are packaged into brand styles which meet the requirements of clause (i).
If an application is approved by the Commission, the label rotation described in subparagraph (C) shall apply with respect to the applicant during the 1-year period beginning on the date of the application approval.
Plan.--An applicant under subparagraph (A) shall include in its application a plan under which the label statements specified in subsection (a) will be rotated by the applicant manufacturer or importer in accordance with the label rotation described in subparagraph (C).
Other rotation requirements.--Under the label rotation which the manufacturer or importer with an approved application may put into effect, each of the labels specified in subsection (a) shall appear on the packages of each brand style of cigarettes with respect to which the application was approved an equal number of times within the 12-month period beginning on the date of the approval by the Commission of the application.
Application of Requirement.--Subsection (a) does not apply to a distributor or a retailer of cigarettes who does not manufacture, package, or import cigarettes for sale or distribution within the United States.
Cigars; Pipe Tobacco.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to establish warning labels for cigars and pipe tobacco.
Such regulations shall require content-specific messages regarding health hazards posed by cigars and pipe tobacco, include graphic illustrations of such content messages, as is required under subsection (a), and be formatted in a clear and unambiguous manner, as is required under subsection (a).
Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) Cigar.--The term `cigar' means any roll of tobacco wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco (other than any roll of tobacco that is a cigarette or cigarillo).
Pipe tobacco.--The term `pipe tobacco' means any loose tobacco that, because of the appearance, type, packaging or labeling of such tobacco, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a tobacco to be smoked in a pipe.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this section.
AMENDMENT TO THE COMPREHENSIVE SMOKELESS TOBACCO HEALTH EDUCATION ACT OF 1986.
Amendment.--The Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986 (15 United States Code 4401 et sequentes) is amended by striking section 3 and inserting the following: ``SEC.
General Rule.-- ``(1) Label on package.--It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, or import for sale or distribution within the United States any smokeless tobacco product unless the product package bears, in accordance with the requirements of this section, a warning label.
Label in advertisements.--It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer, packager, or importer of smokeless tobacco products to advertise or cause to be advertised within the United States any smokeless tobacco product unless the advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements of this Act, one of the labels required by paragraph (1).
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations describing the warning labels required under subsection (a).
Content of Label.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that the text of each warning label addresses one of the following: ``(1) Diseases resulting from use of smokeless tobacco products.
Any physical addiction that results from using smokeless tobacco products.
The influence that use of smokeless tobacco products by adults has on young children and teenagers and the consequences of such use.
Number of Labels.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that not less than 2 warning labels are created for each subject matter described in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (c).
Such regulations shall also require that each package of smokeless tobacco bear 1 warning label that shall be rotated in accordance with subsection (g).
Graphics.-- ``(1) In general.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that each warning label required by subsection (a) contains a color graphic or picture that illustrates or emphasizes to the greatest practicable extent the message of the text of the corresponding warning label.
Contents.--The graphics described in paragraph (1) shall enhance the message of the text of the warning label and may include a color picture of one of the following: ``(A) A diseased mouth or other physical effect of using smokeless tobacco products.
An individual using a smokeless tobacco product.
Children watching an adult use a smokeless tobacco product.
Format.-- ``(1) Location.--Each label statement required by subsection (a)(1) shall be located on the principal display panel of the product and occupy not less than 50 percent of such panel.
Type and color.--Each label statement required by subsection (a)(1) shall be printed in 17 point type with adjustments as determined appropriate by the Secretary to reflect the length of the required statement.
All the letters in the label shall appear in conspicuous and legible type in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material on the package and be printed in an alternating black on white and white on black format as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Advertising and Rotation.--The provisions of sections (d) and (e)(1) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (as amended by the Stronger Tobacco Warning Labels to Save Lives Act) shall apply to advertisements for smokeless tobacco products required under subsection (a)(2) and the rotation of the label statements required under subsection (a)(1) on such products.
Application of Requirement.--Subsection (a) does not apply to a distributor or a retailer of smokeless tobacco products who does not manufacture, package, or import such products for sale or distribution within the United States.
Television and Radio Advertising.--It shall be unlawful to advertise smokeless tobacco or cigars on any medium of electronic communications subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this section.