This Act may be cited as the ``Insular Areas Consolidation Act of 1996''.
In this Act: (1) Baker island.--The term ``Baker Island'' means all of the islands and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 0 degrees, 11 to 13 minutes, of latitude north of the Equator and at the meridian of 176 degrees, 27 to 30 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
Howland island.--The term ``Howland Island'' means all of the islands and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 0 degrees, 46 to 50 minutes, of latitude north of the Equator and at the meridian of 176 degrees, 37 to 39 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
Included area.--The term ``included area'' means the area included in the State of Hawaii under section 3(a).
Jarvis island.--The term ``Jarvis Island'' means all of the islands and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 0 degrees, 22 to 24 minutes, of latitude south of the Equator and at the meridian of 160 degrees, 0 to 3 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
Johnston atoll.--The term ``Johnston Atoll'' means all of the islands and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 16 degrees, 40 to 48 minutes, of latitude north of the Equator and at the meridian of 169 degrees, 24 to 36 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
Kingman reef.--The term ``Kingman Reef'' means all of the territory and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 6 degrees, 22 to 27 minutes, of latitude north of the Equator and at the meridian of 162 degrees, 22 to 25 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
Midway islands.--The term ``Midway Islands'' means all of the islands and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 28 degrees, 10 to 18 minutes, of latitude north of the Equator and at the meridian of 177 degrees, 16 to 28 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
Palmyra atoll.--The term ``Palmyra Atoll'' means all of the islands and appurtenant reefs at the parallel of 5 degrees, 51 to 54 minutes, of latitude north of the Equator and at the meridian of 162 degrees, 0 to 11 minutes, of longitude west of Greenwich, England, and the territorial waters of the islands and reefs.
ADDITIONS TO STATE OF HAWAII.
In General.--The State of Hawaii shall include Baker Island, Jarvis Island, Howland Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, the Midway Islands, and Palmyra Atoll.
Jurisdiction.--The included area shall be subject to the jurisdiction of the State of Hawaii to the same extent as and in the same manner that the jurisdiction of the State applies to all other areas within the State.
Rights of United States.--The inclusion of the included area in the State of Hawaii under this section shall be subject to all rights of use, ownership, management, and operation by the Government of the United States that exist on the date of enactment of this Act.
Hawaii Statehood Act.--Section 2 of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the admission of the State of Hawaii into the Union'', approved March 18, 1959 (Public Law 86-3; 48 United States Code prec.
491), is amended by striking all that follows ``enactment of this Act'' and inserting a period.
Exemption From Provisions Relating to the Guano Islands.--Title LXXII of the Revised Statutes (48 United States Code 1411 et sequentes) shall not apply to the included area.
ACCEPTANCE BY STATE OF HAWAII.
Acceptance by State of Hawaii.--Sections 3 and 4 shall not take effect unless not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act (unless the Secretary of the Interior and the Governor of the State of Hawaii agree to an extension), the Governor of the State of Hawaii certifies to the President that the State of Hawaii accepts all or part of the included area.
Proclamation by the President.--Not later than 30 days after receiving the certification described in subsection (a), the President shall issue a proclamation of the new geographical jurisdiction of the State of Hawaii.
Effective Date.--Sections 3 and 4 shall take effect on the issuance of the proclamation described in subsection (b).
USE OF INCLUDED AREA.
Nothing in this Act authorizes, approves, or suggests the appropriateness of any change in the use that is being made on the date of enactment of this Act of any of the included area.
The United States shall indemnify, defend, and hold harmless the State of Hawaii from any claim arising from the ownership of lands and waters in the included area (including structures and other improvements) or the operation by the United States of any facilities or equipment in the included area before the date of issuance of the proclamation described in subsection (b).