Definitions.--In this section: (1) Company.--The term ``Company'' means Florida Power & Light Company.
Federal land.--The term ``Federal Land'' means the parcels of land that are-- (A) owned by the United States; (B) administered by the Secretary; (C) located within the National Park; and (D) generally depicted on the map as-- (i) Tract A, which is adjacent to the Tamiami Trail, United States Reports Rt.
41; and (ii) Tract B, which is located on the eastern boundary of the National Park.
Map.--The term ``map'' means the map prepared by the National Park Service, titled ``Proposed Land Exchanges, Everglades National Park'', numbered 160/60411A, and dated September 2008.
National park.--The term ``National Park'' means the Everglades National Park located in the State.
Non-federal land.--The term ``non-Federal land'' means the land in the State that-- (A) is owned by the State, the specific area and location of which shall be determined by the State; or (B)(i) is owned by the Company; (ii) comprises approximately 320 acres; and (iii) is located within the East Everglades Acquisition Area, as generally depicted on the map as ``Tract D''.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Florida and political subdivisions of the State, including the South Florida Water Management District.
Land Exchange With State.-- (1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, if the State offers to convey to the Secretary all right, title, and interest of the State in and to specific parcels of non-Federal land, and the offer is acceptable to the Secretary, the Secretary may, subject to valid existing rights, accept the offer and convey to the State all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the Federal land generally depicted on the map as ``Tract A''.
Conditions.--The land exchange under paragraph (1) shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary may require.
Valuation.-- (A) In general.--The values of the land involved in the land exchange under paragraph (1) shall be equal.
Equalization.--If the values of the land are not equal, the values may be equalized by donation, payment using donated or appropriated funds, or the conveyance of additional parcels of land.
Appraisals.--Before the exchange of land under paragraph (1), appraisals for the Federal and non-Federal land shall be conducted in accordance with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions and the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice.
Technical corrections.--Subject to the agreement of the State, the Secretary may make minor corrections to correct technical and clerical errors in the legal descriptions of the Federal and non-Federal land and minor adjustments to the boundaries of the Federal and non-Federal land.
Administration of land acquired by secretary.--Land acquired by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) become part of the National Park; and (B) be administered in accordance with the laws applicable to the National Park System.
Land Exchange With Company.-- (1) In general.--Subject to the provisions of this paragraph, if the Company offers to convey to the Secretary all right, title, and interest of the Company in and to the non- Federal land generally depicted on the map as ``Tract D'', and the offer is acceptable to the Secretary, the Secretary may, subject to valid existing rights, accept the offer and convey to the Company all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the Federal land generally depicted on the map as ``Tract B'', along with a perpetual easement on a corridor of land contiguous to Tract B for the purpose of vegetation management.
Conditions.--The land exchange under paragraph (1) shall be subject to such terms and conditions as the Secretary may require.
Valuation.-- (A) In general.--The values of the land involved in the land exchange under paragraph (1) shall be equal unless the non-Federal land is of higher value than the Federal land.
Equalization.--If the values of the land are not equal, the values may be equalized by donation, payment using donated or appropriated funds, or the conveyance of additional parcels of land.
Appraisal.--Before the exchange of land under paragraph (1), appraisals for the Federal and non-Federal land shall be conducted in accordance with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions and the Uniform Standards of Professional Appraisal Practice.
Technical corrections.--Subject to the agreement of the Company, the Secretary may make minor corrections to correct technical and clerical errors in the legal descriptions of the Federal and non-Federal land and minor adjustments to the boundaries of the Federal and non-Federal land.
Administration of land acquired by secretary.--Land acquired by the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall-- (A) become part of the National Park; and (B) be administered in accordance with the laws applicable to the National Park System.
Map.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
Boundary Revision.--On completion of the land exchanges authorized by this section, the Secretary shall adjust the boundary of the National Park accordingly, including removing the land conveyed out of Federal ownership.