The Ukrainian American Veterans, Incorporated, organized and incorporated under the laws of the State of New York, is hereby recognized and granted a Federal charter.
The corporation shall have only the powers granted to it through its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in the States in which it is incorporated and subject to the laws of such States.
The purposes of the corporation are those provided in its articles of incorporation and include a commitment, on a national basis, to-- (1) preserve, protect, and defend the Constitution of the United States; (2) commemorate the wars, campaigns, and military actions of the United States in order to reflect respect, honor, and tribute for the dead and the surviving veterans; (3) give individuals throughout the Nation a greater understanding of and appreciation for the sacrifices of the people who participated in any military action on behalf of individuals throughout the United States; (4) stimulate, to the highest degree possible, the interest of the entire Nation in the problems of veterans, their widows, and orphans; (5) collect, edit, publish, and preserve records and mementos of patriotic service of veterans of the Armed Forces of the United States; and (6) foster the association of veterans of Ukrainian descent who have served in the Armed Forces of the United States.
Use of Income and Assets.--No part of the income or assets of the corporation may inure to any member, officer, or director of the corporation or be distributed to any such person during the life of this charter.
No provision in this subsection may be construed to prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to the officers and employees of the corporation or reimbursement for actual necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The corporation may not make any loan to any member, officer, director, or employee of the corporation.
Political Activity.--The corporation, any officer or director of the corporation, acting as such officer or director, may not contribute to, support, or otherwise participate in any political activity or in any manner attempt to influence legislation.
Issuance of Stock and Payment of Dividends.--The corporation may not issue any shares of stock or declare or pay any dividends.
Claims of Federal Approval.--The corporation may not claim the approval of the Congress or the authorization of the Federal Government for any of its activities.
Corporate Status.--The corporation shall maintain its status as a corporation organized and incorporated under the laws of the State of New York.
Corporate Function.--The corporation shall function as an educational, patriotic, civic, and historical organization under the laws of the States in which it is incorporated.
The corporation shall be liable for the acts of its officers, directors, employees, and agents whenever the officers, directors, employees, and agents act within the scope of their authority.
MAINTENANCE AND INSPECTION OF BOOKS AND RECORDS.
Books and Records of Account.--The corporation shall keep correct and complete books and records of account and shall keep minutes of any proceeding of the corporation involving any of its members, the board of directors, or any committee having authority under the board of directors.
Names and Addresses of Members.--The corporation shall keep, at its principal office, a record of the names of all members having the right to vote in any proceeding of the corporation.
Right To Inspect Books and Records.--All books and records of the corporation may be inspected by any member having the right to vote, or by any agent or attorney of such member, for any proper purpose, at any reasonable time.
Application of State Law.--No provision of this section may be construed to contravene any applicable State law.
AUDIT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for audit of accounts of private corporations established under the Federal law'', approved August 30, 1964 (36 United States Code 1101), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Ukrainian American Veterans, Incorporated.''.
The corporation shall annually submit to the Congress a report concerning the activities of the corporation during the preceding fiscal year.
The annual report shall be submitted at the same time as is the report of the audit required by section 7.
The report shall not be printed as a public document.
RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO AMEND OR REPEAL CHAPTER.
The right to amend or repeal this Act is expressly reserved to the Congress.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``corporation'' means the Ukrainian American Veterans, Incorporated; and (2) the term ``State'' means any of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Trust Territories of the Pacific Islands, or any other territory or possessions of the United States.
The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation as provided in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The charter granted in this Act shall expire if the corporation fails to comply with any provisions of this Act.