This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Election Law Reform Commission Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF COMMISSION.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Federal Election Law Reform Commission'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The purposes of the Commission are to study the laws relating to elections for Federal office and to recommend reforms in those laws.
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among individuals who are not officers or employees of any government and who are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of education, training, or experience.
In making appointments, the President shall consult-- (1) the Speaker of the House of Representatives with respect to the appointment of 2 members; (2) the majority leader of the Senate with respect to the appointment of 2 members; (3) the minority leader of the House of Representatives with respect to the appointment of one member; and (4) the minority leader of the Senate with respect to the appointment of one member.
Chairman.--At the time of the appointment, the President shall designate one member of the Commission as Chairman of the Commission.
Terms.--The members of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 4 members of the Commission may be of the same political party.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Any member of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take under this section.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDED LEGISLATION.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a report of the activities of the Commission, together with a draft of legislation (including technical and conforming provisions) recommended by the Commission to reform the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) and any other laws relating to elections for Federal office.
MATTERS TO BE CONSIDERED BY THE COMMISSION.
In formulating its draft of legislation under section 5, the Commission shall consider-- (1) the growth pattern of expenditures in elections for Federal office; (2) the appropriateness of public financing, communications vouchers, and postage subsidies with respect to elections for Federal office; (3) the option of expenditure limitations for achieving a balance of campaign resources between challengers and incumbents in elections for Federal office; (4) possible mechanisms of enforcement with respect to expenditures in elections for Federal office, including (A) voluntary compliance through incentives such as direct public financing, communications vouchers, and postage subsidies, and (B) mandatory compliance through imposition of penalties, such as taxes on excess expenditures; (5) the nature and extent of election related spending (for party building, get-out-the-vote, and similar activities) that is not currently regulated under Federal law (commonly known as ``soft money''); (6) the impact of non-party multicandidate political committees (commonly known as ``political action committees'') on elections for Federal office; (7) the adequacy of existing limitations on the contributions and activities of such committees, as well as the adequacy of existing limitations on the contributions and activities of individuals and other persons; (8) the influence of independent expenditures on elections for Federal office, through television advertising and otherwise, and the possibility of taking independent expenditures into account in the computation of contribution and expenditures with respect to candidates who benefit from independent expenditures; and (9) the impact of out-of-State and out-of-District contributions on congressional elections.
Rules of House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and the Senate, respectively, and as such they shall be considered as part of the rules of each House, respectively, or of that House to which they specifically apply, and such rules shall supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Definitions.--As used in this section, the term ``Federal election bill'' means only a bill of either House of Congress which is introduced as provided in subsection (c) to carry out the recommendations of the Commission as set forth in the draft of legislation referred to in section 5.
Introduction and Referral.--Within 3 days after the Commission submits its draft legislation under section 5, a Federal election bill shall be introduced (by request) in the House by the majority leader of the House and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the majority leader of the Senate.
Such bills shall be referred to the appropriate committees.
Amendments Prohibited.-- No amendment to a Federal election bill shall be in order in either the House of Representatives or the Senate; and no motion to suspend the application of this subsection shall be in order in either House; nor shall it be in order in either House to entertain a request to suspend the application of this subsection by unanimous consent.
Period for Committee and Floor Consideration.-- (1) If the committee of either House to which a Federal election bill has been referred has not reported it at the close of the 20th day after its introduction, such committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the bill and it shall be placed on the appropriate calendar.
If prior to the passage by one House of a Federal election bill of that House, that House receives the same Federal election bill from the other House, then-- (A) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no Federal election bill had been received from the other House; but (B) the vote on final passage shall be on the Federal election bill of the other House.
For purposes of paragraph (1), in computing a number of days in either House, there shall be excluded the days on which that House is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain or an adjournment of the Congress sine die.
Floor Consideration in the House.-- (1) A motion in the House of Representatives to proceed to the consideration of a Federal election bill shall be highly privileged except that a motion to proceed to consider may only be made on the second legislative day after the calendar day on which the Member making the motion announces to the House his intention to do so.
The motion to proceed to consider is not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Consideration of a Federal election bill in the House of Representatives shall be in the House with debate limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
The previous question on the Federal election bill shall be considered as ordered to final passage without intervening motion.
It shall not be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which a Federal election bill is agreed to or disagreed to.
All appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the Rules of the House of Representatives to the procedure relating to a Federal election bill shall be decided without debate.
Floor Consideration in the Senate.-- (1) A motion in the Senate to proceed to the consideration of a Federal election bill shall be privileged and not debatable.
An amendment to the motion shall not be in order, nor shall it be in order to move to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to.
Debate in the Senate on a Federal election bill, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours.
The time shall be equally divided between, and controlled by, the majority leader and the minority leader or their designees.
Debate in the Senate on any debatable motion or appeal in connection with a Federal election bill shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the bill, except that in the event the manager of the bill is in favor of any such motion or appeal, the time in opposition thereto, shall be controlled by the minority leader or his designee.
Such leaders, or either of them, may, from time under their control on the passage of a Federal election bill, allot additional time to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
A motion in the Senate to further limit debate is not debatable.
A motion to recommit a Federal election bill is not in order.
Pay and Travel Expenses of Members.--(1) Each member of the Commission, other than the Chairman, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
The Chairman shall be paid for each day referred to in the preceding sentence at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Members of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a staff director, who shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Details.--Upon request of the Director, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure by contract the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission shall cease to exist 3 months after the date of the submission of its report under section 5.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as are necessary to carry out its duties under this Act.