This Act may be cited as the ``Consumer Product Risk Reporting Act of 2001''.
REPAIR, REPLACEMENT, OR REFUND.
Section 15(d) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2064(d)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``If'' in the first sentence and inserting ``Subject to the last 2 sentences of this subsection, if''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``If the Commission determines (after affording opportunity for an informal hearing) that the action that the manufacturer, distributor, or retailer has elected to take under paragraph (1), (2), or (3) is not in the public interest, the Commission shall order the manufacturer, distributor, or retailer to take whichever other action specified in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) that the Commission determines to be in the public interest.
If the Commission determines that both of the remaining actions specified in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) are in the public interest, the Commission shall order the manufacturer, distributor, or retailer to take whichever of those actions the manufacturer, distributor, or retailer elects.''.
Section 15(b) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1274(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``If'' in the first sentence and inserting ``Subject to the last 2 sentences of this subsection, if''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``If the Commission determines (after affording opportunity for an informal hearing) that the action that the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer has elected to take under paragraph (1), (2), or (3) is not in the public interest, the Commission shall order the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer to take whichever other action specified in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) that the Commission determines to be in the public interest.
If the Commission determines that both of the remaining actions specified in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) are in the public interest, the Commission shall order the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer to take whichever of those actions the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer elects.''
Section 15(c)(2) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1274(c)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``If'' in the first sentence and inserting ``Subject to the last 2 sentences of this subsection, if''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``If the Commission determines (after affording opportunity for an informal hearing) that the action that the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer has elected to take under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) is not in the public interest, the Commission shall order the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer to take whichever other action specified in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) that the Commission determines to be in the public interest.
If the Commission determines that both of the remaining actions specified in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) are in the public interest, the Commission shall order the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer to take whichever of those actions the manufacturer, distributor, or dealer elects.''.
Section 20(a) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2069(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Amount of Penalty.-- ``(1) Any person who knowingly violates section 19 shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $7,000 for each such violation.
Subject to paragraph (2), a violation of paragraph (1), (2), (4), (5), (6), (7), (8), (9), (10), or (11) of section 19(a) shall constitute a separate offense with respect to each consumer product involved.
A violation of section 19(a)(3) shall constitute a separate violation with respect to each failure or refusal to allow or perform an act required thereby, and, if such violation is a continuing one, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
The second sentence of paragraph (1) shall not apply to violations of paragraph (1) or (2) of section 19(a)-- ``(A) if the person who violated such paragraph is not the manufacturer or private labeler or a distributor of the product involved, and ``(B) if such person did not have either-- ``(i) actual knowledge that such person's distribution or sale of the product violated such paragraph; or ``(ii) notice from the Commission that such distribution or sale would be a violation of such paragraph.
(A) The penalty amount authorized in paragraph (1) shall be adjusted for inflation by increasing the amount referred to in paragraph (1) by the cost-of-living adjustment for the preceding 5 years.
Any increase determined under the preceding sentence shall be rounded up to-- ``(i) in the case of a penalty amount less than or equal to $10,000, the nearest multiple of $1,000; ``(ii) in the case of a penalty amount greater than $10,000, the nearest multiple of $5,000.
Not later than December 1, 2005, and December 1 of each 5th calendar year thereafter, the Commission shall prescribe and publish in the Federal Register the authorized penalty amount that shall apply for violations that occur after January 1 of the year immediately following such publication.
For purposes of subparagraph (A): ``(i) The term `Consumer Price Index' means the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers published by the Department of Labor.
The term `cost-of-living adjustment for the preceding 5 years' means the percentage by which-- ``(I) the Consumer Price Index for the month of June of the calendar year preceding the adjustment exceeds ``(II) the Consumer Price Index for the month of June preceding the date on which the maximum authorized penalty was last adjusted.''.
Section 5(c) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1264(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Civil Penalties.-- ``(1) Any person who knowingly violates section 4 shall be subject to a civil penalty not to exceed $7,000 for each such violation.
Subject to paragraph (2), a violation of subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), (f), (g), (i), (j), or (k) of section 4 shall constitute a separate offense with respect to each substance involved.
A violation of section 4(e) shall constitute a separate violation with respect to each failure or refusal to allow or perform an act required by section 4(e), and if such violation is a continuing one, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate offense.
The second sentence of paragraph (1) of this subsection shall not apply to violations of subsection (a) or (c) of section 4-- ``(A) if the person who violated such subsection is not the manufacturer, importer, or private labeler or a distributor of the substance involved; and ``(B) if such person did not have either-- ``(i) actual knowledge that such person's distribution or sale of the substance violated such subsection, or ``(ii) notice from the Commission that such distribution or sale would be a violation of such subsection.
In determining the amount of any penalty to be sought upon commencing an action seeking to assess a penalty for a violation of section 4, the Commission shall consider the nature of the substance, the severity of the risk of injury, the occurrence or absence of injury, the amount of the substance distributed, and the appropriateness of such penalty in relation to the size of the business of the person charged.
Any civil penalty under this subsection may be compromised by the Commission.
In determining the amount of such compromised penalty or whether it should be remitted or mitigated and in what amount, the Commission shall consider the appropriateness of such penalty to the size of the business of the persons charged, the nature of the substance involved, the severity of the risk of injury, the occurrence or absence of injury, and the amount of the substance distributed.
The amount of such penalty when finally determined, or the amount agreed on compromise, may be deducted from any sums owing by the United States to the person charged.
As used in the first sentence of paragraph (1), the term `knowingly' means-- ``(A) having actual knowledge, or ``(B) the presumed having of knowledge deemed to be possessed by a reasonable person who acts in the circumstances, including knowledge obtainable upon the exercise of due care to ascertain the truth of representations.
(A) The penalty amount authorized in paragraph (1) shall be adjusted for inflation by increasing the amount referred to in paragraph (1) by the cost-of-living adjustment for the preceding 5 years.
Any increase determined under the preceding sentence shall be rounded up to-- ``(i) in the case of a penalty amount less than or equal to $10,000, the nearest multiple of $1,000; ``(ii) in the case of a penalty amount greater than $10,000, the nearest multiple of $5,000.
Not later than December 1, 2005, and December 1 of each 5th calendar year thereafter, the Commission shall prescribe and publish in the Federal Register the authorized penalty amount that shall apply for violations that occur after January 1 of the year immediately following such publication.
For purposes of subparagraph (A): ``(i) The term `Consumer Price Index' means the Consumer Price Index for all urban consumers published by the Department of Labor.
The term `cost-of-living adjustment for the preceding 5 years' means the percentage by which-- ``(I) the Consumer Price Index for the month of June of the calendar year preceding the adjustment exceeds ``(II) the Consumer Price Index for the month of June preceding the date on which the maximum authorized penalty was last adjusted.''.
Section 21 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2070) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Any person who knowingly violates section 19 shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, or be imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both, if such person is an individual, or fined under title 18, United States Code, if such person is an organization (as the term `organization' is defined in section 18 of title 18, United States Code).
Any person who knowingly and willfully violates section 19 of this Act shall be fined under title 18, United States Code, or be imprisoned not more than 3 years, or both, if such person is an individual, or fined under title 18, United States Code, if such person is an organization.
Any individual director, officer, or agent of a corporation who authorizes, orders, or performs any of the acts or practices constituting in whole or in part a violation of subsection (a) shall be subject to penalties under this section without regard to any penalties to which that corporation may be subject under subsection (a).''.
Section 5(a) of the Federal Hazardous Substances Act (15 United States Code 1264(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Criminal Penalties.--Any person who violates any of the provisions of section 4 shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall on conviction thereof be subject to a fine under title 18, United States Code, or to imprisonment for not more than one year, or both, if such person is an individual, or to a fine under title 18, United States Code, if such person is an organization (as the term `organization' is defined in section 18 of title 18, United States Code); but for offenses committed willfully, or for second and subsequent offenses, the penalty shall be imprisonment for not more than 3 years, or a fine under title 18, United States Code, or both, if such person is an individual, or a fine under title 18, United States Code, if such person is an organization.