This Act may be cited as the ``Prostate Research, Imaging, and Men's Education Act'' or the ``PRIME Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Prostate cancer has reached epidemic proportions, particularly among African-American men, and strikes and kills men in numbers comparable to the number of women who lose their lives from breast cancer.
Life-saving breakthroughs in screening, diagnosis, and treatment of breast cancer resulted from the development of advanced imaging technologies led by the Federal Government.
Men should have accurate and affordable prostate cancer screening exams and minimally-invasive treatment tools, similar to what women have for breast cancer.
While it is important for men to take advantage of current prostate cancer screening techniques, a recent NCI- funded study demonstrated that the most common available methods of detecting prostate cancer (PSA blood test and physical exams) are not foolproof, causing numerous false alarms and false reassurances.
The absence of advanced imaging technologies for prostate cancer causes the lack of accurate information critical for clinical decisions, resulting in missed cancers and lost lives, as well as unnecessary and costly medical procedures, with related complications.
With prostate imaging tools, men and their families would face less physical, psychological, financial and emotional trauma and billions of dollars could be saved in private and public health care systems.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT OF PROSTATE CANCER IMAGING TECHNOLOGIES.
Expansion of Research.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health and in consultation with the Secretary of Defense, shall carry out a program to expand and intensify research to develop innovative advanced imaging technologies for prostate cancer detection, diagnosis, and treatment comparable to state-of-the-art mammography technologies.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012.
PUBLIC AWARENESS AND EDUCATION CAMPAIGN.
National Campaign.--The Secretary shall carry out a national campaign to increase the awareness and knowledge of Americans with respect to the need for prostate cancer screening and for improved detection technologies.
Requirements.--The national campaign conducted under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) roles for the Health Resources Services Administration, the Office on Minority Health of the Department of Health and Human Services, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and the Office of Minority Health of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; and (2) the development and distribution of written educational materials, and the development and placing of public service announcements, that are intended to encourage men to seek prostate cancer screening and to create awareness of the need for improved imaging technologies for prostate cancer detection and minimally invasive treatment.
Racial Disparities.--In developing the national campaign under subsection (a), the Secretary shall recognize and address the racial disparities in the incidences of prostate cancer and mortality rates with respect to such disease.
Grants.--The Secretary shall establish a program to award grants to nonprofit private entities to enable such entities to test alternative outreach and education strategies to increase the awareness and knowledge of Americans with respect to the need for prostate cancer screening and improved imaging technologies.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012.
IMPROVING PROSTATE CANCER SCREENING BLOOD TESTS.
In General.--The Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of Defense, shall carry out research to develop an improved prostate cancer screening blood test using in-vitro detection.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2012.
Report and Strategy.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that details the strategy of the Secretary for implementing the requirements of this Act and the status of such efforts.
Full Compliance.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that-- (1) contains assurances that the provisions of this Act are fully implemented; and (2) certifies such compliance, or in the case of a Federal agency that has not complied, an explanation as to such failure to comply.