This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on Filipino Veterans Entitlement Act''.
There is hereby established the Commission on Filipino War Veterans Entitlement (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--It shall be the duty of the Commission to-- (1) review the facts and circumstances surrounding the enactment of those provisions of the First Supplemental Surplus Appropriation Rescission Act, 1946 (Public Law 301 of the 79th Congress, now codified as section 107 of title 38, United States Code), that required the denial of most veterans' benefits and privileges to Filipino veterans of World War II; (2) review existing Department of Veterans Affairs benefits and medical privileges that are available to those veterans; (3) determine what type and kind of fair, equitable, and justifiable veterans' benefits are due to those veterans; and (4) recommend appropriate changes in law.
Hearings.--The Commission shall hold public hearings in the cities of Manila, Cebu, and Davao in the Philippines; Los Angeles and San Francisco, California; Chicago, Illinois; Houston, Texas; New York, New York; Washington, DC; Honolulu, Hawaii, and in any other location that the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Report.--The Commission shall submit to Congress a written report of its findings and recommendations not later than October 1, 1994.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of seven members, who shall be appointed as follows: (1) Three members shall be appointed by the President.
Two members shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two members shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate.
Terms, Vacancies.--The term of office for members shall be for the life of the Commission.
A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
First Meeting.--The first meeting of the Commission shall be called by the President within 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Quorum.--Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairman, Vice Chairman.--The Commission shall elect a chairman and vice chairman from among its members.
The term of office of each shall be for the life of the Commission.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission who is not otherwise employed by the United States Government shall receive compensation at a rate equal to the daily rate prescribed for GS-18 under the General Schedule contained in section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day, including travel time, the member is engaged in the actual performance of the member's duties as a member of the Commission.
A member of the Commission who is an officer or employee of the United States Government shall serve without additional compensation.
All members of the Commission shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other actual and necessary expenses incurred by them in the performance of their duties.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings; Subpoenas.--The Commission or, on the authorization of the Commission, any subcommittee or member thereof, may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, and request the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, correspondence, memorandum, papers, and documents as the Commission or such subcommittee or member may deem advisable.
The Commission may request the Attorney General to invoke the aid of an appropriate United States District Court to require, by subpoena or otherwise, such attendance, testimony, or production.
Information From Executive Agencies.--The Commission may require directly from the head of any department, agency, independent instrumentality, or other authority of the executive branch of the Government, available information which the Commission considers useful in the discharge of its duties.
All departments, agencies, and independent instrumentalities, or other authorities of the executive branch of the Government shall cooperate with the Commission and furnish all information requested by the Commission to the extent permitted by law.
The Commission is authorized to-- (1) appoint and fix the compensation of such personnel as may be necessary, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that the compensation of any employee of the Commission may not exceed a rate equivalent to the rate payable under GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of such title; (2) obtain the services of experts and consultants in accordance with the provisions of section 3109 of such title; (3) enter into agreements with the Administrator of General Services for procurement of necessary financial and administrative services, for which payment shall be made by reimbursement from funds of the Commission in such amounts as may be agreed upon by the Chairman of the Commission and the Administrator; (4) procure supplies, services, and property by contract in accordance with applicable laws and regulations and to the extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts; and (5) enter into contracts with Federal or State agencies, private firms, institutions, and agencies for the conduct of research or surveys, the preparation of reports and other activities necessary to the discharge of the duties of the Commission, to the extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.
The Commission shall terminate on February 1, 1995.
There is hereby authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 to carry out the provisions of this Act.