This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Information Presentation Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) There is a substantial lack of consistency in the presentation of information explaining and supporting Federal rulemaking actions when such information is published with proposed and final rules in the Federal Register.
This lack of consistency makes it more difficult for the public and Congress to understand rulemaking actions and their justification and to locate particular relevant information.
Presidential Executive Order 12866, promulgated September 30, 1993, specifies certain analytical components for Federal rulemaking that provide a useful design for consistent organization of the information presented in Federal Register rulemaking notices.
Such a consistent format will facilitate congressional, executive branch, and public review of proposed rulemaking actions.
FORMATTING OF RULEMAKING ENTRIES IN THE FEDERAL REGISTER.
Significant Rules.--This section applies to each significant rule that is published in the Federal Register as a general notice of proposed rulemaking, or as a final or interim final substantive rule, under section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
Information To Be Included in Proposed, Interim Final, and Final Rules.--Each agency shall, in accordance with a uniform format to be established (after public notice and an opportunity for public comment) by the Office of the Federal Register, include in the preamble (the ``Supplementary Information'') to each such significant rule, both as a proposed and as a final or interim final rule, the information specified in this subsection.
Rulemaking status.-- (A)(i) The agency shall describe whether, and if so the reason that, the rule has been determined to be-- (I) a significant rule; or (II) a major rule under section 804(2) of title 5, United States Code.
If the agency determines that a rule is not a significant rule, the agency shall provide the reasons and justifications for such determination using each of the factors described in section 5(3).
The agency shall identify the nature and timing of any applicable legal deadline or other good cause for the issuance of the rule more quickly than the normal work schedule would provide.
The agency shall provide an explanation as to whether the President, the Vice President, or any official in the Executive Office of the President has waived any provision of any relevant Executive order or related policy directive applicable to the rulemaking.
If any cost-benefit analysis, risk assessment, or other evaluation of the rule prepared by the agency displays an important gap in the analytical information relied upon therein, the agency shall provide an explanation as to why it is or is not feasible or reasonable to delay the rulemaking until those gaps in information are filled.
Regulatory policy officer.--The agency shall provide the name, telephone number, and position of the regulatory policy officer of the agency responsible at each stage of the regulatory process for fostering the development of effective, innovative, and least burdensome regulations and furthering the principles set forth in any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking.
Consultation.--The agency shall describe any consultations with stakeholders, formal advisory bodies, and State, local, or tribal governments under title II of Public Law 104-4 (2 United States Code 1531 et sequentes) or other applicable authority, identifying the individuals involved and the issues discussed.
Need.--The agency shall identify any applicable law requiring the specific rulemaking and separately describe any compelling public need for undertaking the rulemaking, including a detailed explanation of the need for preempting, or regulating instead of, State, local, or tribal governments.
Legal authority.--The agency shall identify the specific statutory provisions authorizing the rule, the overall regulatory program involved, and the scope of the statutory discretion of the agency, if any, to regulate and the degree to which the agency is regulating.
Except in cases in which the rule has no legal effect other than to implement the literal wording of the applicable law, the agency shall include in the preamble a legal analysis identifying the scope of discretion available to the agency in undertaking the rulemaking.
Alternatives considered.--The agency shall identify the principal regulatory alternatives considered by the agency before determining which alternative to propose for public comment, or to adopt in the final or interim final rule.
Alternative selected.--Based on the criteria set forth in title II of Public Law 104-4 (2 United States Code 1531 et sequentes) and any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking, the agency shall identify and explain in reasonable detail the reasons why the agency selected the alternative to be adopted or adopted in the rule.
Costs.--The agency shall estimate the direct and indirect costs of the rule, which shall be stated to the extent reasonably possible as monetized costs, quantified costs, or qualitative costs, in that order.
Impacts.--The agency shall identify the entities that will be significantly impacted through compliance with the rule, and shall evaluate and describe the nature of the impacts that are anticipated to be caused by the costs to be imposed or other actions the entities are anticipated to take in order to come into compliance with the rule.
The agency shall summarize any analysis or evaluation conducted under title II of Public Law 104-4 (2 United States Code 1531 et sequentes) or chapter 6 of title 5, United States Code, or if the agency did not conduct such an analysis or evaluation, provide an explanation as to why an analysis or evaluation was not performed.
Benefits.--The agency shall estimate the direct and indirect benefits of the rule.
These benefits shall be stated to the extent possible as monetized benefits, quantified benefits, or qualitative benefits.
Certification of compliance.--The agency shall state whether any official in the Executive Office of the President carried out a review of the rule under any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking.
If such a review has been carried out, the agency shall briefly describe the individuals involved, the timing of the review process, the procedural actions taken by those involved, and the nature of any issues raised in the course of such review.
If any such official found the issuance of the rule to be consistent with the regulatory principles set forth in such Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking, the agency shall identify the official, and describe the nature of the communication involved.
Additional Information To Be Included in Interim Final and Final Rules.-- (1) In general.--Each agency shall, in accordance with a uniform format to be established (after public notice and opportunity for public comment) by the Office of the Federal Register, include in the preamble (the ``Supplementary Information'') to each such significant rule, as a final or interim final rule, the information specified in this subsection.
Significant issues.-- (A) Each agency shall provide a brief description of the significant issues raised-- (i) by the public in a statement placed in the rulemaking file; (ii) in consultations described in subsection (b)(3) by formal advisory bodies; and (iii) by any official in the Executive Office of the President carrying out a review under any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking.
If, under subparagraph (A)(iii), an official did not raise any significant issue, the agency shall provide a description to that effect.
The agency shall identify and describe any important gap in analytical information relied upon in any cost-benefit analysis, risk assessment, or other evaluation of the rule prepared by the agency, and any assumptions and justification for such assumptions that were used to fill those gaps.
Conflict resolution.--The agency shall describe in reasonable detail, both concerning the specific review procedures used and also the substantive concerns raised-- (A) whether the rule was returned to the agency for reconsideration by any official in the Executive Office of the President, the nature of any reasons for such return, and the nature of the response of the agency to such return; (B) the nature of any involvement by the President or Vice President or their respective staff in reviewing the rule, or any earlier version of the rule, submitted for review by any official in the Executive Office of the President under any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking; and (C) the nature of the resolution of any disagreement involved in such review or return.
Significant substantive changes.-- (A) The agency shall provide a brief description of any substantive changes to the rule made-- (i) following the end of the period for public comment and the submission of the draft final or interim final rule for review by any official in the Executive Office of the President under any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking; and (ii) during any review of the draft final or interim final rule by any official in the Executive Office of the President under any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking.
The agency shall identify the individual primarily responsible for suggesting any such substantive change, if such individual is not within the program office directly responsible for drafting the rule.
Cost-benefit determination.--To the extent permitted by law and as applicable, the agency shall provide a reasoned statement explaining the way in which the estimated benefits of the rule justify its estimated costs, as described under subsections (b)(8) and (b)(10), and any other impacts, as described under subsection (b)(9).
To the extent that the agency relies upon qualitative benefits to justify the action of the agency, the agency shall also describe the subjective nature and uncertainties inherent in such a statement of qualitative benefits.
Good Cause Exception.--When the agency for good cause finds, and incorporates the finding and a brief statement of reasons therefor in the rule, that providing any portion of the information required by subsections (b) and (c) is impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest, the agency may issue the rule without providing such portion of the information required.
The agency shall identify in the preamble to the rule the portion of the information that is not being provided and shall state the reasons for not providing the preamble and when the preamble will be provided.
The agency shall make every reasonable effort to provide such information before the effective date of the rule.
Each agency shall, on an annual basis and in accordance with a schedule and uniform format to be established (after public notice and opportunity for public comment) by the Office of the Federal Register, publish a notice in the Federal Register that contains the following specified statistics: (1) The number of rules published as proposed, interim final, and final rules.
The number of rules under paragraph (1) that are discretionary, in contrast to rules the contents of which were specifically mandated by law as described under section 3(b)(5).
The number of pages in the Federal Register for each category of rule under paragraphs (1) and (2).
The number of those rules that are-- (A) significant rules; and (B) major rules under section 804(2) of title 5, United States Code.
The number of those rules reviewed under any relevant Executive order or related policy directive related to rulemaking, the number of rules substantively changed during such reviews, and the number of pertinent actions taken during such reviews.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code.
The term ``rule'' has the meaning given that term in section 551(4) of title 5, United States Code.
The term ``significant rule'' means any agency rulemaking action that is likely to result in a rule that may-- (A) have an annual effect on the economy of $1,000,000 or more or adversely affect in a material way the economy, a sector of the economy, productivity, competition, jobs, the environment, public health or safety, or State, local, or tribal governments or communities; (B) create a serious inconsistency or otherwise interfere with an action taken or planned by another agency; (C) materially alter the budgetary impact of entitlements, grants, user fees, or loan programs or the rights and obligations of recipients thereof; or (D) raise novel legal or policy issues arising out of legal mandates, the priorities of the President, or the regulatory principles set forth in any relevant Executive order or related policy directive.
This Act shall take effect 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.