This Act may be cited as the ``Fort Peck Tribes- Montana Compact Act of 1994''.
The Fort Peck Indian Tribes-Montana Compact is approved, ratified and confirmed.
AGREEMENTS RELATED TO USE OF WATER RIGHTS.
Tribal Authority To Enter Into Agreements.--Subject to the approval of the Secretary and to all terms of the Fort Peck Indian Tribes-Montana Compact, the Tribes may enter into a joint venture, service contract, lease, exchange or other agreement (hereafter referred to in this Act as a ``Water Agreement''), or a modification of such agreement, that authorizes-- (1) the delivery, use or transfer of any part of the water rights confirmed in the Tribes by the Fort Peck Indian Tribes- Montana Compact, for a specified term, not to exceed 50 years, inclusive of all renewal periods; or (2) the diversion or use of any portion of a tribal water right within or outside the Reservation.
Approval by Secretary.--The Secretary shall approve or disapprove a Water Agreement, or a modification of such agreement, within-- (1) 180 days after submission of the agreement or modification to the Secretary; or (2) 60 days after compliance, if required, with section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332(2)(C)) and with any other applicable provision of Federal law; whichever is later.
Enforcement.--A party to a Water Agreement or modification may enforce the provisions of subsection (b) in accordance with the provisions of section 1361 of title 28, United States Code.
Confidentiality.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Department of the Interior shall treat-- (1) any projection, study, data or other information under the control of the Department of the Interior relating to the terms and conditions of a Water Agreement or modification of such an agreement; or (2) any information relating to a financial benefit accruing to the Tribes as a result of a Water Agreement or modification of such an agreement; as the privileged, proprietary information of the Tribes.
Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act or the Fort Peck Indian Tribes-Montana Compact, the Tribes may not enter into any Water Agreement which authorizes the use of the tribal water right outside the Basin.
Economic Development.--(1) There is established in the Treasury of the United States the ``Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes Economic Recovery Fund''.
Commencing with fiscal year 1996, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit in the fund an amount equal to 10 percent of the receipts from deposits to the United States Treasury for the preceding fiscal year from the integrated programs of the Eastern Division of the Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin Project administered by the Western Area Power Administration, but in no event shall the aggregate of the amounts deposited to the fund established by this subsection exceed $50,000,000.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit the interest which accrues on deposits to the fund in a separate account in the Treasury of the United States.
Such interest shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, for use by the Secretary of the Interior, commencing with fiscal year 1999, and each fiscal year thereafter, in making payments to the Tribes for use for (A) tribal economic development, including development of long-term profitmaking opportunities for the Tribes and employment opportunities for tribal members, and (B) for acquisition of lands including trust lands within the Reservation from willing sellers and the improvement of such acquired lands, subject to the approval of the Secretary.
No part of the principal of the fund shall be available for making such payments.
Amounts deposited in the fund shall be nonreimbursable and nonreturnable.
No payments pursuant to this Act shall result in the reduction, or the denial, of any Federal services or programs that the Tribes or any of their members, are otherwise entitled to, or eligible for, because of their status as a federally recognized Indian tribe or member pursuant to Federal law.
No payments pursuant to this Act shall be subject to Federal or State income tax, or affect Pick-Sloan Missouri River Basin power rates in any way.
No part of any moneys in any fund under this Act shall be distributed to any member of the Tribes on a per capita basis.
Waiver of Claims Against the United States.--In consideration of performance by the United States of all actions required by this Act, including the congressional authorization, appropriation, and payment of all funds for the Fund, the Tribes shall be deemed to have executed in return a waiver and release of any and all existing claims against the United States arising in whole or in part from or concerning water rights finally settled by the Fort Peck Indian Tribes- Montana Compact.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``Fort Peck Indian Tribes-Montana Compact'' means the compact relating to the reserved water rights of the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Reservation that was ratified by the Tribes on April 29, 1985, and by the legislature of the State of Montana on May 15, 1985.
The term ``Reservation'' means the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, as defined in the agreement of December 28, 1886, and December 31, 1886, and as confirmed by the Act approved May 1, 1888 (25 United States Statutes at Large 113).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Tribes'' means the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation.
The term ``tribal water right'' means the tribal water right defined in, and subject to, the Fort Peck-Montana Compact.
The term ``Fund'' means the Assiniboine and Sioux Tribes Economic Recovery Fund established by section 3(f)(1).