This Act may be cited as the ``Alternative Water Sources Act of 2000''.
GRANTS FOR ALTERNATIVE WATER SOURCE PROJECTS.
Title II of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1281 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
GRANTS FOR ALTERNATIVE WATER SOURCE PROJECTS.
In General.--The Administrator may make grants to State, interstate, and intrastate water resource development agencies (including water management districts and water supply authorities), local government agencies, private utilities, and nonprofit entities for alternative water source projects to meet critical water supply needs.
Eligible Entity.--The Administrator may make grants under this section to an entity only if the entity has authority under State law to develop or provide water for municipal, industrial, and agricultural uses in an area of the State that is experiencing critical water supply needs.
Selection of Projects.-- ``(1) Limitation.--A project that has received funds under the reclamation and reuse program conducted under the Reclamation Projects Authorization and Adjustment Act of 1992 (43 United States Code 390h et sequentes) shall not be eligible for grant assistance under this section.
Additional consideration.--In making grants under this section, the Administrator shall consider whether the project is located within the boundaries of a State or area referred to in section 1 of the Reclamation Act of June 17, 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 385), and within the geographic scope of the reclamation and reuse program conducted under the Reclamation Projects Authorization and Adjustment Act of 1992 (43 United States Code 390h et sequentes).
Committee Resolution Procedure.-- ``(1) In general.--No appropriation shall be made for any alternative water source project under this section, the total Federal cost of which exceeds $3,000,000, if such project has not been approved by a resolution adopted by the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives or the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate.
Requirements for securing consideration.--For purposes of securing consideration of approval under paragraph (1), the Administrator shall provide to a committee referred to in paragraph (1) such information as the committee requests and the non-Federal sponsor shall provide to the committee information on the costs and relative needs for the alternative water source project.
Uses of Grants.--Amounts from grants received under this section may be used for engineering, design, construction, and final testing of alternative water source projects designed to meet critical water supply needs.
Such amounts may not be used for planning, feasibility studies or for operation, maintenance, replacement, repair, or rehabilitation.
Cost Sharing.--The Federal share of the eligible costs of an alternative water source project carried out using assistance made available under this section shall not exceed 50 percent.
Reports.-- ``(1) Reports to administrator.--Each recipient of a grant under this section shall submit to the Administrator, not later than 18 months after the date of receipt of the grant and biennially thereafter until completion of the alternative water source project funded by the grant, a report on eligible activities carried out by the grant recipient using amounts from the grant.
Report to congress.--On or before September 30, 2005, the Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report on the progress made toward meeting the critical water supply needs of the grant recipients under this section.
Definitions.--In this section, the following definitions apply: ``(1) Alternative water source project.--The term `alternative water source project' means a project designed to provide municipal, industrial, and agricultural water supplies in an environmentally sustainable manner by conserving, managing, reclaiming, or reusing water or wastewater or by treating wastewater.
Critical water supply needs.--The term `critical water supply needs' means existing or reasonably anticipated future water supply needs that cannot be met by existing water supplies, as identified in a comprehensive statewide or regional water supply plan or assessment projected over a planning period of at least 20 years.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $75,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.''.
SENSE OF THE CONGRESS; REQUIREMENT REGARDING NOTICE.
Purchase of American-Made Equipment and Products.--In the case of any equipment or products that may be authorized to be purchased with financial assistance provided under this Act (including any amendment made by this Act), it is the sense of the Congress that entities receiving such assistance should, in expending the assistance, purchase only American-made equipment and products.
Notice to Recipients of Assistance.--In providing financial assistance under this Act (including any amendment made by this Act), the head of each Federal agency shall provide to each recipient of the assistance a notice describing the statement made in subsection (a) by the Congress.
Notice of Report.--Any entity which receives funds under this Act shall report any expenditures on foreign-made items to the Congress within 180 days of the expenditure.
Passed the House of Representatives May 4, 2000.