This Act may be cited as the ``Native American Trust Fund Accounting and Management Reform Act of 1993''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; and (2) the term ``Bureau'' means the Bureau of Indian Affairs of the Department of the Interior.
TITLE I--TRUST FUND INTEREST PAYMENTS SEC.
PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON FUNDS INVESTED.
Payment of Interest.--(1) The fourth proviso of subsection (a) of the first section of the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), is amended by striking ``may invest'' and inserting ``shall invest''.
The first section of the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Amounts deposited or invested under subsection (a) shall earn interest at the appropriate rates, taking into consideration the type of deposit or investment.
The Secretary shall periodically pay such interest to the appropriate Indian tribe or individual Indian or, at the election of the Indian tribe or individual Indian, add such interest to the principal so deposited or invested.''.
Technical Correction.--The second subsection (b) of the first section of the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), as added by section 302 of Public Law 101-644 (104 United States Statutes at Large 4667), is hereby redesignated as subsection (c).
Repeal of Limitation on United States Liability.--Paragraph (2) of subsection (c) of the first section of the Act of June 24, 1938, as amended by subsection (b), is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Amounts deposited or invested under this subsection shall generate earnings at the appropriate rates, taking into consideration the type of investment concerned.
The Secretary shall periodically pay such earnings to the appropriate Indian tribe or individual Indian or, at the election of the Indian tribe or individual Indian, add such earnings to the principal of such funds so invested.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to interest earned on amounts deposited or invested on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
AUTHORITY FOR PAYMENT OF CLAIMS FOR INTEREST OWED.
The Secretary is authorized to make payments to an Indian tribe or an individual Indian-- (1) in full satisfaction of any claim of such Indian tribe or individual Indian for interest on amounts deposited or invested on behalf of such Indian tribe or individual Indian before the date of enactment of this Act under the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), and who was not paid the appropriate amount of interest on such funds; and (2) in an amount equal to the interest which would have been earned if funds of such Indian tribe or individual Indians which were subject to the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), had been deposited or invested in accordance with such Act.
TITLE II--INDIAN TRUST FUND MANAGEMENT DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM SEC.
The purpose of this title is to demonstrate new approaches for the management of tribal and individual Indian funds held in trust by the United States and managed by the Secretary through the Bureau, that, consistent with the trust responsibility of the United States and the principles of self-determination, will-- (1) give Indian tribal governments and individual Indian account holders greater control over the management of such trust funds; (2) pursuant to tribal instructions, involve investment of such trust funds by the Secretary in a manner that will also help to promote economic development in Indian communities; or (3) otherwise demonstrate how the principles of self- determination can work with respect to the management of such trust funds, in a manner consistent with the trust responsibility of the United States.
For the purposes of this title, except for the purposes of section 208, the terms ``Indian tribe'' and ``tribe'' mean-- (1) an Indian tribe; (2) a consortia of Indian tribes; or (3) an association of Indians holding individual Indian trust fund accounts managed by the Secretary through the Bureau.
An Indian tribe may submit to the Secretary a plan to demonstrate a new approach for the management of tribal or individual Indian funds held in trust by the United States for such tribe or the members of such tribe, and as of the date of the enactment of this Act, managed by the Secretary through the Bureau.
Such plan may provide for the following: (1) Management of such funds directly by the Indian tribe in financial institutions selected by the tribe, subject to supervision and oversight by the Secretary.
For the purposes of this section, the term ``management'' may include one or more of the functions carried out, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, by the Secretary through the Bureau in managing such funds, such as collection, disbursement, and investment functions.
Management of such funds by the Secretary in a manner that-- (A) involves investment of such funds in financial institutions on or near the reservation; (B) increases tribal access to such institutions; (C) promotes economic development activities on the reservation; or (D) otherwise promotes tribal priorities.
Management of such funds at the local level through contracts with local financial institutions that meet the purposes of this title.
Such other approaches, as determined by the Secretary, that meet the purpose of this title.
APPROVAL OF PLANS BY THE SECRETARY.
In General.--The Secretary shall approve and implement, or provide for the implementation by an Indian tribe of, a plan that meets the following conditions: (1) Such plan has been approved by the appropriate Indian tribe, as follows: (A) For a plan involving tribal trust funds, such plan is accompanied by a resolution from the tribal governing body approving the plan.
For a plan submitted by an Indian tribe (as defined in paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 202) involving individual Indian money accounts, where most or all of the account holders are members of the submitting tribe, it is accompanied by a resolution from the tribal governing body approving the plan, along with a certification that the tribe held no fewer than 2 public meetings to provide an opportunity for account holders to comment on the plan.
For a plan submitted by an Indian tribe (as defined in paragraph (3) of section 202), it is accompanied by a written approval signed by each participating account holder, along with a certification that the tribe on whose reservation the trust asset that is the source of the funds is located, has been consulted regarding the plan.
The Secretary determines such plan to be consistent with standards of reasonable prudence, after considering all appropriate factors, including but not limited to the following: (A) The capability and experience of the individuals or institutions that will be managing the trust funds.
The protection against substantial loss of principal.
The rate of return, provided that the plan need not produce the highest rate of return possible if the Indian tribe chooses to accept a lower rate in return for other benefits such as the benefits from investing in local financial institutions.
The ability of the Secretary to effectively monitor the demonstration, pursuant to the trust responsibility of the United States as specified in section 205.
The duration of the plan does not exceed 5 years.
Investment in Equities.--Nothing in this section shall prohibit an Indian tribe submitting a plan for a demonstration under this section from providing in such plan for the investment of its trust funds in equities, if the Secretary determines that such plan meets the standard of reasonable prudence under subsection (a)(2).
In General.--If an Indian tribe assumes management of trust funds pursuant to a demonstration under this title, the trust responsibility of the United States with respect to such funds shall, for the duration of the demonstration, be limited to the following: (1) The exercise of reasonable prudence by the Secretary in approving the plan for the demonstration.
An annual audit provided by the Secretary, directly or by contract, to determine that the tribe is performing in conformance with the plan for the demonstration.
If the Secretary finds, through such audits, that the tribe is not in compliance with the terms of the plan, the Secretary shall-- (A) terminate the demonstration; or (B) prescribe remedial action to be taken by the tribe to achieve compliance with the plan.
Decrease in Interest and Loss of Principal.--If a plan for a demonstration submitted under this title and approved by the Secretary provides for the implementation of such demonstration by the Secretary, the United States shall not be liable, during the period of such demonstration, for any decrease in interest rate or any loss of principal that is proximately caused by the Secretary's prudent implementation of such demonstration.
Agreement.--Prior to the implementation of any demonstration under this title, the Indian tribe involved shall sign a written statement indicating that it understands and accepts the limitations on the trust responsibility of the United States as provided in this section.
TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary shall, directly or by contract, provide Indian tribes with technical and financial assistance in developing, implementing, and managing plans for demonstrations under this title.
NO INCOME TAX CONSEQUENCES.
Funds managed pursuant to a demonstration program under this title, and distributions made from such funds, shall, for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, be treated in the same manner as such funds would be treated if such funds were managed directly by the Secretary, through the Bureau.
VOLUNTARY WITHDRAWAL FROM TRUST FUND PROGRAM.
In General.--An Indian tribe may, in accordance with this section, submit a plan to withdraw some or all funds held in trust for such tribe by the United States and managed by the Secretary through the Bureau.
Approval of Plan.--The Secretary shall approve a plan under this section that meets the requirements specified in section 204(a)(1) and subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 204(a)(2).
Termination of Trust Responsibility.--Beginning on the date funds are withdrawn pursuant to this section, any trust responsibility of the United States with respect to such funds shall terminate.
The Secretary shall, beginning one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, submit an annual report to the Congress on the implementation of demonstration programs under this title.
Such report shall include recommendations for changes necessary to effectively implement the purpose of this title.
TITLE III--RECOGNITION OF TRUST RESPONSIBILITY SEC.
The first section of the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), as amended by section 101(a)(2), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) The Secretary shall properly discharge the trust responsibilities of the United States under this section by-- ``(1) providing adequate systems for accounting for and reporting trust fund balances; ``(2) providing adequate controls over receipts and disbursements; ``(3) providing periodic, timely reconciliations to assure the accuracy of accounts; ``(4) determining accurate cash balances; ``(5) preparing and supplying account holders with meaningful periodic statements of their account balances; ``(6) establishing consistent, written policies and procedures for trust fund management and accounting; and ``(7) providing adequate staffing, supervision, and training for trust fund management and accounting.''.
TRUST RESPONSIBILITY WITH RESPECT TO NATURAL RESOURCES.
The Congress recognizes that the trust responsibility of the United States extends to tribal and individual Indian owners of natural resources located within the boundaries of Indian reservations and trust lands.
This includes the fiduciary responsibility to manage funds held in trust by the United States for Indian tribes and individual Indians derived from actions including, but not limited to, the use and sale of leased lands, judgments, mineral leases, oil and gas leases, timber permits and sales, and water resources.
TITLE IV--TRAINING AND PERSONNEL SEC.
Training Program.--The Secretary shall establish a program to assist Indians, including, but not limited to, employees of the Bureau and members and employees of Indian tribes, to obtain expertise in the management of trust funds.
Components of such program may include the following: (1) An outreach program to encourage and assist Indians to obtain employment with private financial institutions.
Agreements with financial institutions and other entities under which such entities would provide classroom training, on-the-job training, internships, and employment opportunities not to exceed 2 years, for employees and prospective employees of the Bureau.
Recruitment.-- (1) Employment descriptions.--The Secretary shall ensure that the employment description for any Federal position related to the management of Indian trust funds contains requirements necessary to ensure that a person filling such position would have the necessary skills, based on industry standards, to fully perform the position's responsibilities in a manner consistent with the responsibility of the United States to properly manage Indian trust funds.
Pay.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Office of Personnel Management, shall establish the rate of pay payable for a position related to the management of Indian trust funds at a level of the General Schedule appropriate for such position.
Indian Preference.--Nothing in this title shall authorize or permit any waiver of Indian preference laws as such term is defined in section 2(f)(2) of Public Law 96-135 (25 United States Code 472 et sequentes).
TITLE V--RESPONSIBILITY TO ACCOUNT FOR INDIAN TRUST FUNDS SEC.
RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY TO ACCOUNT FOR THE DAILY AND ANNUAL BALANCES OF INDIAN TRUST FUNDS.
Requirement to Account.--The Secretary shall account for the daily and annual balance of all funds held in trust by the United States for the benefit of an Indian tribe or an individual Indian which are deposited or invested pursuant to the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a).
Periodic Statement of Performance.--Not later than 10 business days after the close of a calendar month, the Secretary shall provide a statement of performance to each Indian tribe and individual with respect to whom funds are deposited or invested pursuant to the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a).
The statement, for the period concerned, shall-- (1) identify the source, type, and status of the funds; (2) the beginning balance; (3) the earnings and losses; and (4) the ending balance.
Annual Audit.--The Secretary shall cause to be conducted an annual audit on a fiscal year basis of all funds held in trust by the United States for the benefit of an Indian tribe or an individual Indian which are deposited or invested pursuant to the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a), and shall include a letter relating to the audit in the first statement of performance provided under subsection (b) after the completion of the audit.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect October 1, 1993, but shall only apply with respect to earnings and losses occurring on or after October 1, 1993, on funds held in trust by the United States for the benefit of an Indian tribe or an individual Indian.