This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Physician Payment Reform Act of 2005''.
MINIMUM UPDATE FOR PHYSICIANS' SERVICES FOR 2006 AND 2007.
In General.--Section 1848(d) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-4(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Update for 2006 and 2007.--The update to the single conversion factor established in paragraph (1)(C) for 2006 shall not be less than 1.5 percent and for 2007 shall not be less than 1.5 percent.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1848(d)(4)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-4(d)(4)(B)) is amended, in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ``and paragraph (5)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (5) and (6)''.
Not Treated as Change in Law and Regulation in Sustainable Growth Rate Determination.--The amendments made by this section shall not be treated as a change in law for purposes of applying section 1848(f)(2)(D) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-4(f)(2)(D)).
Premium Transition Rule.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) 2006.-- (A) Premium.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as modifying the premium previously computed under section 1839 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395r) for months in 2006.
Government contribution.--In computing the amount of the Government contribution under section 1844(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w(a)) for months in 2006, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall compute and apply a new actuarially adequate rate per enrollee age 65 and over under section 1839(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395r(a)(1)) taking into account the provisions of this section.
2007.-- (A) Premium.--The monthly premium under section 1839 of the Social Security Act for months in 2007 shall be computed as if this section had not been enacted.
Government contribution.--The Government contribution under section 1844(a) of the Social Security Act for months in 2007 shall be computed taking into account the provisions of this section, including subparagraph (A).
MEDPAC REPORT ON MEDICARE SPENDING ON PHYSICIAN SERVICES.
In General.--Not later than March 15, 2007, the Medicare Payment Assessment Commission shall submit to Congress a report (in this section referred to as the ``report'') on approaches to controlling aggregate spending for physician services in order to maximize efficiency and maintain beneficiary access to high-quality care under part B of the Medicare program.
Report Details.-- (1) The report shall include recommendations on-- (A) the appropriate categorization or level of analysis (such as group practice, hospital medical staff, type of service or specialty, geographic area, outliers, or any other approach or combination of approaches); (B) standards to assess volume growth; and (C) how volume control policies should be implemented, including the extent to which the policies should be codified in law.
The report shall address the appropriate level of discretion for the Secretary of Health and Human Services to make necessary adjustments to alter physician payments or otherwise intervene to affect provider behavior.
The report shall also include findings and recommendations on the work of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services and the Relative Value Update Committee (RUC), including-- (A) whether the current pricing system accurately reflects resource costs; (B) whether adjustments should be made to practice expense to better estimate marginal cost; (C) identification and review of overvalued services; (D) the effectiveness of the five-year review process; (E) comparison of relative values among categories of services; (F) the ability for such Centers to develop and utilize external resources (including as medical directors from carriers or health plans) to determine appropriate pricing; (G) strategies that should be available to such Centers to make adjustments to payments when necessary; (H) any additional recommendations for reforming the current pricing system, such as whether bases other than resource costs should be considered in determining the relative value of services in the physician fee schedule; and (I) the extent to which alternative payment methods should be used for certain types of providers or patients (such as payment by episode and payment by capitation or partial capitation).
The report shall evaluate the effect that Medicare and private plan payment policies have on the development and maintenance of the physician workforce.
REPEAL OF MEDICARE COST CONTAINMENT PROVISIONS.
Subtitle A of title X of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 is repealed and the provisions of law amended by such subtitle are restored as if such subtitle had not been enacted.