This Act may be cited as the ``Hydrogen Future Act of 1995''.
Congress finds that-- (1) fossil fuels, the main energy source of the present, have provided this country with tremendous supply but are limited; (2) additional research, development, and demonstration are needed to encourage private sector investment in development of new and better energy sources and enabling technologies; (3) hydrogen holds tremendous promise as a fuel because it can be extracted from water and can be burned much more cleanly than conventional fuels; (4) hydrogen production efficiency is a major technical barrier to society's collectively benefiting from one of the great energy carriers of the future; (5) an aggressive, results-oriented, multiyear research initiative on efficient hydrogen fuel production and use should be maintained; and (6) the current Federal effort to develop hydrogen as a fuel is inadequate.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to direct the Secretary of Energy to conduct a research, development, and demonstration program leading to the production, storage, transport, and use of hydrogen for industrial, residential, transportation, and utility applications; and (2) to provide advice from academia and the private sector in the implementation of the Department of Energy's hydrogen research, development, and demonstration program to ensure that economic benefits of the program accrue to the United States.
In this Act: (1) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of Energy.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
Authorized Activities.-- (1) In general.--Pursuant to this section, the Spark M. Matsunaga Hydrogen Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12401 et sequentes), and section 2026 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (42 United States Code 13436), and in accordance with the purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall conduct a hydrogen energy research, development, and demonstration program relating to production, storage, transportation, and use of hydrogen, with the goal of enabling the private sector to demonstrate the feasibility of using hydrogen for industrial, residential, transportation, and utility applications.
Priorities.--In establishing priorities for Federal funding under this section, the Secretary shall survey private sector hydrogen activities and take steps to ensure that activities under this section do not displace or compete with the privately funded hydrogen activities of the United States industry.
Schedule.-- (1) Solicitation.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of an Act providing appropriations for programs authorized by this Act, the Secretary shall solicit proposals from all interested parties for research and development activities authorized under this section.
Department facility.--The Secretary may consider, on a competitive basis, a proposal from a contractor that manages and operates a department facility under contract with the Department, and the contractor may perform the work at that facility or any other facility.
Award.--Not later than 180 days after proposals are submitted, if the Secretary identifies one or more proposals that are worthy of Federal assistance, the Secretary shall award financial assistance under this section competitively, using peer review of proposals with appropriate protection of proprietary information.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Research.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), in the case of a research proposal, the Secretary shall require a commitment from non-Federal sources of at least 25 percent of the cost of the research.
Basic or fundamental nature.--The Secretary may reduce or eliminate the non-Federal requirement under subparagraph (A) if the Secretary determines that the research is purely basic or fundamental.
Development and demonstration.--In the case of a development or demonstration proposal, the Secretary shall require a commitment from non-Federal sources of at least 50 percent of the cost of development or demonstration.
Consultation.--Before financial assistance is provided under this section or the Spark M. Matsunaga Hydrogen Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12401 et sequentes)-- (1) the Secretary shall determine, in consultation with the United States Trade Representative and the Secretary of Commerce, that the terms and conditions under which financial assistance is provided are consistent with the Agreement on Subsidies and Countervailing Measures referred to in section 101(d)(12) of the Uruguay Round Agreement Act (19 United States Code 3511(d)(12)); and (2) an industry participant shall be required to certify that-- (A) the participant has made reasonable efforts to obtain non-Federal funding for the entire cost of the project; and (B) full non-Federal funding could not be reasonably obtained.
Duplication of Programs.--The Secretary shall not carry out any activity under this section that unnecessarily duplicates an activity carried out by another government agency or the private sector.
Exchange.--The Secretary shall foster the exchange of generic, nonproprietary information and technology developed pursuant to section 5 among industry, academia, and government agencies.
Economic Benefits.--The Secretary shall ensure that economic benefits of the exchange of information and technology will accrue to the United States economy.
In General.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a detailed report on the status and progress of the Department's hydrogen research and development program.
Contents.--A report under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) an analysis of the effectiveness of the program, to be prepared and submitted by the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel established under section 108 of the Spark M. Matsunaga Hydrogen Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12407); and (2) recommendations of the Panel for any improvements in the program that are if needed, including recommendations for additional legislation.
Repeal of unnecessary provision.--The Spark M. Matsunaga Hydrogen Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 1401 et sequentes) is amended-- (A) by striking section 103; (B) by redesignating sections 104, 105, 106, 107, 108, and 109 as sections 103, 104, 105, 106, 107, and 108, respectively; (C) in section 103 (as redesignated)-- (i) in subsection (a) by striking ``, consistent with the 5-year comprehensive program management plan under section 103,''; and (ii) in subsection (e) by striking ``106'' and inserting ``105''; (D) in section 104(b) (as redesignated) by striking ``104'' and inserting ``103''; (E) in section 105(a) (as redesignated) by striking ``108'' and inserting ``107''; (F) in section 106(c) (as redesignated) by striking ``108'' and inserting ``107''; and (G) in section 107(d) (as redesignated)-- (i) by adding ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1); (ii) by striking ``; and'' at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting a period; and (iii) by striking paragraph (3).
Coordination With Other Federal Agencies.--The Secretary shall-- (1) coordinate all hydrogen research and development activities in the Department with the activities of other Federal agencies, including the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, and the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, that are engaged in similar research and development; and (2) pursue opportunities for cooperation with those Federal entities.
Consultation.--The Secretary shall consult with the Hydrogen Technical Advisory Panel established under section 108 of the Spark M. Matsunaga Hydrogen Research, development, and Demonstration Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12407) as necessary in carrying out this Act.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act-- (1) $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; (2) $35,000,000 for fiscal year 1997; and (3) $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
Limitation on Authority to Obligate Funds.-- (1) Limitation.--In each of fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998, the total amount that may be obligated for energy supply research and development activities shall not exceed the total amount obligated for such activities in fiscal year 1995.
Rule of construction.--Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as authorizing the appropriation of any Federal funds.