This Act may be cited as the ``Migratory Bird Treaty Reform Act of 1996''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Migratory Bird Treaty Act was enacted in 1918 to implement the 1916 Convention for the Protection of Migratory Birds between the United States and Great Britain (for Canada).
The Act was later amended to reflect similar agreements with Mexico, Japan, and the former Soviet Union.
Pursuant to the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, as amended, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to promulgate regulations specifying when, how, and whether migratory birds may be hunted.
Contained within these regulations are prohibitions on certain methods of hunting migratory birds to prevent an excessive harvest of the resource.
These prohibitions, many of which were recommended by sportsmen, have been in place for over 60 years and have received broad acceptance among the hunting community with one principal exception relating to the application and interpretation of the prohibitions on the hunting of migratory birds by the aid of baiting, or on or over any baited area.
The prohibitions regarding the hunting of migratory birds by the aid of bait, or on or over bait, have been fraught with interpretive difficulties on the part of law enforcement, the hunting community, and courts of law.
Hunters who desire to comply with applicable regulations have been subject to citation for violations of the regulations due to the lack of clarity, inconsistent interpretations, and enforcement.
The baiting regulations have been the subject of multiple congressional hearings and a law enforcement advisory commission.
Restrictions on the hunting of migratory birds by the aid of baiting, or on or over any baited area, must be clarified in a manner that recognizes the national and international importance of protecting the migratory bird resource while ensuring consistency and appropriate enforcement including the principles of ``fair chase''.
No baiting restrictions should act as a detriment to the benefits of habitat management including wildlife food crops.
Section 3 of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (16 United States Code 704) is amended as follows: (1) By inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
By adding at the end the following: ``(b) No person shall take migratory game birds-- ``(1) with a trap, snare, net, rifle, pistol, swivel gun, shotgun larger than 10 gauge, punt gun, battery gun, machine gun, fish hook, poison, drug, explosive, or stupefying substance; ``(2) with a shotgun of any description capable of holding more than 3 shells, unless it is plugged with a one-piece filler, incapable of removal without disassembling the gun, so that its total capacity does not exceed 3 shells; ``(3) from or by means, aid, or use of a sinkbox or any other type of low floating device, having a depression affording a hunter a means of concealment beneath the surface of the water; ``(4) from or by means, aid or use of any motor vehicle, motor-driven land conveyance, or aircraft of any kind, except that paraplegics and persons missing 1 or both legs may take from any stationary motor vehicle or stationary motor-driven land conveyance; ``(5)(A) except as provided in subparagraph (B), from or by means of any motorboat or other craft having a motor attached, or any sailboat, unless the motor has been completely shut off and/or the sails furled, and its progress therefrom has ceased; ``(B) a craft under power may be used to retrieve dead or crippled birds (except that crippled birds may not be shot from such craft under power except in the seaduck area, as provided by regulations issued by the Secretary of the Interior); ``(6) by means or aid of any motor-driven land, water, or air conveyance, or any sailboat used for the purpose of or resulting in the concentrating, driving, rallying or stirring up of any migratory bird; ``(7) by the use or aid of live birds as decoys, including on any area where tame or captive live ducks or geese are present, unless such birds are and have been for a period of 10 consecutive days prior to such taking, confined within an enclosure which substantially reduces the audibility of their calls and totally conceals such birds from the sight of wild migratory waterfowl; ``(8) by the use or aid of recorded or electrically amplified bird calls or sounds, or recorded or electrically amplified imitations of bird calls or sounds; and ``(9) while possessing shot (either in shotshells or loose shot for muzzle-loading) other than steel shot, bismuth-tin shot, or such other shot as may be approved as nontoxic by the Secretary of the Interior; this paragraph applies only to the taking of Anatidae (ducks, geese, including brant, and swans), coots (Fulica americana) and any species that make up aggregate bag limits during concurrent seasons with the former in areas designated as nontoxic shot zones by the Secretary of the Interior.
(1) No person shall take any migratory bird by the aid of baiting, or on or over any baited area, where that person knows or should have known through the exercise of reasonable diligence that bait was present.
Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit-- ``(A) the taking of all migratory game birds, including waterfowl, on or over standing crops, flooded standing crops (including aquatics), flooded harvested croplands, grain crops properly shocked on the field where grown, or grains found scattered solely as the result of normal agricultural planting or harvesting; ``(B) the taking of all migratory game birds, except waterfowl, on or over any lands where shelled, shucked, or unshucked corn, wheat or other grain, salt, or other feed has been distributed or scattered as a result of normal agricultural operations or procedures or as a result of manipulation of a crop or other feed on the land where grown for wildlife management purposes; or ``(C) the taking of any migratory game birds, including waterfowl, on or over moist soil on emergent marsh plants-- ``(i) that are on the land where the plants were grown; ``(ii) that have been mowed, chopped, disced, or otherwise manipulated; and ``(iii) the presence of which is the result of normal wetland habitat practices performed by the owner of record or any agent of the owner.
For purposes of paragraph (2)(C), the term `moist soil on emergent marsh plants'-- ``(A) means those species of wetland plants which occur naturally in unmanaged wetlands; and ``(B) includes, but is not limited to, watergrass/wild millet (Eschinochloa spp.
), smartweed (Polygonum spp.
), bulrush (Scirpus spp.
), swamp timothy (Heleochloa schoenoides), spike rush (Eleocharis spp.
), wild rice (Zizania spp.
), sedge (Cyperus spp.
), cocklebur (Xanthum spp.
), sprangle top (Leptochloa spp.
), curly dock (Rumex spp.
), Pigweed (Amaranthus spp.
), cattail (Typha spp.
), beggarticks (Bidens spp.
), giant reed grass (Phragmites spp.
), joint grass (Paspalum spp.
), johnson grass (Sorghum spp.
), and goosefoot (Chenopodium spp.).
As used in this subsection: ``(A) The term `baiting' means the intentional placing, exposing, depositing, distributing, or scattering of shelled, shucked, or unshucked corn, wheat or other grain, salt, or other feed that constitutes for such birds an attraction, on or over any areas where hunters are attempting to take migratory game birds.
The term `baited area' means any area where shelled, shucked, or unshucked corn, wheat or other grain, salt, or other feed whatsoever capable of attracting migratory game birds is intentionally placed, exposed, deposited, distributed, or scattered; such an area shall remain a baited area for 10 days following complete removal of all such corn, wheat or other grain, salt, or other feed.
(i) The term `normal agricultural operations' includes the growing of crops where harvesting does not take place, planting for erosion control, top sowing of crops, and distribution or scattering of grains if such operations are normal in a region, except that the term shall not include the distributing or scattering of grain or other feed once it has been removed from or stored on a field where grown unless it is for a normal agricultural operation for feed for farm animals in the region.
Any other activity may be considered to be a normal agricultural operation only if the Secretary of the Interior, after meaningful consultation with the director of appropriate cooperative State research, education, and extension services, State fish and wildlife agencies, and State extension agricultural offices-- ``(I) determines that the activity is normal within the specific regional area in which it occurs; and ``(II) publishes the determination annually in the Federal Register in conjunction with other migratory bird hunting regulations, after public review and comment.
The terms `attraction' and `attracting' mean that the bait was a major contributing factor in luring the migratory birds to within a reasonable shotgun range given other such factors as the geographic location of the hunting venue, the physical characteristics of the hunting area, and the hunting methods used by the hunters.''.
ACQUISITION OF MIGRATORY BIRD REFUGES.
Section 6 of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (16 United States Code 707) is amended as follows: (1) By redesignating subsection ``(c)'' as subsection ``(d)''.
By inserting after subsection (b), the following: ``(c) All fines and penalties assessed and recovered under this provision shall be deposited into the migratory bird conservation fund established under section 4 of the Act of March 16, 1934 (16 United States Code 718d) to be used only for the location, ascertainment, and acquisition of suitable areas for migratory bird refuges under this Act.''.
Section 6(c) of the Migratory Bird Treaty Act (16 United States Code 707(c)) is amended as follows: (1) By striking ``All guns,'' and inserting ``(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), all guns''.
By adding the following at the end: ``(2) In lieu of seizing any personal property, the Secretary of the Interior shall permit the owner or operator of the personal property to post bond or other surety pending the disposition of any proceeding under this Act.