This Act may be cited as the ``Empowering Parents to Fight Drugs Act of 1998''.
State Grants.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to State educational agencies to enable each local educational agency in the State to develop and implement a random drug testing program for students in grades 7 through 12.
Local Subgrants.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant award under this Act shall award not less than 99.75 of such amount to provide subgrants to local educational agencies.
State Application.--Any State educational agency desiring to receive a grant under this part for any fiscal year shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may require.
In General.-- (1) State allocation.--Except as provided in subsection (b)(1), from the total amount appropriated pursuant to section 7 in any fiscal year, the Secretary shall allocate to each State educational agency an amount that bears the same ratio to such total amount as the number of students enrolled in grades 7 through 12 in such State in the preceding fiscal year bears to the total number of such students for all States for that fiscal year.
Local allocation.--Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), of the remaining amounts appropriated pursuant to section 7 in any fiscal year, the State shall allocate to each local educational agency an amount that bears the same ratio to such remaining amount as the number of students enrolled in grades 7 through 12 in such agency bears to the total number of such students for all local educational agencies in the State for that fiscal year.
Administrative Costs.-- (1) Secretary.--The Secretary may reserve the lesser of $200,000 or 0.10 percent of the total amount appropriated to carry out this Act in each fiscal year for the costs of administration.
State educational agencies.--Each State educational agency may reserve not more than 0.25 percent of any grant funds received under this Act in each fiscal year for the costs of administration.
Local educational agencies.--Each local educational agency may reserve not more than 5 percent of any grant funds received under this Act in each fiscal year for the costs of administration.
REQUIREMENTS AND OPTIONAL ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall certify to the State educational agency that-- (1) funds received under this Act shall be used in accordance with subsection (b); (2) the agency shall develop a plan to implement a drug testing program; and (3) before implementation, any drug testing plan or subsequent amendment to such plan shall be considered a public document and made available to the public for review, not later than 30 days after such plan or amendment is available.
Uses of Funds.-- (1) Required uses of funds.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall, either directly or through contract with outside sources, provide for a drug test of each student in grades 7 through 12 not less than once each year.
Such test shall, at a minimum, include a drug screening for marijuana, amphetamines, phencyclidine (PCP), opiates, and cocaine.
Optional uses of funds.--After a local educational agency has complied with the requirements of paragraph (1), the agency may use any remaining funds available for the following: (A) Law enforcement assistance.--To contract with local law enforcement agencies to assist in drug detection in schools, including the use of drug sniffing dogs.
Additional tests.--To test students more than once during a school year.
Reporting of Test Results.--Each local educational agency that receives funds under this Act shall inform parents in detail about the random testing program and ensure that-- (1) at the beginning of each school year, parents are notified of their right to withdraw their child from participation in the random drug testing program; and (2) parents receive, on a timely basis, the positive results of any drug test of a child who participates in the program.
Confidentiality.--The local educational agency shall develop and enforce standards designed to protect the confidentiality of all student test results.
Medical Review Officer.-- (1) In general.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall provide, either directly or through contract, for a medical review officer.
Duties.--Each medical review officer shall be designated to receive all test results.
First positive result.--In the case of the first positive test result of a student, the medical review officer shall be responsible to inform only parents by making every attempt feasible to meet with the parents of such student and inform the parents of the results and resources and services of rehabilitation and education available in the community.
Consecutive positive results.--In the case of a student who has 2 or more consecutive positive test results, the medical review officer shall be responsible to inform parents and school officials who shall determine the appropriate action for the student based on school policy.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``medical review officer'' means a licensed physician (medical doctor or doctor of osteopathy) responsible for receiving laboratory results generated by a local educational agency's drug testing program who has knowledge of substance abuse disorders and has appropriate medical training to interpret and evaluate a student's confirmed positive test result together with the student's medical history and any other relevant biomedical information; (2) the term ``parent'' includes a legal guardian or other person standing in loco parentis; (3) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education; and (4) the term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, American Samoa, and Guam.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 1999 through 2003.
Amendment.--Part E of title XIV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``Any local educational agency that receives funds under this Act shall implement a drug testing program that meets the requirements of the ``Empowering Parents to Fight Drugs Act of 1998.''.
Effective Date.--A local educational agency shall implement a drug testing program referred to in section 14515 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 not later than the school year beginning 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.