Subject to section 2 and in accordance with the provisions of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior is authorized and directed to execute and implement the ``Contract Among the United States Bureau of Reclamation, the California Department of Water Resources, and the South Delta Water Agency'' dated August 28, 1990 (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``contract'').
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE CONTRACT.
Conditions.--The Secretary of the Interior (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') may not implement the construction of permanent barriers pursuant to the contract until after the following: (1) Environmental studies.--A final environmental impact statement and environmental impact report is prepared pursuant to the provisions of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 and the California Environmental Quality Act and is certified by the appropriate lead agencies, and, if necessary, the permanent barriers are modified or the contract amended to address issues identified as part of the environmental review process.
Testing program.--Notwithstanding any other provision of the contract, the testing program called for in the contract is continued for a period determined by the Secretary to be sufficient to establish, from analysis of the testing data, that the South Delta barrier facilities are likely to have the desired water level, circulation, and quality results anticipated at the time the contract was negotiated.
Applicable Laws; Monitoring Program.--Construction, operation, and maintenance of the temporary South Delta barrier facilities associated with the testing program referred to in subsection (a)(2) shall be in accordance with all applicable laws and regulations.
The Secretary shall develop an environmental monitoring program with the assistance of and in coordination with the California Department of Fish and Game, the California Department of Water Resources, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, and the National Marine Fisheries Service, which shall be in place during construction, operation, and maintenance of the temporary barrier facilities.
Interim Flows.--The interim water flows provided for in the contract shall not limit any existing or future obligation of the Secretary to provide additional instream flow releases from New Melones Reservoir for fish and wildlife purposes or other environmental purposes.
This subsection does not create any new or additional authority that is or may otherwise be provided under applicable law.
To the extent possible, water flows provided under the contract and for fishery purposes shall be released on a schedule which maximizes the efficiency of use of water allocated for water quality and fishery benefits and shall be made in coordination with the California Department of Fish and Game.
Compatibility With Old River Barrier.--The Secretary shall determine whether the barrier at the head of the Old River in the Sacramento/San Joaquin Delta, authorized in section 3406(b)(15) of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (106 United States Statutes at Large 4719), can be constructed and operated in a manner compatible with the South Delta barriers called for in the contract and whether the barrier facilities in the contract are likely to have the desired water level, circulation, and quality results anticipated at the time the contract was negotiated.
Contract Amendments.-- (1) Required by environmental analysis.--If necessary, the contract shall be amended to incorporate the changes required by the results from the environmental and other studies and testing referred to in this section.
Any such amendment shall not increase the payment obligations of the South Delta Water Agency.
San joaquin river water quantity and quality.--In negotiating the contract amendment in accordance with Article 4.b.
of the contract, the Secretary shall consider-- (A) the activities and recommendations of other programs for the improvement of flows and reduction of salinity and toxic trace element discharges and concentrations in the San Joaquin River Basin for fish and wildlife and other purposes and for the attainment of all applicable water quality standards, including nondegradation requirements; and (B) recommendations contained in the final report of the San Joaquin Valley Drainage Program dated September 1990.
Minimized alteration of activities and recommendations.--The Secretary shall attempt to minimize any necessary alteration required by the contract amendment of the activities and recommendations referred to in paragraph (2).
Allocation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided by subsection (b), the costs of implementing the contract authorized by section 1 shall be allocated among the United States, the California Department of Water Resources, and the South Delta Water Agency in accordance with the provisions of Article 6 of the contract.
Limitation on expenditures by united states.--In no event shall expenditures made by the United States for construction exceed 50 percent of the actual construction costs incurred pursuant to Article 6 of the contract.
Effect of availability of certain funds.--In the event that funds become available from the California State General Fund, from related water development mitigation agreements, or as the result of legislation enacted providing for (A) reimbursement of the incremental costs of the facilities attributable to changes in design or construction for the benefit of fisheries or navigation, or (B) the mitigation of impacts caused by other upstream water users or waste dischargers, such funds shall be applied to the overall cost of implementing the contract, thereby evenly reducing the shares paid by the United States and the California Department of Water Resources.
Operation and monitoring costs.--The costs incurred by the United States for operation and maintenance, including monitoring, shall not exceed 50 percent of the actual operation and maintenance costs.
Allocation of united states costs.--The costs incurred by the United States for construction and for operation and maintenance shall be allocated by the Secretary among the reimbursable and nonreimbursable purposes of the Central Valley Project for purposes of repayment in accordance with the Federal reclamation laws (Act of June 17, 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 388), and Acts supplementary thereto and amendatory thereof).
Payments by south delta water agency.--Any payment to the United States made by the South Delta Water Agency pursuant to Article 6.f.
of the contract shall be used for the further implementation of the contract.
Costs Associated With Barrier at Head of Old River.-- Notwithstanding subsection (a), the costs associated with the barrier at the head of Old River shall be consistent with section 3406(b)(15) of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (106 United States Statutes at Large 4719).
Treatment of Costs Incurred.--The costs incurred with respect to items covered by the contract, both before and after the date of execution of the contract, including interest, shall be included in the total for the purposes of determining the share of the United States of construction, operation, and maintenance costs.
Environmental, Testing, and Construction.--There is authorized to be appropriated-- (1) $30,000,000 for the share of the costs of the United States pursuant to Article 6 of the contract, including environmental, testing, construction, and repayment of the share of the United States of past costs incurred by the State of California in developing the program set forth in the contract; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for operation and maintenance.
Contract Amendment.--There is authorized to be appropriated such funds as are necessary to negotiate an amendment to the contract in accordance with Article 4.b.
Nothing in this Act provides authorization for implementation of any amendment negotiated pursuant to Article 4.b.
of the contract that is not otherwise authorized.
Availability.--Appropriations pursuant to this Act are authorized to remain available until expended without any fiscal year limitation but appropriations for construction of permanent barriers may not be expended until the conditions set forth in section 2(a) are completed.