This Act may be cited as the ``Drug Abuse Treatment on Demand Assistance Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the Department of Health and Human Services, each year drug and alcohol related abuse kills more than 120,000 Americans.
In 1999, an estimated 14,800,000 Americans were current illicit drug users.
States across the country are faced with increasing demands for drug treatment programs.
In addition, methamphetamine abuse continues to be on the rise.
Methamphetamine abuse accounts for 5.1 percent of all treatment admissions, which was the fourth highest percentage after cocaine, heroin, and marijuana.
Current statistics show that methamphetamine use is increasing rapidly especially among the nation's youth.
There are 2,700,000 substance abusers in America in need of treatment.
This number exceeds the 2,137,100 persons receiving treatment.
Recent reports indicate that every additional dollar invested in substance abuse treatment saves taxpayers $7.46 in societal costs.
In California, the average cost to taxpayers per inmate, per year, is $23,406 versus $4,300 for a full treatment program.
Drugs and alcohol cost taxpayers nearly $276,000,000,000 annually in preventable health care costs, extra law enforcement, auto crashes, crime and lost productivity versus $3,100,000,000 appropriated for substance abuse-related activities in fiscal year 2000.
Nationwide, 59 percent of police chiefs believe that drug offenders should be treated rather than incarcerated.
Current treatment on demand programs such as those in San Francisco and Baltimore focus on the specific drug abuse needs of the local community and should be encouraged.
Many States have developed programs designed to treat non-violent drug offenders and this should be encouraged.
Drug treatment prevention programs must be increased in order to effectively address the needs of those actively seeking treatment before they commit a crime.
It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) assist individuals who voluntarily seek the services of drug abuse treatment programs by providing them with treatment on demand; (2) provide assistance to help eliminate the backlog of individuals on waiting lists to obtain drug treatment for their addictions; (3) enhance public safety by reducing drug-related crimes and preserving jails and prison cells for serious and violent criminal offenders; and (4) assist States in the implementation of alternative drug treatment programs that divert non-violent drug offenders to treatment programs that are more suited for the rehabilitation of drug offenders.
In this Act: (1) Drug treatment program.-- (A) In general.--The terms ``drug treatment program'' and ``alternative treatment program'' mean a licensed or certified community drug treatment program that may include-- (i) outpatient treatment; (ii) half-way house treatment; (iii) narcotic replacement therapy; or (iv) drug education or prevention courses or limited inpatient or residential drug treatment as needed to address special detoxification or relapse situation or severe dependence.
Limitation.--Such terms shall not include drug treatment programs offered in a prison or jail facility.
Non-violent.--The term ``non-violent'' with respect to a criminal offense means an offense that is not a crime of violence as defined under the applicable State law.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
GRANTS FOR THE EXPANSION OF CAPACITY FOR PROVIDING TREATMENT.
Section 501 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290aa), as amended by section 3102 of the Youth Drug and Mental Health Services Act (Public Law 106-310), is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)-- (A) in paragraph (17), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (18), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(19) make grants for the purpose of increasing the maximum number of individuals to whom public and nonprofit private entities are capable of providing effective treatment for substance abuse, with the goal of ensuring that substance abuse treatment is available for all substance abusers who seek it.
''; and (2) in subsection (o)-- (A) by striking ``For the'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--For the''; (B) by inserting ``except for grants under subsection (d)(19),''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Treatment Capacity.--For the purpose of making grants under subsection (d)(19), there are authorized to be appropriated-- ``(A) $600,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; ``(B) $1,200,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; ``(C) $1,800,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; ``(D) $2,400,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and ``(E) $3,000,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.''.
Grants.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the Secretary, shall award grants to eligible States to enable such States, either directly or through the provision of assistance to counties or local municipalities, to provide drug treatment services to individuals who have been convicted of non-violent drug possession offenses and diverted from incarceration because of the enrollment of such individuals into community-based drug treatment programs.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section a State shall-- (1) be implementing an alternative drug treatment program under which any individual in the State who has been convicted of a non-violent drug possession offense may be enrolled in an appropriate drug treatment program as an alternative to incarceration; and (2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--Amounts provided to a State under a grant under this section may be used by the State (or by State or local entities that receive funding from the State under this section) to pay expenses associated with-- (1) the construction of treatment facilities; (2) payments to related drug treatment services providers that are necessary for the effectiveness of the program, including aftercare supervision, vocational training, education, and job placement; (3) drug testing; (4) probation services; and (5) counseling, including mental health services.
Matching Requirement.--Funds may not be provided to a State under this section unless the State agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the State in carrying out the drug treatment program involved, the State will make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is at least equal to the amount of Federal funds provided to the State under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to carry out this section, $125,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.