This Act may be cited as the ``Rite of Passage Community Service Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The teenage years are a pivotal time of life, when young people are making choices that will affect them for the rest of their lives.
The ways in which young people spend their time during their teenage years may set them on a course of active citizenship and engaged learning, or down a path of risky behavior with the likelihood of failure.
Research suggests that when young people see that they are able to improve the lives of others they feel that they are able to control and improve their own lives.
If properly trained, organized, and supervised, teenagers are a resource that can make a significant contribution to their communities.
Opportunities for volunteer service during the teenage years could become a rite of passage for future generations.
The National Academy of Sciences Report on Youth Development concluded that ``the future well-being of the country depends on raising generations of skilled, competent, and responsible adults''.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to-- (1) create a national network of service programs for middle school students to serve in their communities after school and during the summer; (2) provide students with opportunities to serve in their communities and participate in other programs such as workshops in leadership development, public speaking, conflict resolution, team-building, and other character-building programs; (3) provide young people an experience that reinforces their connection to the community, enriches their education, and strengthens their personal and civic values; and (4) instill an ethic of service in young people which will stay with them throughout their lifetimes.
RITE OF PASSAGE COMMUNITY SERVICE PROGRAM.
Establishment.--Section 122(a) of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12572(a)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraph (15) as paragraph (16); and (2) by inserting after paragraph (14) the following: ``(15) A community-based Rite of Passage after school and summer service corps program that would offer young people-- ``(A) the opportunity to perform service in their communities; ``(B) the opportunity to participate in activities that would provide training in leadership development, public speaking, conflict resolution, team building, and other critical skills; ``(C) service-learning curricula linked to academic goals; and ``(D) the opportunity to work with older AmeriCorps members who can organize service projects and act as mentors.''.
Eligibility.--Section 137 of such Act (42 United States Code 12591) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) Special Rules for Rite of Passage Program.--An individual shall be considered to be a participant in a Rite of Passage community- based after school or summer service corps program described in section 122(a)(15) (42 United States Code 12591) that is carried out with assistance provided under section 121(a) (42 United States Code 12571) if the individual-- ``(1) satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (6) of subsection (a); and ``(2) is between the ages of 12 and 16, inclusive, at the time the individual begins the term of service.''.
Terms of Service.--Section 139(b) of such Act (42 United States Code 12593(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Special rule for rite of passage program.--An individual participating in a Rite of Passage community-based after school or summer service corps program described in section 122(a)(15) shall agree to participate in the program for not less than 150 hours during a period of not less than 2 months and not more than 1 year.''.
National Service Educational Award.-- (1) Special rule for rite of passage program.--Section 141 of such Act (42 United States Code 12595) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Special Rule for Rite of Passage Program.--An individual participating in a Rite of Passage community-based after school or summer service corps program described in section 122(a)(15), upon completion of the required 150 hours of service shall receive an education award of $500.''.
Eligible individuals.--Section 146 is amended-- (A) in subsection (a)(2) by striking ``or a program described in section 122(a)(9);'' and inserting ``, a program described in section 122(a)(9), or a program described in section 122(a)(15);''; and (B) in subsection (d)(2)-- (i) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``or''; (ii) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``period.''
and inserting ``period; or''; and (iii) by adding at the end the following: ``(C) participated in a program described in section 12572(a).''.
Not later than March 1 of each of the first 3 years following the date of enactment of this Act, the Corporation for National and Community Service shall transmit to the Congress a report and evaluation of the program authorized by this Act.