This Act may be cited as the ``Women in Military Service for America Memorial Commemorative Coin Act''.
Five Dollar Gold Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 50,000 $5 gold coins each of which shall weigh 8.359 grams, have a diameter of 0.850 inches, and be composed of 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under paragraph (1) shall be symbolic of women's service in the Armed Forces of the United States.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1993'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
One Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary shall issue not more than 500,000 $1 silver coins, each of which shall weigh 26.73 grams, have a diameter of 1.500 inches, and be composed of 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under paragraph (1) shall be symbolic of women's service in the Armed Forces of the United States.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1993'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--The coins issued under this Act shall be numismatic items for purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under existing law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act.
In General.--The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, Incorporated.
Review by Citizens Commemorative Design Committee.--The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Advisory Committee in accordance with section 5135 of title 31, United States Code.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act during the period beginning on November 1, 1993, and ending on December 31, 1994.
Quality of Coins.--The coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Sales Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price not less than the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge provided in subsection (c) with respect to such coins, and the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Prepaid Orders at a Discount.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $40 per coin for the $5 coins and $11 per coin for the $1 coins.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--No provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods or services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
The total surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of the coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, Inc., for the purpose of creating, endowing, and dedicating the Women in Military Service for America Memorial.
The Comptroller General shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the Women in Military Service for America Memorial Foundation, Inc., as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under section 8.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins referred to in section 2 will not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment for Issuance of Coins.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for such coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment for such coin; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration.