of Approval.-- (1) Introduction and placement on calendar.--If the President submits a formal request under subsection (a)(1) for authorization to use members of the Armed Forces for a military humanitarian operation, then within 1 calendar day of such request, the majority leader of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall introduce an identical joint resolution in the Senate and the House of Representatives calling for consideration of the military humanitarian operation and shall place such resolution directly on the calendar of the respective House.
Floor consideration.-- (A) In general.--It shall be in order for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of a resolution introduced under paragraph (1), and all points of order against the resolution (and against consideration of the resolution) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate.--Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 4 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on the resolution, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the resolution shall occur.
The vote shall occur not later than 48 hours after submission of a formal request under subsection (a)(1), unless the President waives such deadline, in which case the vote in each House shall occur on the next calendar day each respective House is in session.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution described in paragraph (1) shall be decided without debate.
Coordination with action by other house.--If, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House described in paragraph (1), that House receives from the other House a resolution described in paragraph (1)-- (A) the resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee; and (B) with respect to the resolution of the House receiving the resolution, the procedure in the receiving House shall be the same as if no joint resolution had been received from the other House until the vote on final passage, when the joint resolution received from the other House shall supplant the joint resolution of the receiving House.
Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution described in paragraph (1), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
If any provision of this Act is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of the Act shall not be affected.