This Act may be cited as the ``Children and Media Research Advancement Act'' or the ``CAMRA Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to enable the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention to-- (1) examine the role and positive and negative impact of electronic media in children's and adolescents' cognitive, social, emotional, physical, and behavioral development; and (2) provide for a report to Congress containing the empirical evidence and other results produced by the research funded through grants under this Act.
RESEARCH ON THE ROLE AND IMPACT OF ELECTRONIC MEDIA IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS.
Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 280g et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 399O (relating to grants to foster public health responses to domestic violence, dating violence, sexual assault, and stalking) as section 399P; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
RESEARCH ON THE ROLE AND IMPACT OF ELECTRONIC MEDIA IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS.
In General.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (referred to in this section as the `Director'), shall enter into a contract with the National Academy of Science or another appropriate entity to review, synthesize, and report on research, and establish research priorities, regarding the roles and impact of electronic media (including television, motion pictures, DVD's, interactive video games, digital music, the Internet, and cell phones) and exposures to such media on youth in the following core areas of development: ``(1) Cognitive.--Cognitive areas such as language development, attention span, problem solving skills (such as the ability to conduct multiple tasks or `multitask'), visual and spatial skills, reading, and other learning abilities.
Physical.--Physical areas such as physical coordination, diet, exercise, sleeping and eating routines.
Socio-behavioral.--Socio-behavioral areas such as family activities and peer relationships including indoor and outdoor play time, interactions with parents, consumption habits, social relationships, aggression, and positive social behavior.
Research Program.-- ``(1) In general.--Taking into account the report provided for under subsection (a), the Secretary, acting through the Director and in coordination with the Director of the National Institutes of Health, shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, award grants for research concerning the role and impact of electronic media on the cognitive, physical, and socio-behavioral development of youth.
Requirements.--The research provided for under paragraph (1) shall comply with the following requirements: ``(A) Such research shall focus on the impact of factors such as media content (whether direct or indirect), format, length of exposure, age of youth, venue, and nature of parental involvement.
Such research shall not duplicate other Federal research activities.
For purposes of such research, electronic media shall include television, motion pictures, DVD's, interactive video games, digital music, the Internet, and cell phones.
Eligible entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this subsection, an entity shall-- ``(A) prepare and submit to the Director an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Director shall require; and ``(B) agree to use amounts received under the grant to carry out activities as described in this subsection.
Reports.-- ``(1) Report to the director.--Not later than 15 months after the date of the enactment of this section, the report provided for under subsection (a) shall be submitted to the Director and to the appropriate committees of Congress.
Report to congress.--Not later than December 31, 2012, the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report that-- ``(A) synthesizes the results of-- ``(i) research carried out under the grant program under subsection (b); and ``(ii) other related research, including research conducted by the private or public sector and other Federal entities; and ``(B) outlines existing research gaps in light of the information described in subparagraph (A).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2012.''.
Passed the Senate September 13, 2006.
Attest: EMILY J. REYNOLDS, Secretary.