This Act may be cited as the ``High Risk Rural Roads Safety Act of 2011''.
HIGH RISK RURAL ROADS SAFETY PROGRAM.
Title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 149 the following: ``Sec.
High risk rural roads safety program ``(a) In General.--The Secretary shall carry out a program to improve the safety of high risk rural roads in accordance with this section.
High Risk Rural Road Projects.--Funds apportioned to a State under this section may be used for any of the following projects and activities to improve the safety of a high risk rural road: ``(1) A road safety audit.
An intersection safety improvement.
Installation of rumble strips or another warning device, if the rumble strips or other warning devices do not adversely affect the safety or mobility of bicyclists, pedestrians, and the disabled.
An improvement for pedestrian or bicyclist safety or safety of the disabled.
Construction of a railway-highway crossing safety feature, including installation of protective devices.
Construction of a traffic calming feature.
Improvement of highway signage and pavement markings, including to meet minimum levels of retroreflectivity established by the Department of Transportation.
Installation of a priority control system for emergency vehicles at signalized intersections.
Installation of a traffic control or other warning device at a location with high accident potential.
Installation of guardrails, barriers (including barriers between construction work zones and traffic lanes for the safety of motorists and workers), and crash attenuators.
The addition or retrofitting of structures or other measures to eliminate or reduce accidents involving vehicles and wildlife.
Installation and maintenance of signs (including fluorescent, yellow-green signs) at pedestrian-bicycle crossings and in school zones.
Installation of a skid-resistant surface at an intersection or other location with a high frequency of accidents.
Improvement of an edge drop-off that is greater than 4 inches.
Spot pavement and shoulder widening.
Elimination of a roadside obstacle.
Systemic improvements focusing on low-cost safety infrastructure investments.
Traffic enforcement or other activities relating to work zone safety.
Apportionment of Funds.--On October 1 of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall apportion the sums authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section for such fiscal year among the States in accordance with the following: ``(1) 25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(A) the total rural major collector lane miles in each State; bears to ``(B) the total rural major collector lane miles in all States.
25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(A) the total rural minor collector lane miles in each State; bears to ``(B) the total rural minor collector lane miles in all States.
25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(A) the total rural local road lane miles in each State; bears to ``(B) the total rural local road lane miles in all States.
25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(A) the total number of fatalities, in the most recent fiscal year for which data is available, on rural major collector, rural minor collector, and rural local roads in each State; bears to ``(B) the total number of fatalities, in the most recent fiscal year for which data is available, on rural major collector, rural minor collector, and rural local roads in all States.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of a high risk rural road project carried out with funds apportioned to a State under this section shall be 90 percent.
Road Assessment Programs.--Notwithstanding subsection (b), a State may use not more than 1.25 percent or $100,000 of the funds apportioned to the State under this section in a fiscal year, whichever is greater, for a road assessment program, under which any of the following may be carried out to improve the safety of a high risk rural road: ``(1) Risk mapping to document the safety performance of a road.
Documenting the risk of death or serious injury from an accident with respect to a road, including specifying the locations where that risk is high or low.
Monitoring changes in the safety performance of a road segment over time and determining how those changes relate to safety improvement activities.
Examining the effectiveness of road infrastructure improvements with respect to protecting road users from accidents, including accidents that result in death or serious injury.
Identifying roads eligible to be assisted under subsection (b).
Identifying cost-effective improvements for a specific road segment.
Reports.--The Secretary shall submit annually to the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives a report describing progress made in reducing the number of fatalities and incapacitating injuries on each of the high risk rural roads with respect to which a project was carried out under this section.
High Risk Rural Road Defined.--In this section, the term `high risk rural road' means any roadway functionally classified as a rural major or minor collector or a rural local road-- ``(1) with respect to which there is a significant likelihood of accidents resulting in fatalities or incapacitating injuries; or ``(2) with respect to which there is a physical condition that presents to users of the roadway an increased risk of an accident, including an accident resulting in a serious injury.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) to carry out this section $400,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2017.
Funds made available to carry out this section shall not be transferrable and shall remain available until expended.''.
Section 148 of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (f); and (2) by redesignating subsections (g) and (h) as subsections (f) and (g), respectively.
The analysis for chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 149 the following: ``150.
High risk rural roads safety program.