This Act may be cited as the ``Teacher Paperwork Reduction Act of 2002''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The amount of paperwork special education teachers are required to complete is burdensome, takes valuable time away from the classroom, and undermines the goal of providing the best quality education possible to all children.
Special education teachers spend an average of 5 hours per week on paperwork, compared to general education teachers who spend an average of 2 hours per week on paperwork.
The average length of an individualized education program (referred to in this Act as an ``IEP''), 1 of the biggest sources of paperwork, is between 8 and 16 pages.
More than 60 percent of special education teachers spend between \1/2\ to 1\1/2\ days a week completing paperwork, according to a survey by the Council for Exceptional Children conducted in 2000.
Though special education teachers believe IEPs are essential to providing quality instruction to students with disabilities, they say IEPs need to be streamlined and more relevant to their students' educational needs.
83 percent of special education teachers report spending from \1/2\ to 1\1/2\ days each week in IEP-related meetings, and special education teachers estimate they spend 4 hours planning before each IEP meeting, according to the Council for Exceptional Children.
14 percent of special education teachers spend 1 hour or less per week on paperwork while 24 percent spend 1.5 to 3 hours and 8 percent spend 14 hours or more on paperwork.
53 percent of special education teachers report that, to a great extent, their routine duties and paperwork interfere with their interaction with their students.
The causes of burdensome paperwork for special education teachers include-- (A) Federal regulations; (B) misconceptions at State and local levels regarding Federal regulations, resulting in additional State and local requirements; and (C) litigation and the threat of litigation.
The benefits of mediation as an alternative to lawsuits for special education disputes are the following: (A) Mediation can be a more constructive option for special education children, parents, and teachers because it allows families to maintain a positive relationship with teachers and service providers and parents have the benefit of working together with educators and service providers as partners instead of as adversaries.
Parents and children, most likely, will have their concerns addressed much more quickly through mediation than through litigation.
Mediation is a much less costly alternative for families and school districts.
Mediation often results in agreements with which both parties are satisfied and the parties tend to carry out the terms of the agreement, for example, in Pennsylvania, 85 percent of special education mediations end in agreement.
In this Act: (1) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of Education.
Elementary school.--The term ``elementary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Individualized education program.--The term ``individualized education program'' has the meaning given the term in section 602 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1401).
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Secondary school.--The term ``secondary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
State educational agency.--The term ``State educational agency'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Gao Study and Report.-- (1) Study.-- (A) In general.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a study on the paperwork burden on special education teachers.
Causation.--In the study conducted under subparagraph (A), the Comptroller General shall-- (i) determine-- (I) how much of the paperwork burden on special education teachers is caused by Federal regulations compared to State and local regulations; (II) the number of mediations that have been conducted since mediations were required to be made available under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act Amendments of 1997; and (III) the amount of money that State educational agencies and local educational agencies have saved as a result of participating in mediations under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes) for special education disputes as opposed to engaging in litigation; and (ii) examine-- (I) the impact the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act Amendments of 1997 have had on the paperwork burden on special education teachers; (II) streamlining IEP forms and regulations; and (III) the use of technology in reducing the paperwork burden on special education teachers.
Report.-- (A) Submission.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to Congress on the study conducted under paragraph (1).
Contents.--The report submitted under subparagraph (A) shall include recommendations-- (i) on steps that Congress, the Department, State educational agencies, and local educational agencies could take to comply with the requirement of subsection (b); and (ii) on the use of technology in reducing the paperwork burden on special education teachers.
Reduction.-- (1) Required reductions.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Department, in cooperation with each State educational agency and local educational agency that receives Federal funds under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) or the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes), shall reduce the amount of paperwork that such entities require special education teachers to complete by not less than a net 50 percent.
Reduction goals.--The Department and each State educational agency and local educational agency that receives Federal funds under the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) or the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes) are encouraged to reduce the amount of paperwork that such entities require special education teachers to complete by more than a net 50 percent.
Mediation.--The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 615(e)-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by striking ``allow'' and inserting ``require''; and (ii) by striking ``process'' and all that follows and inserting ``process.
''; and (B) in paragraph (2)-- (i) in subparagraph (A)(i), by striking ``voluntary'' and inserting ``mandatory''; (ii) by striking subparagraph (B); (iii) by redesignating subparagraphs (C) through (G) as subparagraphs (B) through (F), respectively; and (iv) in subparagraph (C), as redesignated by clause (iii), by striking ``process,'' and all that follows and inserting ``process.
''; and (2) in section 682(b)(5), by striking ``, consistent with subparagraphs (B) and (D) of section 615(e)(2),''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
From funds appropriated for part D of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1451 et sequentes), the Department shall award grants-- (1) to conduct research to determine best practices for successful mediation, including training practices, that can help contribute to the effort to reduce paperwork, improve student outcomes, and free up teacher resources for teaching; and (2) to provide mediation training support services.