PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICES AND POSITIONS IN THE EXECUTIVE OR LEGISLATIVE BRANCH.
Applicability.--This section shall apply with respect to each office or position under subparagraph (A), (B), or (D) of section 225(f) of the Federal Salary Act of 1967 (2 United States Code 356), as last in effect before being repealed by section 3(a).
Pay Provisions.--Notwithstanding section 601(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 United States Code 31), section 104 of title 3, United States Code, section 5318 of title 5, United States Code, or any other provision of law, the rate of basic pay for each office or position to which this section applies shall-- (1) for the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending at the close of the day before the first day to which paragraph (2) applies, be equal to the rate payable for such office or position as of the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) on and after the first day of the first Congress beginning after the next election of Representatives occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act, be equal to the rate which would then be payable for such office or position if neither section 703 of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989 (5 United States Code 5318 note), section 6(a) of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1992 (5 United States Code 5318 note) (but only to the extent that it directs that subsection (a)(2)(B) of such section 703 be treated as if it had not been enacted), nor paragraph (1) had been enacted.
Repeal of Certain Related Provisions.--The last sentence of section 603, and the last sentence of section 804(f), of the Ethics Reform Act of 1989 are repealed.
Definition.--For the purpose of this section, the term ``election of Representatives'' is used in the same way as such term is used in the twenty-seventh article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO OFFICES AND POSITIONS IN THE JUDICIAL BRANCH.
Applicability.--This section shall apply with respect to each office or position under subparagraph (C) of section 225(f) of the Federal Salary Act of 1967 (2 United States Code 356), as last in effect before being repealed by section 3(a).
Pay Provisions.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding section 461 of title 28, United States Code, or any other provision of law, the rate of basic pay for each office or position to which this section applies shall-- (A) for the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act and ending at the close of the day before the first day to which subparagraph (B) applies, be equal to the rate payable for such office or position as of the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) on and after the date specified in paragraph (2), be adjusted in accordance with paragraph (3).
Specification of date.--The date specified in this paragraph is the first date, after the first day referred to in section 1(b)(2), as of which the rate of pay payable to a Senator or Member of the House of Representatives (or, if those rates are not the same, whichever is less) is at least equal to the rate payable to a judge of a district court of the United States as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Method for adjusting pay.--The method for adjusting pay for an office or position under this paragraph shall be-- (A) as required under applicable provisions of law (disregarding any adjustments which, but for this Act, would have taken effect under those provisions during the period described in paragraph (1)(A)); except that (B) the first adjustment taking effect after the end of such period shall (for each such office or position) be equal to such percentage as results in the rate of pay for a judge of a district court of the United States being equal to the rate then payable to a Senator or Member of the House of Representatives (or, if those rates are not the same, whichever is less).
REPEAL OF SECTION 225 OF THE FEDERAL SALARY ACT OF 1967.
In General.--Section 225 of the Federal Salary Act of 1967 (2 United States Code 351 and following) is repealed.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 601(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 United States Code 31(1)) is amended by striking ``shall be'' through the period and inserting ``shall be the rate determined for such positions under this subsection.''.
The first sentence of section 104 of title 3, United States Code, is amended by striking ``shall be'' through the period and inserting ``shall be the rate determined for such position under this section.''.
Sections 5312 through 5316 of title 5, United States Code, are each amended by striking ``shall be'' through the colon and inserting ``shall be the rate determined with respect to such level under section 5318:''.
Sections 5, 44(d), 135, and 252 of title 28, United States Code, are each amended by striking ``determined under'' through the period and inserting ``determined under section 461 of this title.