This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Hospice Care Services Act of 1995''.
PROGRAMS FOR FURNISHING HOSPICE CARE TO VETERANS.
Establishment of Programs.--Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``subchapter vii--hospice care pilot program; hospice care services ``Sec.
Definitions ``For the purposes of this subchapter-- ``(1) The term `terminally ill veteran' means any veteran-- ``(A) who is (i) entitled to receive hospital care in a medical facility of the Department under section 1710(a)(1) of this title, (ii) eligible for hospital or nursing home care in such a facility and receiving such care, (iii) receiving care in a State home facility for which care the Secretary is paying per diem under section 1741 of this title, or (iv) transferred to a non-Department nursing home for nursing home care under section 1720 of this title and receiving such care; and ``(B) who has a medical prognosis (as certified by a Department physician) of a life expectancy of six months or less.
The term `hospice care services' means-- ``(A) the care, items, and services referred to in subparagraphs (A) through (H) of section 1861(dd)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(dd)(1)); and ``(B) personal care services.
The term `hospice program' means any program that satisfies the requirements of section 1861(dd)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(dd)(2)).
The term `medical facility of the Department' means a facility referred to in section 1701(4)(A) of this title.
The term `non-Department facility' means a facility (other than a medical facility of the Department) at which care to terminally ill veterans is furnished, regardless of whether such care is furnished pursuant to a contract, agreement, or other arrangement referred to in section 1762(b)(1)(D) of this title.
The term `personal care services' means any care or service furnished to a person that is necessary to maintain a person's health and safety within the home or nursing home of the person, including care or services related to dressing and personal hygiene, feeding and nutrition, and environmental support.
Hospice care: pilot program requirements ``(a)(1) During the period beginning on October 1, 1995, and ending on December 31, 2000, the Secretary shall conduct a pilot program in order-- ``(A) to assess the desirability of furnishing hospice care services to terminally ill veterans; and ``(B) to determine the most effective and efficient means of furnishing such services to such veterans.
The Secretary shall conduct the pilot program in accordance with this section.
(1) Under the pilot program, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) designate not less than 15 nor more than 30 medical facilities of the Department at or through which to conduct hospice care services demonstration projects; ``(B) designate the means by which hospice care services shall be provided to terminally ill veterans under each demonstration project pursuant to subsection (c); ``(C) allocate such personnel and other resources of the Department as the Secretary considers necessary to ensure that services are provided to terminally ill veterans by the designated means under each demonstration project; and ``(D) enter into any contract, agreement, or other arrangement that the Secretary considers necessary to ensure the provision of such services by the designated means under each such project.
In carrying out the responsibilities referred to in paragraph (1) the Secretary shall take into account the need to provide for and conduct the demonstration projects so as to provide the Secretary with such information as is necessary for the Secretary to evaluate and assess the furnishing of hospice care services to terminally ill veterans by a variety of means and in a variety of circumstances.
In carrying out the requirement described in paragraph (2), the Secretary shall, to the maximum extent feasible, ensure that-- ``(A) the medical facilities of the Department selected to conduct demonstration projects under the pilot program include facilities located in urban areas of the United States and rural areas of the United States; ``(B) the full range of affiliations between medical facilities of the Department and medical schools is represented by the facilities selected to conduct demonstration projects under the pilot program, including no affiliation, minimal affiliation, and extensive affiliation; ``(C) such facilities vary in the number of beds that they operate and maintain; and ``(D) the demonstration projects are located or conducted in accordance with any other criteria or standards that the Secretary considers relevant or necessary to furnish and to evaluate and assess fully the furnishing of hospice care services to terminally ill veterans.
(1) Subject to paragraph (2), hospice care to terminally ill veterans shall be furnished under a demonstration project by one or more of the following means designated by the Secretary: ``(A) By the personnel of a medical facility of the Department providing hospice care services pursuant to a hospice program established by the Secretary at that facility.
By a hospice program providing hospice care services under a contract with that program and pursuant to which contract any necessary inpatient services are provided at a medical facility of the Department.
By a hospice program providing hospice care services under a contract with that program and pursuant to which contract any necessary inpatient services are provided at a non-Department medical facility.
(A) The Secretary shall provide that-- ``(i) care is furnished by the means described in paragraph (1)(A) at not less than five medical facilities of the Department; and ``(ii) care is furnished by the means described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (1) in connection with not less than five such facilities for each such means.
The Secretary shall provide in any contract under subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1) that inpatient care may be provided to terminally ill veterans at a medical facility other than that designated in the contract if the provision of such care at such other facility is necessary under the circumstances.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amount paid to a hospice program for care furnished pursuant to subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (c)(1) may not exceed the amount that would be paid to that program for such care under section 1814(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395f(i)) if such care were hospice care for which payment would be made under part A of title XVIII of such Act.
The Secretary may pay an amount in excess of the amount referred to in paragraph (1) (or furnish services whose value, together with any payment by the Secretary, exceeds such amount) to a hospice program for furnishing care to a terminally ill veteran pursuant to subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (c)(1) if the Secretary determines, on a case-by-case basis, that-- ``(A) the furnishing of such care to the veteran is necessary and appropriate; and ``(B) the amount that would be paid to that program under section 1814(i) of the Social Security Act would not compensate the program for the cost of furnishing such care.
Care for terminally ill veterans ``(a) During the period referred to in section 1762(a)(1) of this title, the Secretary shall designate not less than 10 medical facilities of the Department at which hospital care is being furnished to terminally ill veterans in order to furnish the care referred to in subsection (b)(1).
(1) Palliative care to terminally ill veterans shall be furnished at the facilities referred to in subsection (a) by one of the following means designated by the Secretary: ``(A) By personnel of the Department providing one or more hospice care services to such veterans at or through medical facilities of the Department.
By personnel of the Department monitoring the furnishing of one or more of such services to such veterans at or through non-Department facilities.
The Secretary shall furnish care by the means referred to in each of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) at not less than five medical facilities designated under subsection (a).
Information relating to hospice care services ``The Secretary shall ensure to the extent practicable that terminally ill veterans who have been informed of their medical prognosis receive information relating to the eligibility, if any, of such veterans for hospice care and services under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes).
Evaluation and reports ``(a) Not later than September 30, 1996, and on an annual basis thereafter until October 1, 2001, the Secretary shall submit a written report to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives relating to the conduct of the pilot program under section 1762 of this title and the furnishing of hospice care services under section 1763 of this title.
Each report shall include the following information: ``(1) The location of the sites of the demonstration projects provided for under the pilot program.
The location of the medical facilities of the Department at or through which hospice care services are being furnished under section 1763 of this title.
The means by which care to terminally ill veterans is being furnished under each such project and at or through each such facility.
The number of veterans being furnished such care under each such project and at or through each such facility.
An assessment by the Secretary of any difficulties in furnishing such care and the actions taken to resolve such difficulties.
Not later than August 1, 1999, the Secretary shall submit to the committees referred to in subsection (a) a report containing an evaluation and assessment by the Under Secretary for Health of the hospice care pilot program under section 1762 of this title and the furnishing of hospice care services under section 1763 of this title.
The report shall contain such information (and shall be presented in such form) as will enable the committees to evaluate fully the desirability of furnishing hospice care services to terminally ill veterans.
The report under subsection (b) shall include the following: ``(1) A description and summary of the pilot program.
With respect to each demonstration project conducted under the pilot program-- ``(A) a description and summary of the project; ``(B) a description of the facility conducting the demonstration project and a discussion of how such facility was selected in accordance with the criteria set out in, or prescribed by the Secretary pursuant to, subparagraphs (A) through (D) of section 1762(b)(3) of this title; ``(C) the means by which hospice care services care are being furnished to terminally ill veterans under the demonstration project; ``(D) the personnel used to furnish such services under the demonstration project; ``(E) a detailed factual analysis with respect to the furnishing of such services, including (i) the number of veterans being furnished such services, (ii) the number, if any, of inpatient admissions for each veteran being furnished such services and the length of stay for each such admission, (iii) the number, if any, of outpatient visits for each such veteran, and (iv) the number, if any, of home-care visits provided to each such veteran; ``(F) the direct costs, if any, incurred by terminally ill veterans, the members of the families of such veterans, and other individuals in close relationships with such veterans in connection with the participation of veterans in the demonstration project; ``(G) the costs incurred by the Department in conducting the demonstration project, including an analysis of the costs, if any, of the demonstration project that are attributable to (i) furnishing such services in facilities of the Department, (ii) furnishing such services in non-Department facilities, and (iii) administering the furnishing of such services; and ``(H) the unreimbursed costs, if any, incurred by any other entity in furnishing services to terminally ill veterans under the project pursuant to section 1762(c)(1)(C) of this title.
An analysis of the level of the following persons' satisfaction with the services furnished to terminally ill veterans under each demonstration project: ``(A) Terminally ill veterans who receive such services, members of the families of such veterans, and other individuals in close relationships with such veterans.
Personnel of the Department responsible for furnishing such services under the project.
Personnel of non-Department facilities responsible for furnishing such services under the project.
A description and summary of the means of furnishing hospice care services at or through each medical facility of the Department designated under section 1763(a)(1) of this title.
With respect to each such means, the information referred to in paragraphs (2) and (3).
A comparative analysis by the Under Secretary for Health of the services furnished to terminally ill veterans under the various demonstration projects referred to in section 1762 of this title and at or through the designated facilities referred to in section 1763 of this title, with an emphasis in such analysis on a comparison relating to-- ``(A) the management of pain and health symptoms of terminally ill veterans by such projects and facilities; ``(B) the number of inpatient admissions of such veterans and the length of inpatient stays for such admissions under such projects and facilities; ``(C) the number and type of medical procedures employed with respect to such veterans by such projects and facilities; and ``(D) the effectiveness of such projects and facilities in providing care to such veterans at the homes of such veterans or in nursing homes.
An assessment by the Under Secretary for Health of the desirability of furnishing hospice care services by various means to terminally ill veterans, including an assessment by the Director of the optimal means of furnishing such services to such veterans.
Any recommendations for additional legislation regarding the furnishing of care to terminally ill veterans that the Secretary considers appropriate.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``subchapter vii--hospice care pilot program; hospice care services ``1761.
Hospice care: pilot program requirements.
Care for terminally ill veterans.
Information relating to hospice care services.
Authority To Carry Out Other Hospice Care Programs.--The amendments made by subsection (a) may not be construed as terminating the authority of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to provide hospice care services to terminally ill veterans under any program in addition to the programs required under the provisions added by such amendments.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Funds are authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for the purposes of carrying out the evaluation of the hospice care pilot programs under section 1765 of title 38, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), as follows: (1) For fiscal year 1996, $1,200,000.
For fiscal year 1997, $2,500,000.
For fiscal year 1998, $2,200,000.
For fiscal year 1999, $100,000.