This Act may be cited as the ``USDA Accountability and Equity Act of 1997''.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``Department'' means the Department of Agriculture.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
The term ``Assistant Secretary'' means the Assistant Secretary of Agriculture for Administration.
The term ``socially disadvantaged customer'' means socially disadvantaged farmer or rancher, as defined in section 355(e)(2) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act.
TITLE I--PROGRAM ACCOUNTABILITY SEC.
CONVERSION OF COUNTY COMMITTEES.
Effective 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, section 8(a)(5)(B) of the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act (16 United States Code 590h(a)(5)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking clause (ii) and inserting the following: ``(ii) Any such committee shall consist of not fewer than 5 nor more than 7 members as follows: ``(I) Not fewer than 3 and not more than 5 members shall be fairly representative of the agricultural producers in the county or area, and shall be elected by the agricultural producers in such county or area under such procedures as the Secretary may prescribe.
two members shall be demographically representative of members of groups of agricultural producers in the county or area who, in the absence of the members, would be underrepresented on the committee, and shall be appointed by the Secretary, based on recommendations made by the underrepresented groups.
If the Secretary makes such an appointment from among persons not so recommended, the Secretary shall provide the reasons therefor upon request.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(vi) The civil service laws shall apply to all persons performing functions for any county, area, or local committee, subject to such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe taking into account the recommendations made under section 102 of the USDA Accountability and Equity Act of 1997.
The county executive director of a county, area, or local committee, or such other person as the Secretary may select, shall have sole responsibility for making loan determinations under credit programs administered by the Department of Agriculture in the county, area, or locality, subject to the approval of the State director of the Consolidated Farm Service Agency.''.
CONVERSION OF NONFEDERAL FARM SERVICE AGENCY COUNTY COMMITTEE EMPLOYEES TO FEDERAL CIVIL SERVICE STATUS.
County and Area Office Staffs.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (E) of section 8(b)(5) of the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act (16 United States Code 590h(b)(5)(E)) is amended to read as follows: ``(E) Regulations and county and area office employees.-- (i)(I) The Secretary shall issue such regulations as the Secretary considers necessary relating to the selection of members to and the exercise of the functions of the respective committees, and to the administration through such committees of the programs described in subparagraph (D).
Regulations governing payments or grants under this subsection, whenever practicable, shall be classified on the basis of being related to a soil-depleting practice or a soil- building practice.
Employees performing services for county and area committees may be appointed only by the Secretary or the designee of the Secretary.''.
Conversion of permanent county and area office employees.--Subject to regulations of the Office of Personnel Management, employees of county committees employed pursuant to section 8(b) of the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act (16 United States Code 590h(b)) who, on the effective date of this section, are so employed under an appointment not limited to 1 year or less shall be converted to Federal civil service appointments, as follows: (A) Employees who have completed 3 years of service shall be given career civil service appointments.
Employees who have completed less than 3 years of service shall be given career-conditional civil service appointments.
Conversion of temporary county and area office employees.--Subject to regulations of the Office of Personnel Management, employees of county committees employed pursuant to section 8(b) of the Soil Conservation and Domestic Allotment Act (16 United States Code 590h(b)) who, on the effective date of this section, are so employed under an appointment limited to 1 year or less shall, subject to the discretion of the Secretary, be converted to temporary Federal civil service appointments.
Other Amendments.-- (1) Department of agriculture reorganization act of 1994.-- Section 226 of the Department of Agriculture Reorganization Act of 1994 (7 United States Code 6932) is amended-- (A) by striking subsection (e); (B) in subsection (g), by striking ``(f)'' and inserting ``(e)''; and (C) by redesignating subsections (f) through (h) as subsections (e) through (g), respectively.
Title 5 of the united states code.--Title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in sections 3502(a)(C)(i) and 6312(a)(1) by striking ``Act;'' and inserting ``Act, but only if that individual was first employed as an employee of such a county committee or of such a committee or association of producers before the effective date of section 102 of the USDA Accountability and Equity Act of 1997;''; and (B) in sections 5306(a)(1)(C), 8331(1)(F), 8701(a)(8), and 8901(1)(G) by inserting ``first'' before ``employed'' and by striking ``16;'' and inserting ``16 before the effective date of section 102 of the USDA Accountability and Equity Act of 1997;''.
Effective Date.--This section and the amendments made by this section shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--PROGRAM EQUITY SEC.
Section 373(a) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 2008h(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Delinquent Borrowers Prohibited From Obtaining Direct Operating Loans; Exceptions.-- ``(1) Prohibition.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary may not make a direct operating loan under subtitle B to a borrower who is delinquent on any loan made or guaranteed under this title.
Exceptions.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to a borrower if-- ``(i) the borrower was granted a principal or interest write-down under section 353 with respect to the loan on which the borrower is delinquent, and the delinquency is a result of conditions the borrower could not control; ``(ii) there are no unsatisfied judgments against the borrower; ``(iii) 2 years has passed since a principal or interest write-down was granted under section 353 to the borrower; ``(iv) the Secretary determines that the borrower has acted in a fiscally responsible manner for 2 years before application for the direct operating loan; or ``(v) the farm operations of the borrower are pending liquidation.
Requirements applicable to loans to delinquent borrowers.--Any direct operating loan to a borrower to whom a paragraph of the preceding sentence applies shall be made subject to such requirements and conditions as may be necessary to ensure that the borrower does not become delinquent on the loan.''.
LEASE BACK, BUY BACK OPPORTUNITIES.
Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary of Agriculture $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1998 and 1999 for leases or contracts to sell real property acquired under the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act to beginning farmers or ranchers (as defined under section 343(a)(8) of such Act) whose operations were shown by a farm and home plan to cash flow during the 3 years before April 4, 1996.
DEBT WRITE-DOWNS NOT TREATED AS INCOME FOR TAX PURPOSES.
Section 353(d) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 2001(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Tax treatment of write-downs.--No amount shall be includible in gross income for purposes of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 by reason of any discharge of indebtedness under this section.''.
ACCESSIBILITY OF HOUSING LOANS.
Section 502(a) of the Housing Act of 1949 (42 United States Code 1472(a)) is amended by adding after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) The Secretary may not deny eligibility to any applicant for a loan under this section on the basis of the lack of a credit history or a poor credit history, if the applicant demonstrates, in accordance with such requirements as the Secretary may prescribe, that the applicant has been able, for a reasonable period of time, to live in a financially independent manner and pay rent and utility bills in a timely manner.''.
EXPANSION OF THE ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY INCENTIVES PROGRAM FOR SOCIALLY DISADVANTAGED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCERS.
In General.--Section 1241(b) of the Food Security Act of 1985 (16 United States Code 3841(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$200,000,000'' and inserting ``$300,000,000''; (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``50 percent'' and inserting ``\1/3\''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Assistance to socially disadvantaged agricultural producers.--For each of fiscal years 1998 through 2002, \1/3\ of the funding available for technical assistance, cost-share payments, incentives payments, and education under the environmental quality incentives program under chapter 4 of subtitle D shall be targeted to increase assistance to socially disadvantaged farmers and ranchers (as defined in section 355(e)(2) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act).''.
Same-Year Payments for Contracts in the Environmental Quality Incentives Program.--Section 1240G of such Act (16 United States Code 3839aa-7) is amended by striking subsection (c).
Section 1447(b) of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 3222b(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Appropriation.-- ``(1) In general.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary of Agriculture $15,000,000 for fiscal year 1998 and for each succeeding fiscal year to carry out this section.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.''.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE TO STUDY WHETHER LAND GRANT INSTITUTIONS ARE BEING FUNDED EQUITABLY.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish in the Department a bipartisan advisory committee to conduct a study of funding of institutions of higher education (as defined in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965) to determine whether eligible institutions (as defined in section 1447(a) of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977) and 1994 Institutions (as defined in section 532 of the Equity in Educational Land-Grant Status Act of 1994) are receiving equitable support to assist the Department in carrying out its mission.
Number of Members.--The advisory committee shall be composed of not fewer than 5 members and not more than 25 members, appointed by the Secretary.
Prohibition Against Compensation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the members of the advisory committee may not receive pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the advisory committee.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the advisory committee shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--One third of the members of the advisory committee shall constitute a quorum.
Chairperson.--The Secretary (or the delegate of the Secretary) shall be the chairperson of the advisory committee.
Experts and Consultants.--The chairperson of the advisory committee may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the chairperson of the advisory committee, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the advisory committee to assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
Powers.-- (1) Hearings and sessions.--The advisory committee may, for the purpose of carrying out this section, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the advisory committee considers appropriate.
The advisory committee may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of members and agents.--Any member or agent of the advisory committee may, if authorized by the advisory committee, take any action which the advisory committee is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining official data.--The advisory committee may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this section.
Upon request of the chairperson of the advisory committee, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the advisory committee.
Mails.--The advisory committee may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Report.--Within 9 months after the Secretary appoints the members of the advisory committee, the advisory committee shall submit to the Secretary a report on the matters described in subsection (a).
Termination.--The advisory committee shall terminate upon the submission of the report required by subsection (i).
FUNDING OF PROGRAM OF OUTREACH AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE TO SOCIALLY DISADVANTAGED FARMERS.
Section 2501(a)(3) of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 2279(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary $10,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out this section.''.
FUNDING OF EXTENSION INDIAN RESERVATION PROGRAM.
Section 1677(g) of the Food, Agriculture, Conservation, and Trade Act of 1990 (7 United States Code 5930(g)) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) Appropriation.--Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary $8,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out this section.''.
TITLE III--FUNDING OF FARM OWNERSHIP AND OPERATING LOANS SEC.
FUNDING OF FARM OWNERSHIP AND OPERATING LOAN PROGRAMS.
Section 346(b)(1) of the Consolidated Farm and Rural Development Act (7 United States Code 1994(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(H) Out of any money in the Treasury of the United States not otherwise appropriated, there are appropriated to the Secretary for fiscal year 1998 and for each succeeding fiscal year $585,000,000 for direct loans, of which-- ``(i) $85,000,000 shall be for farm ownership loans under subtitle A; and ``(ii) $500,000,000 shall be for operating loans under subtitle B.