This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Health Insurance Affordability Act of 2002''.
REFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR SMALL BUSINESSES PROVIDING HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR EMPLOYEES.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
SMALL BUSINESS COST OF PROVIDING HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR EMPLOYEES.
In General.--At the election of the employer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the qualified premiums paid during the taxable year by the taxpayer.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable percentage shall be determined in accordance with the following table: ``Total number of employees of The applicable percentage is: taxpayer: 10 or fewer.................... 50 percent.
11 to 15....................... 25 percent.
16 or more..................... 0 percent.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum employee compensation.--No amount paid for a qualified premium shall be taken into account under subsection (a) if such amount is paid or incurred with respect to any employee to whom the taxpayer paid wages of $40,000 or more for the calendar year ending with or in the taxable year of the taxpayer.
Minimum employee service.--No amount paid for a qualified premium shall be taken into account under subsection (a) if such amount is paid or incurred with respect to any employee unless such employee has performed at least 400 hours of service for the employer during the taxable year of the employer.
Inflation adjustment.--In the case of a calendar year after 2003, the dollar amount contained in paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for such calendar year by substituting `calendar year 2002' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Any increase under this paragraph which is not a multiple of $100 shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple of $100.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified premiums.--The term `qualified premiums' means premiums paid by the taxpayer for qualified health insurance for any employee of the taxpayer, and the employee's spouse and dependents, but only if the employer pays not less than 75 percent of the aggregate premiums for such insurance for the taxable year.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `premium' shall have the same meaning as when used in section 4980B(f)(4).
Qualified health insurance.--The term `qualified health insurance' means insurance which constitutes medical care (as defined in section 213(d)); except that such term shall not include any insurance if substantially all of its coverage is of excepted benefits described in section 9832(c).
Wages.--The term `wages' shall have the meaning given to such term by subsection (b) of section 3306 (determined without regard to any dollar limitation contained in such section).
Aggregation rule.--For purposes of this section, all persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 or subsection (n) or (o) of section 414 shall be treated as one person.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or from section 35 of such Code'' before the period at the end.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the item relating to section 35 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Small business cost of providing health insurance coverage for employees.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.