This Act may be cited as the ``Do-Not-Call Registry Fee Extension Act of 2007''.
FEES FOR ACCESS TO REGISTRY.
Section 2, of the Do-Not-Call Implementation Act (15 United States Code 6101 note) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
TELEMARKETING SALES RULE; DO-NOT-CALL REGISTRY FEES.
In General.--The Federal Trade Commission shall assess and collect an annual fee pursuant to this section in order to implement and enforce the `do-not-call' registry as provided for in section 310.4(b)(1)(iii) of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, or any other regulation issued by the Commission under section 3 of the Telemarketing and Consumer Fraud and Abuse Prevention Act (15 United States Code 6102).
Annual Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall charge each person who accesses the `do-not-call' registry an annual fee that is equal to the lesser of-- ``(A) $54 for each area code of data accessed from the registry; or ``(B) $14,850 for access to every area code of data contained in the registry.
Exception.--The Commission shall not charge a fee to any person-- ``(A) for accessing the first 5 area codes of data; or ``(B) for accessing area codes of data in the registry if the person is permitted to access, but is not required to access, the `do-not-call' registry under section 310 of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, section 64.1200 of title 47, Code of Federal Regulations, or any other Federal regulation or law.
Duration of access.-- ``(A) In general.--The Commission shall allow each person who pays the annual fee described in paragraph (1), each person excepted under paragraph (2) from paying the annual fee, and each person excepted from paying an annual fee under section 310.4(b)(1)(iii)(B) of title 16, Code of Federal Regulations, to access the area codes of data in the `do-not-call' registry for which the person has paid during that person's annual period.
Annual period.--In this paragraph, the term `annual period' means the 12-month period beginning on the first day of the month in which a person pays the fee described in paragraph (1).
Additional Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall charge a person required to pay an annual fee under subsection (b) an additional fee for each additional area code of data the person wishes to access during that person's annual period.
Rates.--For each additional area code of data to be accessed during the person's annual period, the Commission shall charge-- ``(A) $54 for access to such data if access to the area code of data is first requested during the first 6 months of the person's annual period; or ``(B) $27 for access to such data if access to the area code of data is first requested after the first 6 months of the person's annual period.
Adjustment of Fees.-- ``(1) In general.-- ``(A) Fiscal year 2009.--The dollar amount described in subsection (b) or (c) is the amount to be charged for fiscal year 2009.
Fiscal years after 2009.--For each fiscal year beginning after fiscal year 2009, each dollar amount in subsection (b)(1) and (c)(2) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) the dollar amount in paragraph (b)(1) or (c)(2), whichever is applicable, multiplied by ``(ii) the percentage (if any) by which the CPI for the most recently ended 12-month period ending on June 30 exceeds the baseline CPI.
Rounding.--Any increase under subparagraph (B) shall be rounded to the nearest dollar.
Changes less than 1 percent.--The Commission shall not adjust the fees under this section if the change in the CPI is less than 1 percent.
Publication.--Not later than September 1 of each year the Commission shall publish in the Federal Register the adjustments to the applicable fees, if any, made under this subsection.
Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) CPI.--The term `CPI' means the average of the monthly consumer price index (for all urban consumers published by the Department of Labor).
Baseline CPI.--The term `baseline CPI' means the CPI for the 12-month period ending June 30, 2008.
Prohibition Against Fee Sharing.--No person may enter into or participate in an arrangement (as such term is used in section 310.8(c) of the Commission's regulations (16 Code of Federal Regulations 310.8(c))) to share any fee required by subsection (b) or (c), including any arrangement to divide the costs to access the registry among various clients of a telemarketer or service provider.
Handling of Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall deposit and credit as offsetting collections any fee collected under this section in the account `Federal Trade Commission--Salaries and Expenses', and such sums shall remain available until expended.
Limitation.--No amount shall be collected as a fee under this section for any fiscal year except to the extent provided in advance by appropriations Acts.''.
Section 4 of the Do-Not-Call Implementation Act (15 United States Code 6101 note) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Biennial Reports.--Not later than December 31, 2009, and biennially thereafter, the Federal Trade Commission, in consultation with the Federal Communications Commission, shall transmit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce that includes-- ``(1) the number of consumers who have placed their telephone numbers on the registry; ``(2) the number of persons paying fees for access to the registry and the amount of such fees; ``(3) the impact on the `do-not-call' registry of-- ``(A) the 5-year reregistration requirement; ``(B) new telecommunications technology; and ``(C) number portability and abandoned telephone numbers; and ``(4) the impact of the established business relationship exception on businesses and consumers.
Additional Report.--Not later than December 31, 2009, the Federal Trade Commission, in consultation with the Federal Communications Commission, shall transmit a report to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Energy and Commerce that includes-- ``(1) the effectiveness of do-not-call outreach and enforcement efforts with regard to senior citizens and immigrant communities; ``(2) the impact of the exceptions to the do-not-call registry on businesses and consumers, including an analysis of the effectiveness of the registry and consumer perceptions of the registry's effectiveness; and ``(3) the impact of abandoned calls made by predictive dialing devices on do-not-call enforcement.''.
The Federal Trade Commission may issue rules, in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code, as necessary and appropriate to carry out the amendments to the Do-Not-Call Implementation Act (15 United States Code 6101 note) made by this Act.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.