Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Surface Transportation Board shall promulgate regulations adopting a simplified dispute resolution mechanism with the following features: (1) In general.--The simplified dispute resolution mechanism will utilize expedited arbitration with a minimum of discovery and may be used to decide disputes between parties involving any matter subject to the jurisdiction of the Board, other than rate reasonableness cases that would be decided under constrained market pricing principles.
Applicable standards.--Arbitrators will apply existing legal standards.
Mandatory if requested.--Use of the simplified dispute resolution mechanism is required whenever at least one party to the dispute requests.
90-day turnaround.--Arbitrators will issue their decisions within 90 days after being appointed.
Payment of costs.--Each party will pay its own costs, and the costs of the arbitration and other administrative costs of arbitration will be shared equally between and among the parties.
Decisions private; not precedential.--Except as otherwise provided by the Board, decisions will remain private and will not constitute binding precedent.
Decisions binding and enforceable.--Except as otherwise provided in paragraph (8), decisions will be binding and enforceable by the Board.
Right to appeal.--Any party will have an unqualified right to appeal any decision to the Board, in which case the Board will decide the matter de novo.
In making its decision, the Board may consider the decision of the arbitrator and any evidence and other material developed during the arbitration.
Mutual modification.--Any procedure or regulation adopted by the Board with respect to the simplified dispute resolution may be modified or eliminated by mutual agreement of all parties to the dispute.
PROMOTION OF COMPETITIVE RAIL SERVICE OPTIONS.
Section 11324 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' in paragraph (4) of subsection (b); (2) by striking ``system.''
in paragraph (5) of subsection (b) and inserting ``system; and''; (3) by adding at the end of subsection (b) the following: ``(6) means and methods to encourage and expand competition between and among rail carriers in the affected region or the national rail system.
''; and (4) by inserting after the second sentence in subsection (c) the following: ``The Board may impose conditions to encourage and expand competition between and among rail carriers in the affected region or the national rail system, if such conditions do not cause substantial harm to the benefits of the transaction to the affected carriers or the public.''.
CLARIFICATION OF STB AUTHORITY TO GRANT TEMPORARY ACCESS RELIEF.
Section 10705 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(d) The Board may grant temporary relief under this section when the Board finds it necessary and appropriate to do so to remedy inadequate service.
The authority provided in this section is in addition to the authority of the Board to provide temporary relief under sections 11102 and 11123 of this title.''.
Section 11102 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(e) The Board may grant temporary relief under subsections (a) and (c) when the Board finds it necessary and appropriate to do so to remedy inadequate service.
The authority provided in this section is in addition to the authority of the Board to provide temporary relief under sections 10705 and 11123 of this title.''.
Section 11123 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(e) The authority provided in this section is in addition to the authority of the Board to provide temporary relief under sections 10705 and 11102 of this title.''.
HOUSEHOLD GOODS COLLECTIVE ACTIVITIES.
Section 13703(d) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``(other than an agreement affecting only the transportation of household goods, as defined on December 31, 1995)'' after ``agreement'' in the first sentence.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Surface Transportation Board $16,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $17,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, $17,555,000 for fiscal year 2001, and $18,129,000 for fiscal year 2002.
CHAIRMAN DESIGNATED WITH SENATE CONFIRMATION.
Section 701(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``President'' and inserting ``President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate,''.