This Act may be cited as the ``Patent Application Publication Act of 1994''.
PRIOR ART EFFECT OF PUBLISHED APPLICATIONS.
Section 102(e) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(e) the invention was described in-- ``(1) an application for patent, published under section 122(b), by another filed in the United States before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent; or ``(2) a patent granted on an application for patent by another filed in the United States before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent, or on an international application by another who has fulfilled the requirements of paragraphs (1), (2), and (4) of section 371(c) of this title before the invention thereof by applicant for patent, or''.
TIME FOR CLAIMING BENEFIT OF EARLIER FILING DATE.
In a Foreign Country.--The second paragraph of section 119 of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``No application for patent shall be entitled to this right of priority unless a claim therefor and a certified copy of the original foreign application, specification and drawings upon which it is based are filed in the Patent and Trademark Office at such time during the pendency of the application as required by the Commissioner.
The Commissioner may consider the failure of the applicant to file a timely claim for priority as a waiver of any such claim.
The certification of the original foreign application, specification and drawings shall be made by the patent office of the foreign country in which filed and show the date of the application and of the filing of the specification and other papers.
The Commissioner may require a translation of the papers filed if not in the English language and such other information as he deems necessary.
In the United States.--Section 120 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The Commissioner may determine the time period within which an amendment containing the specific reference to the earlier filed application shall be submitted.''.
In General.--Section 122 of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Confidential status of applications; publication of patent applications ``(a) Except as provided in subsection (b), applications for patents shall be kept in confidence by the Patent and Trademark Office and no information concerning the same given without authority of the applicant or owner unless necessary to carry out the provisions of any Act of Congress or in such special circumstances as may be determined by the Commissioner.
Each application for patent shall be published, in accordance with procedures as determined by the Commissioner, as soon as possible after the expiration of a period of 18 months from the earliest filing date for which a benefit is sought under this title, except that an application that is no longer pending shall not be published and an application subject to a secrecy order under section 181 of this title shall not be published.
An application not subject to a secrecy order under section 181 of this title may be published earlier than the expiration date described in the preceding sentence at the request of the applicant.
No information concerning published patent applications shall be made available to the public except as the Commissioner shall determine.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a determination by the Commissioner to release or not to release information concerning a published patent application shall be final and nonreviewable.''.
Cost Recovery for Publication.--The Commissioner shall recover the cost of early publication required by the amendment made under subsection (a) by adjusting the filing, issue and maintenance fees, by charging a separate publication fee, or by any combination of these methods.
Section 154 of title 35, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Every patent''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(b)(1) In addition to other rights provided by this section, a patent shall include the right to obtain a reasonable royalty from any person who, during the period from publication of the application for such patent under subsection 122(b) of this title until issue of that patent-- ``(A)(i) makes, uses, or sells in the United States the invention as claimed in the published patent application or imports such an invention into the United States; or ``(ii) if the invention as claimed in the published patent application is a process, uses or sells in the United States or imports into the United States products made by that process as claimed in the published patent application; and ``(B) had actual notice or knowledge of the published patent application.
The right to obtain a reasonable royalty shall not be available under this subsection unless the invention claimed in the patent is substantially identical to the invention as claimed in the published patent application.''.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Section 12 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``published applications and'' before ``patents''.
Section 13 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``published applications and'' before ``patents''.
The table of sections for chapter 11 of title 35, United States Code, is amended in the item relating to section 122 by inserting ``; publication of patent applications'' after ``applications''.
The table of sections for chapter 14 of title 35, United States Code, is amended in the item relating to section 154 by inserting ``; provisional rights'' after ``patent''.
Section 181 of title 35, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in the first paragraph-- (i) by inserting ``by the publication of an application or'' after ``disclosure''; and (ii) by inserting ``the publication of an application or'' after ``withhold''; (B) in the second paragraph by inserting ``by the publication of an application or'' after ``disclosure of an invention''; (C) in the third paragraph-- (i) by inserting ``by the publication of the application or'' after ``disclosure of the invention''; and (ii) by inserting ``the publication of the application or'' after ``withhold''; and (D) in the fourth paragraph of the first sentence by inserting ``the publication of an application or'' after ``kept secret and''.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), sections 2 through 6 shall take effect on January 1, 1996 and shall apply to all national applications filed in the United States on or after such date.
Provisional Rights.--The amendment made by section 5 of this Act shall only apply to applications subject to a term beginning on the date on which the patent issues and ending-- (1) 20 years after the date on which the application for patent was filed in the United States; or (2) if the application contains a specific reference to an earlier filed application or applications under sections 120, 121 or 365(c) of title 35, United States Code, 20 years after the date on which the earliest such application was filed.