This Act may be cited as the ``Independent Counsel Accountability and Reform Act of 1995''.
Section 599 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Reauthorization Act of 1994'' and inserting ``Accountability and Reform Act of 1995''.
BASIS FOR PRELIMINARY INVESTIGATION.
Initial Receipt of Information.--Section 591 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking ``information'' and inserting ``specific information from a credible source that is''; and (B) by striking ``may have'' and inserting ``has''; (2) in subsection (c)(1)-- (A) by striking ``information'' and inserting ``specific information from a credible source that is''; and (B) by striking ``may have'' and inserting ``has''; and (3) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows: ``(d) Time Period for Determining Need for Preliminary Investigation.--The Attorney General shall determine, under subsection (a) or (c) (or section 592(c)(2)), whether grounds to investigate exist not later than 15 days after the information is first received.
If within that 15-day period the Attorney General determines that there is insufficient evidence of a violation of Federal criminal law referred to in subsection (a), then the Attorney General shall close the matter.
If within that 15-day period the Attorney General determines there is sufficient evidence of such a violation, the Attorney General shall, upon making that determination, commence a preliminary investigation with respect to that information.
If the Attorney General is unable to determine, within that 15-day period, whether there is sufficient evidence of such a violation, the Attorney General shall, at the end of that 15-day period, commence a preliminary investigation with respect to that information.''.
Receipt of Additional Information.--Section 592(c)(2) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``information'' and inserting ``specific information from a credible source that is''.
PROSECUTORIAL JURISDICTION OF INDEPENDENT COUNSEL.
Prosecutorial Jurisdiction.--Section 593(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``define'' and inserting ``, with specificity, define''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``Such jurisdiction shall be limited to the alleged violations of criminal law with respect to which the Attorney General has requested the appointment of the independent counsel, and matters directly related to such criminal violations.
''; and (2) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows: ``(3) Scope of prosecutorial jurisdiction.--In defining the independent counsel's prosecutorial jurisdiction, the division of the court shall assure that the independent counsel has adequate authority to fully investigate and prosecute the alleged violations of criminal law with respect to which the Attorney General has requested the appointment of the independent counsel, and matters directly related to such criminal violations, including perjury, obstruction of justice, destruction of evidence, and intimidation of witnesses.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 592(d) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking ``subject matter and all matters related to that subject matter'' and inserting ``the alleged violations of criminal law with respect to which the application is made, and matters directly related to such criminal violations''.
AUTHORITIES AND DUTIES OF INDEPENDENT COUNSEL.
Office Space.--Section 594(l)(3) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Office space.--The Administrator of General Services shall promptly provide appropriate office space for each independent counsel.
Such office space shall be within a Federal building unless the Administrator of General Services determines that other arrangements would cost less.''.
Compliance With Policies of the Department of Justice.-- (1) Amendments.--Section 594(f) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by striking ``, except where not possible,'' and inserting ``at all times''; and (B) by striking ``enforcement of the criminal laws'' and inserting ``the enforcement of criminal laws and the release of information relating to criminal proceedings''.
Prior amendments.--The amendments made to section 594(f) of title 28, United States Code, by section 3(e) of the Independent Counsel Reauthorization Act of 1994 are repealed.
Limitation on Expenditures.--Section 594 of title 28, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n) Limitation on Expenditures.--No funds may be expended for the operation of any office of independent counsel after the end of the 2- year period after its establishment, except to the extent that an appropriations Act enacted after such establishment specifically makes available funds for such office for use after the end of that 2-year period.''.
REMOVAL, TERMINATION, AND PERIODIC REAPPOINTMENT OF INDEPENDENT COUNSEL.
Grounds for Removal.--Section 596(a)(1) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Failure of the independent counsel to comply with the established policies of the Department of Justice as required by section 594(f) or to comply with section 594(j) may be grounds for removing that independent counsel from office for good cause under this subsection.''.
Termination.--Section 596(b)(2) of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Termination by division of the court.--The division of the court may terminate an office of independent counsel at any time-- ``(A) on its own motion, ``(B) upon the request of the Attorney General, or ``(C) upon the petition of the subject of an investigation conducted by such independent counsel, if the petition is made more than 2 years after the appointment of such independent counsel, on the ground that the investigation conducted by the independent counsel has been completed or substantially completed and that it would be appropriate for the Department of Justice to complete such investigation or to conduct any prosecution brought pursuant to such investigation, or on the ground that continuation of the investigation or prosecution conducted by the independent counsel is not in the public interest.''.
Monthly Expenditures.-- (1) Amendment.--Section 596(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) On or before the end of each month, an independent counsel shall report to the committees listed in paragraph (2)(B) the amount expended in the previous month.''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1), shall take effect at the end of the 1st month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Periodic Reappointment.--Section 596 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Periodic Reappointment of Independent Counsel.--If an office of independent counsel has not terminated before-- ``(1) the date that is 2 years after the original appointment to that office, or ``(2) the end of each succeeding 2-year period, such counsel shall apply to the division of the court for reappointment.
The court shall first determine whether the office of that independent counsel should be terminated under subsection (b)(2).
If the court determines that such office will not be terminated under such subsection, the court shall reappoint the applicant if the court determines that such applicant remains the appropriate person to carry out the duties of the office.
If not, the court shall appoint some other person whom it considers qualified under the standards set forth in section 593 of this title.
If the court has not taken the actions required by this subsection within 90 days after the end of the applicable 2-year period, then that office of independent counsel shall terminate at the end of that 90-day period.''.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall submit to the Congress, not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, a report setting forth recommendations of ways to improve controls on costs of offices of independent counsel under chapter 40 of title 28, United States Code.