The Congress finds the following: (1) Natural catastrophic events in February 1998 created potentially dangerous fire and insect infestation conditions in areas of national forests and national grasslands in Texas.
On March 10, 1998, the Council on Environmental Quality waived certain requirements under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 to expedite the removal of ``dead, down, and severely root-sprung trees where mortality is expected'' in those areas, by approving alternative arrangements for that removal in accordance with part 1506.11 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations.
The Council on Environmental Quality, which is the Federal agency responsible for monitoring implementation of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, should be commended for approving those alternative arrangements, which help prevent the wildfires and insect and disease infestations often associated with dead and dying trees.
Numerous catastrophic forest conditions similar to, equal to, or worse than the conditions for which the Council on Environmental Quality approved the alternative arrangements exist on national forest and public domain lands throughout the nation.
Treatment equivalent to that provided under the alternative arrangements is warranted and needed on other national forest and public domain lands throughout the United States.
WAIVER OF NEPA REQUIREMENTS FOR TREATMENT OF DEAD, DOWNED, AND SEVERELY ROOT-SPRUNG TREES.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture may remove dead, downed, or severely root-sprung trees in areas described in subsection (b) in accordance with the alternative arrangements approved by the Council on Environmental Quality for National Forests and Grasslands in Texas, as set forth in a letter from the Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality to the Deputy Chief of the National Forest System dated March 10, 1998.
Areas Described.--The areas referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (1) Approximately 20,000 acres of blowdown forest in the Routt National Forest, Colorado.
Approximately 700 acres of blowdown forest in the Rio Grande National Forest, Colorado.
Approximately 50,000 acres of bark beetle infested forest in the Dixie National Forest, Utah.
Approximately 25,000 acres of insect and fuel-loading conditions on National Forest System lands in the Tahoe Basin, California.
Approximately 28,000 acres of fire-damaged, dead, and dying trees in the Malheur National Forest, Oregon.
Approximately 10,000 acres of gypsy moth infestation in the Allegheny National Forest, Pennsylvania.
Approximately 5,000 acres of severely ice damaged forests in the White Mountain National Forest, New Hampshire, and the Green Mountain National Forest, Vermont.
Approximately 10,000 acres of severe Mountain pine beetle damaged forests in the Panhandle National Forest, Nezperce National Forest, and Boise National Forest, Idaho.
Approximately 10,000 acres of severely ice damaged forests in the Daniel Boone National Forest, Kentucky.
Approximately 15,000 acres of fire-damaged, dead, and dying trees in the Osceola National Forest and Apalachica National Forest, Florida.
Other Forests.-- (1) Requirement to request alternative arrangements.--The Secretary of Agriculture or the Secretary of the Interior, respectively, shall promptly request the Council on Environmental Quality to approve alternative arrangements under part 1506.11 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, authorizing removal of dead, downed, or severely root-sprung trees on any national forest or public domain lands where premature mortality is expected as a result of catastrophic forest conditions.
Consideration of requests.--Upon receipt of a request under paragraph (1), the Council on Environmental Quality shall promptly consider and approve or disapprove the request.
Regulations.--The Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality shall, by not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, issue regulations-- (A) governing the approval of alternative arrangements under part 1506.11 of title 40, Code of Federal Regulations, pursuant to requests under paragraph (1); and (B) establishing criteria under which those requests will be considered and approved or disapproved.