This Act may be cited as the ``Bramwell National Historical Park Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that: (1) The coal mining heritage of southern West Virginia is of national historical and cultural significance.
The Town of Bramwell, West Virginia, possesses remarkable and outstanding historical, cultural, and architectural values relating to the coal mining heritage of southern West Virginia.
It is in the national interest to preserve the unique character of the Town of Bramwell, West Virginia, and to enhance the historical, cultural, and architectural values associated with its coal mining heritage.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide for the preservation, restoration, and interpretation of the historical, cultural, and architectural values of the Town of Bramwell, West Virginia, for the educational and inspirational benefit of present and future generations.
In General.--In order to preserve, restore, and interpret the unique historical, cultural, and architectural values of Bramwell, West Virginia, there is hereby established the Bramwell National Historical Park (hereinafter referred to as the ``Park'').
Area Included.--The Park shall consist of the lands and interests in lands within the corporate boundary of the Town of Bramwell.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the Park in accordance with this Act and with the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the national park system, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 461-467).
Donations.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may accept and retain donations of funds, property, or services from individuals, foundations, corporations, or public entities for the purpose of providing services and facilities which he deems consistent with the purposes of the Act.
Cooperative Agreements.--In administering the Park, the Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the State of West Virginia, or any political subdivision thereof, for carrying out the purposes of this Act.
General Authority.--The Secretary may acquire land or interests in land within the boundaries of the Park only by donation, exchange, or purchase from willing sellers with donated or appropriated funds.
State Lands.--Lands or interest in lands, within the boundaries of the Park which are owned by the State of West Virginia or any political subdivision thereof, may be acquired only by donation.
The Secretary is authorized to enter into cooperative agreements with the owners of properties of historical or cultural significance within the Park pursuant to which the Secretary may mark, interpret, restore, and provide technical assistance for the preservation and interpretation of such properties.
Nothing in this Act may be construed as authorizing the Secretary to have access to private residential property within the Park for the purpose of conducting visitors through such property, or for any other purpose, without the advice and consent of the owner of such property.
In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the committee referred to in section 9, shall prepare a plan for the restoration, preservation, interpretation, and development of the historical, cultural, and architectural resources of the Park.
Restoration Measures.--The plan referred to in this section shall provide for such measures as may be deemed appropriate for the restoration of public areas within the Park, including but not limited to each of the following: (1) The restoration of a brick surface to such segments of North River Street, Main Street, Rose Street, South River Street, and Bloch Street as deemed necessary to restore the historical and architectural character of the Park.
Measures to mitigate the visual impact of public utility facilities such as phone and electrical lines on the historical and architectural character of the Park.
Development Measures.--The plan referred to in this section shall provide for such measures as may be deemed appropriate for the development of public areas within the Park, including but not limited to each of the following: (1) The reconstruction of the Bramwell Railroad Depot.
The restoration of an edifice or edifices suitable to provide for the interpretation and visitor appreciation of the historical, cultural, and architectural features of the Park.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the Bramwell National Historical Park Advisory Committee (hereinafter in this Act referred to as ``Advisory Committee'').
The Advisory Committee shall be composed of thirteen members appointed by the Secretary to serve for terms of two years, except for the Governor of the State of West Virginia and the Mayor of the Town of Bramwell who shall serve without limitation of terms.
Any member of the Advisory Committee may serve after the expiration of his term until a successor is appointed.
Any member of the Advisory Committee may be appointed to serve more than one term.
The Secretary or his designee shall serve as Chairman.
Management and Development Issues.--The Secretary, or his designees, shall meet on a regular basis and consult with the Advisory Committee on matters relating to the development of a management plan for the Park and on the implementation of such plan.
Expenses.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall serve without compensation as such, but the Secretary may pay expenses reasonably incurred in carrying out their responsibilities under this Act on vouchers signed by the Chairman.
Membership.--The Secretary shall appoint members to the Advisory Committee as follows: (1) the Governor of the State of West Virginia or his delegate; (2) one member to represent the West Virginia Division of Culture and History to be appointed from among persons nominated by the Governor of the State of West Virginia; (3) the Mayor of the Town of Bramwell; (4) one member to represent the Mercer County Commission; (5) one member to represent the Mercer County Historical Society; (6) two members to represent the Bramwell Historic Landmark Commission; (7) two members to represent the Bramwell Millionaire Garden Club; (8) one member to represent the West Virginia Preservation Alliance, Inc.; (9) one member to represent Coalways, Inc.; (10) one member to represent the West Virginia Association of Museums; and (11) one member to represent the Pinnacle Rock State Park Foundation, Inc. (e) Termination; Charter.--The Advisory Committee shall terminate on the date ten years after the enactment of this Act notwithstanding the Federal Advisory Committee Act (Act of October 6, 1972; 86 United States Statutes at Large 776).
The provisions of section 14(b) of such Act (relating to the charter of the Committee) are hereby waived with respect to this Advisory Committee.
There is hereby authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.