DEMONSTRATION PROJECT FOR MEDICAL ADULT DAY CARE SERVICES.
Establishment.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish a demonstration project (in this section referred to as the ``demonstration project'') under which the Secretary shall, as part of a plan of an episode of care for home health services established for a medicare beneficiary, permit a home health agency, directly or under arrangements with a medical adult day care facility, to provide medical adult day care services as a substitute for a portion of home health services that would otherwise be provided in the beneficiary's home.
Payment.-- (1) In general.--The amount of payment for an episode of care for home health services, a portion of which consists of substitute medical adult day care services, under the demonstration project shall be made at a rate equal to 95 percent of the amount that would otherwise apply for such home health services under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
In no case may a home health agency, or a medical adult day care facility under arrangements with a home health agency, separately charge a beneficiary for medical adult day care services furnished under the plan of care.
Budget neutrality for demonstration project.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall provide for an appropriate reduction in the aggregate amount of additional payments made under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) to reflect any increase in amounts expended from the Trust Funds as a result of the demonstration project conducted under this section.
Demonstration Project Sites.--The project established under this section shall be conducted in not more than 5 States selected by the Secretary that license or certify providers of services that furnish medical adult day care services.
Duration.--The Secretary shall conduct the demonstration project for a period of 3 years.
Voluntary Participation.--Participation of medicare beneficiaries in the demonstration project shall be voluntary.
The total number of such beneficiaries that may participate in the project at any given time may not exceed 15,000.
Preference in Selecting Agencies.--In selecting home health agencies to participate under the demonstration project, the Secretary shall give preference to those agencies that are currently licensed or certified through common ownership and control to furnish medical adult day care services.
Waiver Authority.--The Secretary may waive such requirements of title XVIII of the Social Security Act as may be necessary for the purposes of carrying out the demonstration project, other than waiving the requirement that an individual be homebound in order to be eligible for benefits for home health services.
Evaluation and Report.--The Secretary shall conduct an evaluation of the clinical and cost effectiveness of the demonstration project.
Not later 30 months after the commencement of the project, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the evaluation, and shall include in the report the following: (1) An analysis of the patient outcomes and costs of furnishing care to the medicare beneficiaries participating in the project as compared to such outcomes and costs to beneficiaries receiving only home health services for the same health conditions.
Such recommendations regarding the extension, expansion, or termination of the project as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Home health agency.--The term ``home health agency'' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(o) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(o)).
Medical adult day care facility.--The term ``medical adult day care facility'' means a facility that-- (A) has been licensed or certified by a State to furnish medical adult day care services in the State for a continuous 2-year period; (B) is engaged in providing skilled nursing services and other therapeutic services directly or under arrangement with a home health agency; (C) meets such standards established by the Secretary to assure quality of care and such other requirements as the Secretary finds necessary in the interest of the health and safety of individuals who are furnished services in the facility; and (D) provides medical adult day care services.
Medical adult day care services.--The term ``medical adult day care services'' means-- (A) home health service items and services described in paragraphs (1) through (7) of section 1861(m) furnished in a medical adult day care facility; (B) a program of supervised activities furnished in a group setting in the facility that-- (i) is designed to promote physical and mental health of the individuals; and (ii) meet such criteria as the Secretary determines appropriate; and (C) such other services as the Secretary may specify.
Medicare beneficiary.--The term ``medicare beneficiary'' means an individual entitled to benefits under part A of this title, enrolled under part B of this title, or both.