EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM TO ASSIST DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES.
Section 629 of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5197h) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM TO ASSIST DISADVANTAGED COMMUNITIES.
In General.--The Director shall establish an emergency preparedness demonstration program to research and promote the capacity of disadvantaged communities to carry out programs to provide data, information, and awareness education by providing grants to or executing contracts or cooperative agreements with eligible nonprofit organizations to establish and conduct such programs.
Activities Supported.--An eligible nonprofit organization may use a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement awarded under this section-- ``(1) to conduct research into the status of emergency preparedness and disaster response awareness in households of disadvantaged individuals located in urban and rural communities, particularly in those States and regions most impacted by natural and manmade disasters and emergencies; and ``(2) to develop and promote awareness of emergency preparedness education programs within disadvantaged communities, including development and preparation of culturally competent educational and awareness materials that can be used to disseminate information to organizations and institutions serving disadvantaged individuals.
Eligible Organizations.--An organization shall be eligible to be awarded a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under this section with respect to a program if the organization is a nonprofit organization that is described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 501(c)(3)) and exempt from tax under section 501(a) of such Code, whose primary mission is to provide services to disadvantaged communities, and that can demonstrate a partnership with a disadvantaged business enterprise, including enterprises located in a HUBZone, with respect to the program.
Use of Funds.--A recipient of a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement awarded under this section may only use the proceeds of the grant, contract, or agreement to-- ``(1) acquire expert professional services necessary to conduct research in disadvantaged communities, including African American and Hispanic communities; ``(2) develop and prepare informational materials to promote awareness among disadvantaged communities about emergency preparedness and how to protect their households and communities in advance of disasters; ``(3) establish consortia with national organizations serving disadvantaged individuals, institutions of higher education serving disadvantaged individuals, and faith-based institutions to disseminate information about emergency preparedness to disadvantaged communities; and ``(4) implement a joint project with an institution serving disadvantaged individuals, including a part B institution (as defined in section 322(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1061(2))), an institution described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of section 326(e)(1) of that Act (20 United States Code 1063b(e)(1)(A), (B), or (C)), and a Hispanic-serving institution (as defined in section 502(a)(5) of that Act (20 United States Code 1101a(a)(5))).
Application and Review Procedure.--To be eligible to receive a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under this section, an organization must submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may reasonably require.
The Director shall establish a procedure by which to accept such applications.
Definitions.--In this section, the following definitions apply: ``(1) Disadvantaged business enterprise.--The term `disadvantaged business enterprise' means a business enterprise owned and controlled by disadvantaged individuals.
Disadvantaged community.--The term `disadvantaged community' means a community predominately populated by disadvantaged individuals.
Disadvantaged individual.--The term `disadvantaged individual' means a socially or economically disadvantaged individual as defined by section 8(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(a)).
HUBZone.--The term `HUBZone' has the meaning given such term in section 3(p) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(p)).
Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
Such sums shall remain available until expended.