SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Community Protection and Hazardous Fuels Reduction Act of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--MANAGEMENT OF WILDLAND/URBAN INTERFACE AREAS Sec.
Identification of wildland/urban interface areas.
Contracting to reduce hazardous fuels and undertake forest management projects in wildland/urban interface areas.
TITLE II--FIRE DANGER REDUCTION BY REMOVAL OF GRASSES AND FORBS Sec.
Removal of excess levels of grasses and forbs.
TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Sec.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Management of Federal lands has been characterized by large cyclical variations in fire suppression policies, timber harvesting levels, and the attention paid to commodity and noncommodity values.
Forests on Federal lands are experiencing significant disease epidemics and insect infestations.
The combination of inconsistent management and natural effects has resulted in a hazardous fuels buildup on Federal lands that threatens catastrophic wildfire.
While the long-term effect of catastrophic wildfire on forests and forest systems is a matter of debate, there should be no question that catastrophic wildfire must be prevented in areas of the Federal lands where wildlands abut, or are located in close proximity to, communities, residences, and other private and public facilities on non-Federal lands.
Wildfire resulting from hazardous fuels buildup in such wildland/urban interface areas threatens the destruction of communities, puts human life and property at risk, threatens community water supplies with erosion that follows wildfire, destroys wildlife habitat, and damages ambient air quality.
The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior must assign a high priority and undertake aggressive management to achieve the elimination of hazardous fuel buildup and reduction of the risk of wildfire to the wildland/urban interface areas on Federal lands.
Protection of human life and property, including water supplies and ambient air quality, must be given the highest priority.
The noncommodity resources, including riparian zones and wildlife habitats, in wildland/urban interface areas on Federal lands which must be protected to provide recreational opportunities, clean water, and other amenities to neighboring communities and the public suffer from a backlog of unfunded forest management projects designed to provide such protection.
In a period of fiscal austerity characterized by shrinking budgets and personnel levels, Congress must provide the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior with innovative tools to accomplish the required reduction in hazardous fuels buildup and undertake other forest management projects in the wildland/urban interface areas on the Federal lands at least cost.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide new authority and innovative tools to the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior to safeguard communities, lives, and property by reducing or eliminating the threat of catastrophic wildfire, and to undertake needed forest management projects, in wildland/urban interface areas on Federal lands.
As used in this Act: (1) Federal lands.--The term ``Federal lands'' means-- (A) federally managed lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management under the Secretary of the Interior; and (B) federally managed lands administered by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Forest management project.--The term ``forest management project'' means a project, including riparian zone enhancement, habitat improvement, forage removal by livestock grazing or mechanical means, and soil stabilization or other water quality improvement project, designed to protect one or more noncommodity resources on or in close proximity to Federal lands.
Land management plan.--The term ``land management plan'' means the following: (A) With respect to Federal lands described in paragraph (1)(A), a land use plan prepared by the Bureau of Land Management pursuant to section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1712), or other multiple-use plan currently in effect.
With respect to Federal lands described in paragraph (1)(B), a land and resource management plan (or if no final plan is in effect, a draft land and resource management plan) prepared by the Forest Service pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604).
Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' means-- (A) with respect to the Federal lands described in paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary of the Interior; and (B) with respect to the Federal lands described in paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary of Agriculture.
Wildland/urban interface area.--The term ``wildland/ urban interface area'' means an area of Federal land in close proximity to communities and human habitations, such as homes, cabins, and other property.
Congressional committees.--The term ``congressional committees'' means the Committee on Resources and the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.
Hazardous fuels buildup.--The term ``hazardous fuels buildup'' means an accumulation of forage, woody debris, and predominantly dead and dying timber that has the likelihood of igniting.
TITLE I--MANAGEMENT OF WILDLAND/URBAN INTERFACE AREAS SEC.
IDENTIFICATION OF WILDLAND/URBAN INTERFACE AREAS.
Annual Identification.--On or before September 30 of each year, each District Manager of the Bureau of Land Management and each Forest Supervisor of the Forest Service shall identify those areas on Federal lands within the jurisdiction of the District Manager or Forest Supervisor that the District Manager or Forest Supervisor determines-- (1) meet the definition of wildland/urban interface areas; and (2) have hazardous fuels buildups and other forest management needs that warrant the use of forest management projects as provided in section 102.
Treatment of Identification Process.--The identification of wildland/urban interface areas under subsection (a) that have hazardous fuels buildups and other forest management needs that warrant the use of forest management projects as provided in section 102 shall not be considered to be agency action for purposes of paragraph (2)(A) or (2)(E) of section 102 of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4332).
CONTRACTING TO REDUCE HAZARDOUS FUELS AND UNDERTAKE FOREST MANAGEMENT PROJECTS IN WILDLAND/URBAN INTERFACE AREAS.
Contracting Authority.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary concerned is authorized to enter into contracts under this section for the sale of forest products in a wildland/urban interface area identified under section 101 for the purpose of reducing hazardous fuels buildups in the area.
Inclusion of forest management projects.--Subject to paragraph (3), the Secretary concerned may require, as a condition of any sale of forest products referred to in paragraph (1), that the purchaser of such products undertake one or more forest management projects in the wildland/urban interface area.
Conditions on inclusion.--The Secretary concerned may include a forest management project as a condition in a contract for the sale of forest products referred to in paragraph (1) only when the Secretary determines that-- (A) the forest management project is consistent with the applicable land management plan; and (B) the objectives of the forest management project can be accomplished most cost efficiently and effectively when the project is performed as part of the sale contract.
Financing and Supplemental Funding.-- (1) Forest management credits.--The financing of a forest management project required as a condition of a contract for a sale authorized by subsection (a) shall be accomplished through the inclusion in the contract of a provision for amortization of the cost of the forest management project through the issuance of forest management credits to the purchaser.
Such forest management credits shall offset the cost of the required forest management project against the purchaser's payment for forest products.
Use of appropriated funds.--The Secretary concerned may use appropriated funds to assist the purchaser to undertake a forest management project required as a condition of a contract authorized by subsection (a) if such funds are provided from the resource function or functions that directly benefit from the performance of the project and are available from the annual appropriation for such function or functions during the fiscal year in which the sale is offered.
The amount of assistance to be provided for each forest management project shall be included in the prospectus, and published in the advertisement, for the sale.
Determination of Forest Management Credits.--Prior to the advertisement of a sale authorized by subsection (a), the Secretary concerned shall determine the amount of forest management credits to be allocated to each forest management project to be required as a condition of the sale contract.
A description of the forest management project, and the amount of the forest management credits allocated to the project, shall be included in the prospectus, and published in the advertisement, for the sale.
Transfer of Forest Management Credits.--The Secretary concerned may permit a purchaser that holds forest management credits earned by the purchaser as part of a sale authorized by subsection (a), but not used in connection with that sale, to transfer the forest management credits to another sale authorized by subsection (a) if-- (1) the subsequent sale is also purchased by that purchaser; and (2) the sale parcel is located on Federal lands under that Secretary's jurisdiction.
Treatment of Forest Management Credits as Moneys Received.-- (1) Bureau of land management lands.--In the case of Federal lands described in section 3(1)(A), all amounts earned by or allowed to any purchaser of a sale authorized by subsection (a) in the form of forest management credits shall be considered to be money received for purposes of title II of the Act of August 28, 1937 (50 United States Statutes at Large 875; 43 United States Code 1181f), the first section of the Act of May 24, 1939 (53 United States Statutes at Large 753; 43 United States Code 1181f-1), or other applicable law concerning the distribution of receipts from the sale of forest products on such lands.
Forest system lands.--In the case of Federal lands described in section 3(1)(B), all amounts earned by or allowed to any purchaser of a sale authorized by subsection (a) in the form of forest management credits shall be considered to be money received for purposes of the sixth paragraph under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE'' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (35 United States Statutes at Large 260; 16 United States Code 500) and section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (36 United States Statutes at Large 963; commonly known as the Weeks Act; 16 United States Code 500).
Cost Considerations.--Because of the strong concern for the safety of human life and property and the protection of water quality, air quality, and wildlife habitat, a sale authorized by subsection (a) shall not be precluded because the costs of the sale may exceed the revenues derived from the sale, nor shall such sales be considered in any calculations concerning the revenue effects of the forest products sales program for the Federal lands or units of the Federal lands.
Other Requirements.--Nothing in this title shall be construed to require or authorize any alteration in the procedures or requirements for sales of forest products otherwise authorized by law, including the applicable provisions of the small business set-aside program.
The Secretary concerned shall monitor the preparation and offering of contracts, and the performance of forest management projects, pursuant to section 102 to determine the effectiveness of such contracts and forest management projects in achieving the purpose of this Act.
Annual Report.--Not later than 90 days after the end of each full fiscal year in which contracts are entered into under section 102, the Secretary concerned shall submit to the congressional committees a report, which shall provide for the Federal lands within the jurisdiction of the Secretary concerned the following: (1) A list of the wildland/urban interface areas identified on or before September 30 of the previous fiscal year pursuant to section 101.
A summary of all contracts entered into, and all forest management projects performed, pursuant to section 102 during the preceding fiscal year; (3) A discussion of any delays in excess of three months encountered during the preceding fiscal year, and likely to occur in the fiscal year in which the report is submitted, in preparing and offering the sales, and in performing the forest management projects, pursuant to section 102.
The results of the monitoring required by section 103 of the contracts authorized, and the forest management projects performed, pursuant to section 102.
Any anticipated problems in the implementation of this title.
Four Year Report.--The fourth report prepared by the Secretary concerned under subsection (a) shall contain, in addition to the matters required by subsection (a), the following: (1) An assessment by the Secretary concerned regarding whether the contracting authority provided in section 102 should be reauthorized beyond the period specified in section 105(a).
If reauthorization is warranted, such recommendations as the Secretary concerned considers appropriate regarding changes in such authority to better achieve the purpose of this Act.
Termination Date.--The authority of the Secretary concerned to offer sales of forest products pursuant to section 102, and to require the purchasers of such products to undertake forest management projects as a condition of such sales, shall terminate at the end of the five- fiscal year beginning on the first October 1st occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Effect on Existing Sales.--Any contract for a sale of forest products pursuant to section 102 entered into before the end of the period specified in subsection (a), and still in effect at the end of such period, shall remain in effect after the end of such period pursuant to the terms of the contract.
Effect on Existing Forest Management Credits.--If any forest management credits from a sale of forest products pursuant to section 102 are not used before the end of the period specified in subsection (a), and no law providing authority to offer sales pursuant to section 102 after such period is enacted by Congress, such credits may be used after such period in any sale of forest products that is authorized by another law, is purchased by the purchaser of the sale in which the credits were earned, and is conducted by the Secretary concerned who had jurisdiction over the sale in which the credits were earned.
TITLE II--FIRE DANGER REDUCTION BY REMOVAL OF GRASSES AND FORBS SEC.
REMOVAL OF EXCESS LEVELS OF GRASSES AND FORBS.
Contracting Authority.--Whenever a county commission or other unit of local government certifies to the Secretary concerned that there is a danger of fire in a wildland/urban interface area as a result of excessive levels of grasses and forbs on Federal lands in the area and requests the removal of the excessive grasses and forbs, the Secretary is authorized and encouraged to enter into contracts with livestock operators or other parties for the removal of the excessive grasses and forbs.
Removal Methods.--In the case of a contract under subsection (a) with a livestock operator, the operator shall use grazing to remove the excessive grasses and forbs.
In the case of contracts with other persons, mechanical means, such as discing or mechanical mowing, shall be used.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.
TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS SEC.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary concerned shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary and appropriate to implement this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated for each of the first five fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.