This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Cybersecurity Workforce Assessment Act''.
In this Act: (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs of the Senate; (B) the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives; and (C) the Committee on House Administration of the House of Representatives.
Cybersecurity work category; data element code; specialty area.--The terms ``Cybersecurity Work Category'', ``Data Element Code'', and ``Specialty Area'' have the meanings given such terms in the Office of Personnel Management's Guide to Data Standards.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office of Personnel Management.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Homeland Security.
NATIONAL CYBERSECURITY WORKFORCE MEASUREMENT INITIATIVE.
In General.--The head of each Federal agency shall-- (1) identify all cybersecurity workforce positions within the agency; (2) determine the primary Cybersecurity Work Category and Specialty Area of such positions; and (3) assign the corresponding Data Element Code, as set forth in the Office of Personnel Management's Guide to Data Standards which is aligned with the National Initiative for Cybersecurity Education's National Cybersecurity Workforce Framework report, in accordance with subsection (b).
Employment Codes.-- (1) Procedures.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the head of each Federal agency shall establish procedures-- (A) to identify open positions that include cybersecurity functions (as defined in the OPM Guide to Data Standards); and (B) to assign the appropriate employment code to each such position, using agreed standards and definitions.
Code assignments.--Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the head of each Federal agency shall assign the appropriate employment code to-- (A) each employee within the agency who carries out cybersecurity functions; and (B) each open position within the agency that has been identified as having cybersecurity functions.
Progress Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit a progress report on the implementation of this section to the appropriate congressional committees.
IDENTIFICATION OF CYBERSECURITY WORK CATEGORY AND SPECIALTY AREAS OF CRITICAL NEED.
In General.--Beginning not later than 1 year after the date on which the employment codes are assigned to employees pursuant to section 3(b)(2), and annually through 2021, the head of each Federal agency, in consultation with the Director and the Secretary, shall-- (1) identify Cybersecurity Work Categories and Specialty Areas of critical need in the agency's cybersecurity workforce; and (2) submit a report to the Director that-- (A) describes the Cybersecurity Work Categories and Specialty Areas identified under paragraph (1); and (B) substantiates the critical need designations.
Guidance.--The Director shall provide Federal agencies with timely guidance for identifying Cybersecurity Work Categories and Specialty Areas of critical need, including-- (1) current Cybersecurity Work Categories and Specialty Areas with acute skill shortages; and (2) Cybersecurity Work Categories and Specialty Areas with emerging skill shortages.
Cybersecurity Critical Needs Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director, in consultation with the Secretary, shall-- (1) identify Specialty Areas of critical need for cybersecurity workforce across all Federal agencies; and (2) submit a progress report on the implementation of this section to the appropriate congressional committees.
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTABILITY OFFICE STATUS REPORTS.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall-- (1) analyze and monitor the implementation of sections 3 and 4; and (2) not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, submit a report to the appropriate congressional committees that describes the status of such implementation.