The Congress finds that-- (1) the Presidio, located amidst the incomparable scenic splendor of the Golden Gate, is one of America's great natural and historic sites; (2) the Presidio is the oldest continuously operating military post in the Nation dating from 1776, and was designated as National Historic Landmark in 1962; (3) preservation of the cultural and historic integrity of the Presidio for public use recognizes its significant role in the history of the United States; (4) the Presidio, in its entirety, is a part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area, in accordance with Public Law 92-589; (5) as part of the Golden Gate National Recreation Area, the Presidio's outstanding natural, historic, scenic, cultural, and recreational resources must be managed in a manner which is consistent with sound principles of land use planning and management, and which protects the Presidio from development and uses which would destroy the scenic beauty and historic and natural character of the area; and (6) the Presidio will be managed through an innovative public/private partnership that minimizes cost to the United States Treasury and makes efficient use of private sector resources that could be utilized in the public interest.
The Secretary of the Interior (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') is authorized to negotiate and enter into leases, at fair market rental and without regard to section 321 of chapter 314 of the Act of June 30, 1932 (40 United States Code 303b), for all or part of the Presidio of San Francisco that is under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary until such time as the property concerned is transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of the Presidio Trust.
Notwithstanding sections 1341 and 3302 of title 31 of the United States Code, the proceeds from any such lease shall be retained by the Secretary and used for the preservation, restoration, operation and maintenance, improvement, repair and related expenses incurred with respect to Presidio properties.
For purposes of any such lease, the Secretary may adjust the rental by taking into account any amounts to be expended by the lessee for preservation, maintenance, restoration, improvement, repair and related expenses with respect to properties within the Presidio.
Establishment.--There is established a body corporate within the Department of the Interior to be known as the Presidio Trust (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Trust'').
Transfer.--(1) The Secretary shall transfer to the administrative jurisdiction of the Trust those areas commonly known as the Letterman/LAIR complex, Fort Scott, Main Post, Cavalry Stables, Presidio Hill, Wherry Housing, East Housing, the structures at Crissy Field, roads, utilities or other infrastructure servicing the properties and such other properties that the Secretary deems appropriate, as depicted on the map referred to in this subsection.
The Trust and the Secretary shall agree on the use and occupancy of buildings and facilities necessary to house and support activities of the National Park Service at the Presidio.
Within 60 days after enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prepare a map identifying properties to be conveyed to the Trust.
The transfer for administrative jurisdiction shall occur within 60 days after appointments are made to the board of Directors.
The Secretary shall transfer, with the transfer of administrative jurisdiction over any property, all leases, concessions, licenses, permits, programmatic agreements and other agreements affecting such property and any revenues and unobligated funds associated with such leases, concessions, licenses, permits, and agreements.
Board of Directors.-- (1) In general.--The powers and management of the Trust shall be vested in a Board of Directors consisting of the following 5 members: (A) The Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary's designee.
4 individuals, who are not employees of the Federal Government, appointed by the President, who shall possess extensive knowledge and experience in one or more of the fields of city planning, finance, and real estate.
At least 3 of these individuals shall reside in the region in which the Presidio is located.
Terms.--The President shall make the appointments referred to in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) within 90 days and in such a manner as to ensure staggered 4-year terms.
Any vacancy under subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made, and any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed.
No appointed director may serve more than 8 years in consecutive terms.
No member of the Board of Directors may have a financial interest in any tenant of the Presidio.
Organization and compensation.--The Board shall organize itself in such a manner as it deems most appropriate to effectively carry out the authorized activities of the Trust.
Board members shall serve without pay, but may be reimbursed for the actual and necessary travel and subsistence expenses incurred by them in the performance of the duties of the Trust.
Liability of directors.--Members of the Board of Directors shall not be considered Federal employees by virtue of their membership on the Board, except for purposes of the Federal Tort Claims Act.
Public liaison.--The Board shall establish procedures whereby liaison with the public, through the Golden Gate National Recreation Area Advisory Commission, and the National Park Service, shall be maintained.
Duties and Authorities.--In accordance with the purposes set forth in this Act and in section 1 of the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the Golden Gate National Recreation Area in the State of California, and for other purposes'', approved October 27, 1972 (Public Law 92-589; 86 United States Statutes at Large 1299; 16 United States Code 460bb), the Trust shall manage the leasing, maintenance, rehabilitation, repair and improvement of property within the Presidio which is under its administrative jurisdiction.
The Trust may participate in the development of programs and activities at the properties that have been transferred to the Trust.
In exercising its powers and duties, the Trust shall act in accordance with both the approved General Management Plan, as amended, for the Presidio (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Plan'') and shall have the following authorities: (1) The Trust is authorized to manage, lease, maintain, rehabilitate and improve, either directly or by agreement, those properties within the Presidio which are transferred to the Trust by the Secretary.
(A) The Trust is authorized to negotiate and enter into such agreements, leases, contracts and other arrangements with any person, firm, association, organization, corporation or governmental entity, including without limitation entities of Federal, State and local governments (except any agreement to convey fee title to any property located at the Presidio) as are necessary and appropriate to finance and carry out its authorized activities.
Agreements under this paragraph may be entered into without regard to section 321 of the Act of June 30, 1992 (40 United States Code 303b).
Except as provided in subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E), Federal laws and regulations governing procurement by Federal agencies shall apply to the Trust.
The Secretary may authorize the Trust, in exercising authority under section 303(g) of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 253(g)) relating to simplified purchase procedures, to use as the dollar limit of each purchase or contract under this subsection an amount which does not exceed $500,000.
The Secretary may authorize the Trust, in carrying out the requirement of section 18 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416) to furnish the Secretary of Commerce for publication notices of proposed procurement actions, to use as the applicable dollar threshold for each expected procurement an amount which does not exceed $1,000,000.
The Trust shall establish procedures for lease agreements and other agreements for use and occupancy of Presidio facilities, including a requirement that in entering into such agreements the Trust shall obtain such competition as is practicable in the circumstances.
The Trust is authorized to appoint and fix the compensation and duties of an executive director and such other officers and employees as it deems necessary without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may pay them without regard to the provisions of chapter 51, and subchapter III of chapter 53, title 5, United States Code (relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates).
To augment or encourage the use of non-Federal funds to finance capital improvements on Presidio properties transferred to its jurisdiction, the Trust, in addition to its other authorities, shall have the following authorities: (A) The authority to guarantee any lender against loss of principle or interest on any construction loan, provided that (i) the terms of the guarantee are approved by the Secretary of the Treasury, (ii) adequate guarantee authority is provided in appropriations Acts, and (iii) such guarantees are structured so as to minimize potential cost to the Federal Government.
The authority, subject to available appropriations, to make loans to the occupants of property managed by the Trust for the preservation, restoration, maintenance, or repair of such property.
The authority to issue obligations to the Secretary of the Treasury, but only if the Secretary of the Treasury agrees to purchase such obligations after determining that the projects to be funded from the proceeds thereof are credit worthy and that a repayment schedule is established.
The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to use as a public debt transaction the proceeds from the sale of any securities issued under chapter 31 of title 31, United States Code, and the purposes for which securities may be issued under such chapter are extended to include any purchase of such notes or obligations acquired by the Secretary of the Treasury under this subsection.
The aggregate amount of obligations issued under this subparagraph which are outstanding at any one time may not exceed $150,000,000.
Obligations issued under this subparagraph shall be in such forms and denominations, bearing such maturities, and subject to such terms and conditions, as may be prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury, and shall bear interest at a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, taking into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States of comparable maturities.
No funds appropriated to the Trust may be used for repayment of principle or interest on, or redemption of, obligations issued under this paragraph.
All obligations purchased under authority of this subparagraph must be authorized in advance in appropriations Acts.
The Trust shall be deemed to be a public agency for the purpose of entering into joint exercise of powers agreements pursuant to California government code section 6500 and following.
The Trust may solicit and accept donations of funds, property, supplies, or services from individuals, foundations, corporations and other private or public entities for the purpose of carrying out its duties.
The Trust shall maintain philanthropic liaison with the Golden Gate National Park Association, the fund raising association for the Golden Gate National Recreation Area.
All proceeds received by the Trust shall be retained by the Trust without further appropriation and used to offset the costs of administration, preservation, restoration, operation, maintenance, repair and related expenses incurred by the Trust with respect to such properties under its jurisdiction.
Upon the request of the Trust, the Secretary of the Treasury shall invest excess moneys of the Trust in public debt securities with maturities suitable to the needs of the Trust.
The Trust may sue and be sued in its own name to the same extent as the Federal Government.
Litigation arising out of the activities of the Trust shall be conducted by the Attorney General, as needed; the Trust may retain private attorneys to provide advice and counsel.
The Trust shall have all necessary and proper powers for the exercise of the authorities invested in it.
For the purpose of compliance with applicable laws and regulations concerning properties transferred to the Trust by the Secretary, the Trust shall negotiate directly with regulatory authorities.
Insurance.--The Trust shall procure insurance against any loss in connection with the properties managed by it or its authorized activities as is reasonable and customary.
Building Code Compliance.--The Trust shall ensure that all properties under its jurisdiction are brought into compliance with all applicable Federal building codes and regulations within 10 years after the enactment of this Act.
Taxes.--The Trust shall be exempt from all taxes and special assessments of every kind in the State of California, and its political subdivisions, including the city and county of San Francisco to the same extent as the Secretary.
Financial Information and Report.--(1) Financial statements of the Trust shall be audited annually in accordance with section 9105 of title 31 of the United States Code.
At the end of each calendar year, the Trust shall submit to the Secretary and the Congress a comprehensive and detailed report of its operations, activities, and accomplishments for the prior fiscal year.
The report also shall include a section that describes in general terms the Trust's goals for the current fiscal year.
Savings Clause.--Nothing in this section shall preclude the Secretary from exercising any of the Secretary's lawful powers within the Presidio.
Leasing.--In managing and leasing the properties transferred to it, the Trust should consider the extent to which prospective tenants maximize the contribution to the implementation of the General Management Plan and to the generation of revenues to offset costs of the Presidio.
The Trust shall give priority to the following categories of tenants: tenants that enhance the financial viability of the Presidio thereby contributing to the preservation of the scenic beauty and natural character of the area; tenants that facilitate the cost- effective preservation of historic buildings through their reuse of such buildings, or tenants that promote through their activities the general programmatic content of the plan.
Reversion.--In the event of failure or default, all interests and assets of the Trust shall revert to the United States to be administered by the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the activities of the Trust.
Separability of Provisions.--If any provisions of this Act or the application thereof to any body, agency, situation, or circumstance is held invalid, the remainder of the Act and the application of such provision to other bodies, agencies, situations, or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.