This Act may be cited as the ``Communities Combating College Drinking and Drug Use Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Alcohol is by far the drug most widely used and abused by young people in the United States.
(A) In 2003, it is illegal for youths under the age of 21 to purchase alcohol in all of the 50 States and the District of Columbia, and illicit drugs remain illegal.
According to the National Institute on Drug Abuse, on average, young people begin drinking at about age 13.
However, some start even younger.
By the time young people are high school seniors, more than 80 percent have used alcohol and approximately 64 percent have been drunk.
When adolescents move on to college, they bring their drinking habits with them.
According to a 1993-1997 Harvard School of Public Health College Alcohol Study, 40 percent of college students are binge drinkers.
According to the Department of Health and Human Services, in 1998, 10,400,000 current drinkers were under legal age (age 12-21) and of these, 5,100,000 were binge drinkers, including 2,300,000 heavy drinkers.
Among 10th graders the perceived harmfulness of regularly taking LSD (lysergic acid diethylamide) is 68.8 percent, and among 8th graders the perceived harmfulness is 52.9 percent, according to the 2001 Monitoring the Future Study (MTF) funded by the National Institute on Drug Abuse.
Only 45.7 percent of 12th graders perceived a great risk in trying MDMA (ecstasy) once or twice.
The perceived availability of crack and cocaine among 10th graders was thought of as easy or fairly easy by 31 percent of 10th graders.
(A) Underage drinking particularly impacts institutions of higher education.
In 1999, Harvard University's School of Public Health College Alcohol Study surveyed 119 colleges and found that students who were binge drinkers in high school were 3 times more likely to binge drink in college.
According to a March 2002 article published in the Journal of Studies on Alcohol, a study conducted by the Social and Behavioral Sciences Department of the Boston University School of Public Health reported that 1998 and 1999 studies show over 2,000,000 of the 8,000,000 college students in the United States drove under the influence of alcohol, over 500,000 were unintentionally injured while under the influence of alcohol, and over 600,000 were hit or assaulted by another student who had been drinking.
According to the same Boston University study, it is estimated that over 1,400 students aged 18-24 and enrolled in 2-year and 4-year colleges died in 1998 from alcohol-related unintentional injuries.
More than 600,000 students between the ages of 18 and 24 are assaulted by another student who has been drinking, and another 500,000 students are unintentionally injured under the influence of alcohol.
More than 70,000 students between the ages of 18 and 24 are victims of alcohol-related sexual assault or date rape, more than 400,000 students reported having unprotected sex, and more than 100,000 students reported having been too intoxicated to know if they consented to having sex, according to the Boston University study.
(A) Longstanding cultural influences perpetuate student patterns of drinking.
Of frequent binge drinkers, 73 percent of males and 68 percent of females cited drinking to get drunk as an important reason for drinking according to ``Binge Drinking on Campus: Results of a National Study'', from Harvard School of Public Health.
The proportion of college students who drink varies depending on where they live.
Drinking rates are highest in fraternities and sororities, followed by on-campus housing.
Students who live independently offsite (e.g., in apartments) drink less, while commuting students who live with their families drink the least.
Institutions of higher education in places with strict laws such as keg registration, prohibitions on happy hours, and open container in public bans, which restrict the volume of alcohol sold or consumed, displayed lower rates of consumption and binge drinking among underage students.
A 2000 report by the Department of Health and Human Services, entitled ``Healthy People 2010'', observes that ``The perception that alcohol use is socially acceptable correlates with the fact that more than 80 percent of American youth consume alcohol before their 21st birthday, whereas the lack of social acceptance of other drugs correlates with comparatively low rates of use.
Similarly, widespread societal expectations that young persons will engage in binge drinking may encourage this highly dangerous form of alcohol consumption.''.
Mutually reinforcing interventions between the college and surrounding community can change the broader environment and help reduce alcohol abuse and alcohol-related problems over the long term.
(A) The use of illicit drugs threatens the lives and well-being of students at institutions of higher education.
According to the working paper, ``Alcohol and Marijuana Use Among College Students: Economic Complements or Substitutes'', for the National Bureau of Economic Research, alcohol and marijuana are economic complements, meaning that as the use of alcohol goes down on campuses, it is expected that marijuana will as well, or that as marijuana usage falls, so will alcohol usage.
The annual prevalence of the use of an illicit drug at institutions of higher education is 36 percent.
The annual marijuana use is 34 percent.
The annual use of cocaine and LSD is 4.8 percent.
The annual use of heroin is 4.5 percent.
In this Act: (1) Binge drinking.--The term ``binge drinking'' means the consumption of 5 or more drinks on any 1 occasion.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
Outlying area.--The term ``outlying area'' means the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico (6) Statewide coalition.--The term ``statewide coalition'' means a coalition that-- (A) includes-- (i) the entity a State designates to apply for a grant under this Act and to administer the grant funds; and (ii)(I) institutions of higher education within that State; and (II) a nonprofit group, a community anti- drug or anti-alcohol coalition, or another substance abuse prevention group within the State; and (B) works toward lowering the drug and alcohol abuse rate at not fewer than 50 percent of the institutions of higher education throughout the State and in the communities surrounding the campuses of the institutions.
Surrounding community.--The term ``surrounding community'' means the community-- (A) which surrounds an institution of higher education participating in a statewide coalition; (B) where the students from the institution of higher education take part in the community; and (C) where students from the institution of higher education live in off-campus housing.
The purpose of this Act is to encourage States, institutions of higher education, local communities, nonprofit groups, including community anti-drug or anti-alcohol coalitions, and other substance abuse groups within the State to enhance existing or, where none exist, to establish new statewide coalitions to reduce the usage of drugs and alcohol by college students both on campus and in the surrounding community at large.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2004 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.
Grants to States.-- (1) Allotments.-- (A) In general.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall make grants according to allotments under subparagraph (B) to States having applications approved under subsection (c) to pay the cost of carrying out the activities described in the application.
Determination of allotments.-- (i) Reservation of funds.--From the total amount appropriated under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve-- (I) one-half of 1 percent for allotments to the outlying areas, to be distributed among those outlying areas on the basis of their relative need for assistance under this Act, as determined by the Secretary, to carry out the purpose of this Act; and (II) one-half of 1 percent for the Secretary of the Interior for programs under this Act for schools operated or funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
State allotments.--From funds appropriated under subsection (a) for a fiscal year that remain after reserving funds under clause (i), the Secretary shall allot to each State an amount that bears the same relation to such remainder as the population of the State bears to the population of all States, as determined by the 2000 decennial census.
Matching funds required.--Each State receiving a grant under this Act shall contribute matching funds, from non- Federal sources, toward the cost of the activities described in the application, in an amount equal to-- (A) 100 percent of the Federal funds received under the grant, in the case of a State supporting a new statewide coalition; and (B) 50 percent of the Federal funds received under the grant, in the case of a State supporting a statewide coalition that was in existence on the day preceding the date of enactment of this Act.
Administrative costs.--Each State receiving a grant under this section may expend not more than 25 percent of the grant funds for administrative costs.
State Applications.-- (1) In general.--For a State to be eligible to receive a grant under this part, the State shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary shall reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted under this section shall include the following: (A) A description of how the State will work to enhance existing, or where none exists, to build a statewide coalition in cooperation with-- (i) not fewer than 50 percent of the institutions of higher education within the State; (ii) local communities; (iii) nonprofit groups, community anti-drug or anti-alcohol coalitions; and (iv) other substance abuse prevention groups within the State.
A description of how the State intends to ensure that the statewide coalition is actually implementing the purpose of this Act and moving toward the achievement indicators described in subsection (d).
A list of the members of the statewide coalition or interested parties.
Accountability.--On the date on which the Secretary first publishes a notice in the Federal Register soliciting applications for grants under this section, the Secretary shall include in the notice achievement indicators for the program assisted under this section.
The achievement indicators shall be designed-- (1) to measure the impact that the statewide coalitions assisted under this Act are having on the institutions of higher education and the surrounding communities, including changes in the number of alcohol or drug-related incidents of any kind (including violations, physical assaults, sexual assaults, reports of intimidation, disruptions of school functions, disruptions of student studies, illnesses, or deaths); (2) to measure the quality and accessibility of the programs or information offered by the statewide coalitions; and (3) to provide such other measures of program impact as the Secretary determines appropriate.