This Act may be cited as the ``Bipartisan Health Care Reform Commission Act of 1994''.
Establishment.--There is established an independent commission to be known as the Bipartisan Health Care Reform Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall consist of-- (A) 3 members appointed by the President, not more than 2 of whom may be members of the same political party; (B) 2 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate; (C) 2 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate; (D) 2 members appointed by the Majority Leader of the House of Representatives; and (E) 2 members appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Qualifications of members.--Members shall be appointed on the basis of their expertise and national recognition in the fields of health economics, provider reimbursement, health insurance, health benefits design, and related fields.
No Member of Congress may be appointed to serve as a member of the Commission.
Term.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancy.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Availability of Funds.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall make available, from amounts appropriated to the Secretary, such staff and funds as may be necessary to carry out the work of the Commission.
No Compensation Except Travel Expenses.--Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide that each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum; Chairman.--Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
The President shall designate one member of the Commission to serve as chairman.
Analyses and Recommendations.--The Commission shall-- (1) conduct an analysis of the health care systems of the States, as well as proposed or enacted reforms of such systems; (2) conduct an analysis of the problems relating to programs and policies of the Federal Government relating to health care, including Federal health insurance programs (such as the medicare and medicaid programs), health programs of the various Departments, and tax policies as they relate to health care and health insurance; (3) analyze private sector health systems, including various employer plans and innovative delivery systems; and (4) make recommendations on reforms that the Congress should consider in response to the findings of the analyses.
Hearings.--The Commission shall hold at least 5 public hearings.
The topics of the hearings shall be established in consultation with the officials that appointed members to the Commission.
Report.--Not later than April 30, 1995, the Commission shall submit a report to the Congress on the state of health care in the United States.
Such report shall include analyses of the following issues: (1) The rate of growth in health care costs by type of provider, by type of payer, and by State.
The utility of various mechanisms to empower purchasers of health care with information about comparative cost, quality, and access, including the effect of such information on patient's behavior in the medical marketplace.
The success or failure of different types of group health plans, such as plans that use medical savings accounts, managed care plans, plans offered through voluntary purchasing cooperatives, and traditional indemnity plans, in cost, quality, and access.
The success or failure of various Medicaid reform proposals, including the use of managed care, the use of vouchers to permit purchase of private insurance, and prioritization of benefits.
Legislative Proposal.--If the Commission recommends changes which requires legislation to implement, the Commission shall include in its report under subsection (c) a detailed legislative proposal providing for implementation of the recommendations.
Introduction and Referral.-- (1) In general.--If the report of the Commission under section 3-- (A) includes a detailed legislative proposal under section 3(d), and (B) is accompanied by a statement provided by the Director of the Congressional Budget Office under subsection (h) that the enactment of the proposal will not result in any increase in the Federal deficit in each of the 10 fiscal years beginning after the date of submittal of the report, the majority leader (or the leader's designee) in each House shall introduce (by request and not later than 7 days after the date of receipt by Congress of the report) the legislative proposal as a bill.
The title of that bill shall be ``A bill to carry out the recommendations of the Bipartisan Health Care Reform Commission.''.
Referral.--That bill shall be referred on the date of introduction to the appropriate committee (or committees) in accordance with rules of the respective Houses.
Discharge Deadline.--If any committee to which the bill is referred does not report the bill by the end of the 45-day period beginning on the date the bill was referred to the committee, the committee shall be automatically discharged from further consideration of the bill as of the end of such period.
Floor Consideration.-- (1) House of representatives.--For the purpose of expediting consideration and passage of a bill reported or discharged under this section, the Committee on Rules of the House of Representatives shall report a privileged resolution providing for the consideration of the bill and amendments thereto under an open rule and for a period of unlimited debate before the consideration of amendments to the bill.
If such a bill differs from the recommendation of the Commission, any such resolution shall make in order an amendment consisting of the text of the Commission's recommendations.
Senate.--[LANGUAGE TO BE INSERTED LATER] (d) Final Passage.--A vote on final passage of the bill shall be taken in a House not later than the end of the 15-day period beginning on the date on which the motion to proceed to its consideration in that House has been approved.
Special Rules.--If the House of Representatives approves a bill and the Senate approves a bill the text of which is identical to the text of the bill approved by the House of Representatives, the Senate is deemed to have approved the bill approved by the House of Representatives, effective on the later of-- (1) the date of approval of a bill in the Senate, or (2) the date the Senate receives a message from the House of Representatives announcing that the House has passed the bill.
Rules of House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and of the Senate, respectively, or of that House to which they specifically apply and such rules supersede other rules only to the extent that they are inconsistent therewith, and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change such rules (so far as relating to such House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
Not Including Certain Days.--Days on which a House of Congress is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days shall be excluded in the computation of any number of days in a period under this section with respect to that House.
Congressional Budget Office Determinations.--The Director of the Congressional Budget Office, upon request of the Commission or an appropriate committee, shall-- (1) review any bill to be proposed by the Commission or the committee to determine if the enactment of the bill would result in any increase in the Federal deficit in any of the 10 fiscal years beginning after the date on which the request is made, and (2) provide a written statement of such determination.