SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Economic Council Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) domestic and international economic policy are essential elements of our national security.
America's leadership in the world can be attributed in large measure to the success of our Nation's economic vitality.
That success, and our Nation's security, is being challenged by the growth in the international economic competition; (2) one of the fundamental lessons of the cold war period is that a strong military nation cannot achieve national security without economic vitality; (3) the ability of the United States to compete internationally is central to the Nation's economic prosperity and security.
Exports now account for more than 10 per centum of our country's gross domestic product and are a growing percentage of our Nation's output.
Increased exports are fundamental to facilitating job creation and economic growth; (4) as we enter the post-cold war period with an increased focus on policies to compete in world markets, America's ability to produce exports and be competitive is in need of constant and high level attention by our Nation's policy makers; (5) the President's National Security Council has played a vital and constant role in the successful development and coordination of America's national security policy since the creation of the Council in 1947; (6) to be successful, policies to meet the challenges of international competitiveness must be given the same coordinated high level attention as our successful national security policy.
In order to remain a strong economic force in the increasingly competitive global economy, America needs a coordinated economic strategy which will allow our country to be on a competitive basis with other nations, taking into account the free market system which has been the hallmark of our economic system; (7) the President must have available a permanent council of experts and advisors which have direct access to the President and can coordinate the complex components of the President's economic policy to facilitate exports, job creation, and national prosperity; and (8) an organization equivalent to the National Security Council should be established within the Executive Office of the President to develop and coordinate economic policy as trade and global competition emerge as essential elements of our national security.
The National Economic Council should bring focus and coordination to domestic and international economic policies at the highest level of government and should be recognized as the President's organization for developing and coordinating these policies.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL.
There is established a council to be known as the National Economic Council (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Council'').
The President of the United States shall preside over meetings of the Council: Provided, That in his absence he may designate a member of the Council to preside.
The Council shall be composed of-- (1) the President; (2) the Vice President; (3) the United States Trade Representative; (4) the Secretary of Treasury; (5) the Secretary of Commerce; (6) the Secretary of Labor; (7) the Secretary of Agriculture; (8) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; (9) the Director of the Office of Management and Budget; (10) the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy; (11) the Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors; and (12) any other individual as the President may direct.
The Council shall have a staff to be headed by the National Economic Advisor who shall be appointed by the President.
The National Economic Advisor is authorized, subject to the civil-service laws and chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, to appoint and fix the compensation of such personnel as may be necessary to perform such duties as may be prescribed by the Council in connection with the performance of its functions.
FUNCTIONS OF THE NATIONAL ECONOMIC COUNCIL.
The function of the Council shall be to advise the President with respect to the integration of domestic and international policies relating to the economy and international competitiveness so as to enable the Federal Government to operate more effectively in matters involving our Nation's ability to compete in the global economy.
In addition to performing such other functions as the President may direct, the Council shall-- (1) formulate and coordinate an economic strategy which will provide the economic environment necessary for our country to be on a competitive basis with other nations; (2) consider matters of common interest of the departments and agencies of the Government concerned with the economy and international competitiveness, and to coordinate recommendations concerning these policies to the President in connection therewith; (3) assess the ability of the United States to compete internationally, and the risk of a failure to meet this challenge, for the purpose of making recommendations to the President in connection therewith; and (4) define a set of guidelines for Government interaction with the market, taking into account the free market system which has been the hallmark of our national economy.
The functions of the Council under this Act shall be performed-- (1) subject to the direction of the President; and (2) for the purpose of effectively coordinating the policies and functions of the Federal departments and agencies relating to the economy and international competitiveness.
The Council shall, from time to time, make such recommendations and such other reports to the President as it deems appropriate or as the President may require.