This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Beneficiary Access to Home Care Act of 1998''.
Congress finds that the interim payment system for home health services under medicare enacted as part of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is having the following unintended consequences: (1) The sickest, most frail medicare beneficiaries are losing access to medically necessary home health services which are otherwise covered under the medicare program.
Many high-quality, cost-effective agencies have had per beneficiary limits set so low that they are finding it impossible to continue their participation in the medicare program.
Many agencies are being subjected to aggregate per beneficiary limits which do not accurately reflect their current patient mix and make it impossible for these agencies to compete with similarly situated agencies.
Residents of certain States and regions of the country are being afforded access to far fewer home health services under medicare than residents of certain other States or regions of the country who have identical medical conditions.
Under the surety bond requirements, high-quality, law- abiding home health agencies which have participated satisfactorily in the medicare program for years are being excluded.
PAYMENTS TO HOME HEALTH AGENCIES UNDER MEDICARE.
Retroactive Restoration of Per Visit Cost Limit to 112 Percent of the Mean of Costs.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(i) is amended-- (A) in subclause (II), by adding at the end ``or''; (B) in subclause (III)-- (i) by striking ``and before October 1, 1997,''; and (ii) by striking ``, or'' and inserting a period; and (C) by striking subclause (IV).
Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) are effective as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33).
Revision of Interim Payment System for Home Health Services.-- (1) Retroactive repeal of new per beneficiary limits.-- (A) In general.--Clauses (v) through (vii) of section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) are repealed (B) Effective date.--The repeal made by subparagraph (A) is effective as if included in the enactment of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-33).
Establishment of new limits.-- (A) In general.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)), as amended by paragraph (1)(A), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(v)(I) For services furnished by home health agencies for cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1998, the Secretary shall provide for an interim system of limits.
Payment shall not exceed the costs determined under the preceding provisions of this subparagraph or, if lower, an agency-specific, annual per beneficiary limitation equal to the sum of the base amount described in clause (vi) and the outlier amount described in clause (vii).
Such limitations shall be prorated among agencies for any beneficiary who receives covered home health services from more than one agency under common ownership or control for cost reporting periods beginning in a fiscal year.
The Secretary shall establish such limitations not later than October 1, 1998, for cost reporting periods beginning during fiscal year 1999 and not later than August 1 before the beginning of each succeeding fiscal year for cost reporting periods beginning during such fiscal year.
The base amount described in this clause for a cost reporting period is equal to the product of-- ``(I) the amount of the reasonable costs (including nonroutine medical supplies) of the standardized average cost per unduplicated patient in fiscal year 1994 of providing services for the first 120 days after home health services have commenced (as determined under clause (viii), such costs updated by the home health market basket index; and ``(II) the agency's unduplicated census count of base patients (entitled to benefits under this title) for the cost reporting period subject to the limitation, as determined under clause (ix).
The outlier amount described in this clause for a cost reporting period is equal to the product of-- ``(I) subject to clause (viii)(III), the amount of the reasonable costs (including nonroutine medical supplies) of the standardized average cost per unduplicated patient in fiscal year 1994 of providing services for the more than 120 days after home health services have commenced (as determined under clause (viii), such costs updated by the home health market basket index; and ``(II) the agency's unduplicated census count of outlier patients (entitled to benefits under this title) for the cost reporting period subject to the limitation, as determined under clause (ix).
(I) The standardized average costs per unduplicated patient described in clause (vi)(I) or (vii)(I) shall be determined based upon an appropriate percentage of a standardized average cost described in subclause (II).
For cost reporting periods beginning during fiscal year 1998, such appropriate percentages shall be 82 percent and 110 percent, respectively.
The standardized average cost described in this subclause is the reasonable costs (including nonroutine medical supplies) of standardized average cost per unduplicated patient in fiscal year 1994 of providing home health services to any patient described in clause (vi)(I) or (vii)(I), which are necessary for the efficient delivery of needed services covered by the insurance programs established under this title.
Such standardized average cost shall be determined, for a home health agency located in a census division, based 50 percent on such average determined on a national basis for all agencies and 50 percent on such average determined on a regional basis for all agencies located in that census division.
In determining the amount described in clause (vii)(I) in the case of a patient who may be counted in the base patient count under clause (vi)(II) for a cost reporting period and who may also be counted in the outlier patient count under clause (vii)(II) for the period, the amount described in clause (vii)(II) with respect to that patient shall be \2/3\ of the amount otherwise determined under such clause.
(I) For purposes of determining an agency's unduplicated census count of base patients for purposes of clause (vi)(II) for a cost reporting period, an individual who has been counted in the agency's unduplicated census count under such clause may not be counted again under such clause during the same home health spell of illness.
For purposes of this clause, the term `home health spell of illness' has the meaning given such term in section 1861(tt)(2) except that such spell shall begin with the first day (not included in a previous home health spell of illness) on which the individual is furnished any home health services for which benefits are available under this title and which occurs in a month for which the individual is entitled to benefits under either part A or part B.
No patient shall be included in the outlier census count under subclause (vi)(II) for a home health agency unless the fiscal intermediary involved has determined that the patient meets the conditions for coverage of home health services beyond 120 days in a home health spell of illness.
The Secretary shall establish a precertification process to ensure that such determinations are made in a timely manner that avoids interruptions in coverage for individuals who continuously meet such conditions of coverage.
Such a determination that a patient does not meet such conditions is reviewable under section 1869(b) to the same extent as a claim for benefits involving $1,000 or more in controversy.''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by subparagraph (A) applies to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1998.
Transitional rule for counting current patients in count of outlier patients.--In the case of a patient who-- (i) is receiving covered home health services from a home health agency as of the first day of the first cost reporting period in which clause (v) of section 1861(v)(1)(L) of the Social Security Act (as added by paragraph (2)) applies to the agency, and (ii) received such services from such agency for more than 120 days during a home health spell of illness (as defined for purposes of clause (ix) of such section, as so added), the patient shall be counted in the count of outlier patients under clause (vii)(II) of such section and not in the count of base patients under clause (vi)(II) of such section.
Application of Wage Index Based on Location of Agency.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(iii) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(iii)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, or, in the case of limits established under clause (v), based upon the geographic area in which the agency is located''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) applies to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1998.
Limitation on Application of Freeze in Update to Per Visit Limits.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L)(iv) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)(iv)) is amended by striking ``under this subparagraph'' and inserting ``under clause (i)''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) applies to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1998.
Adjustment in 15 Percent Reduction To Achieve Original CBO Spending Targets.-- (1) In general.--Section 4603(e) of the Balanced Budget Act of 1997 is amended by striking ``by 15 percent'' and inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, by a percentage which is sufficient to assure that total expenditures under this title for benefits for home health services in each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002 do not exceed the amount of such expenditures for such fiscal year, as estimated by the Congressional Budget Office immediately before the date of the enactment of this Act''.
Conforming amendment to prospective payment system.-- Section 1895(b)(3)(A)(ii) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff(b)(3)(A)(ii)) is amended by striking ``by 15 percent'' and inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, by a percentage which is sufficient to assure that total expenditures under this title for benefits for home health services in each of fiscal years 1999 through 2002 do not exceed the amount of such expenditures for such fiscal year, as estimated by the Congressional Budget Office immediately before the date of the enactment of this section.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection apply to cost reporting periods beginning on or after October 1, 1999.
Restoration of Periodic Interim Payments for Home Health Agencies.-- (1) In general.--Section 1815(e)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395g(e)(2)) is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following: ``(D) home health services; and''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) apply to payment for services furnished on or after October 1, 1999.
EXTENSION OF HOME HEALTH PER EPISODE PROSPECTIVE PAYMENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall continue the home health per episode prospective payment demonstration project authorized under section 4027 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (42 United States Code 1395n note) until the prospective payment system is established and implemented under section 1895 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395fff).
Any final report otherwise required under section 4027 shall be due not later than 6 months after the date such demonstration project is completed.
REVISION OF SURETY BOND REQUIREMENT FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES.
Under Medicare Program.--Section 1861(o)(7) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(o)(7)) is amended to read as follows: ``(7) provides the Secretary, prior to the initial certification of the home health agency and for 1 year thereafter, with a surety bond against fraudulent or abusive activities in a form specified by the Secretary and in an amount equal to $25,000; and''.
Under Medicaid Program.--Section 1903(i)(18) of such Act (42 United States Code 1396b(i)(18)) is amended to read as follows: ``(18) with respect to any amount expended for home health care services provided by an agency or organization unless the agency or organization provides the State agency, prior to the initial certification of the home health agency and for 1 year thereafter, with a surety bond against fraudulent or abusive activities in a form specified by the Secretary under paragraph (7) of section 1861(o) and in an amount equal to $25,000 or such comparable surety bond as the Secretary may permit under the last sentence of such section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to services furnished on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
REQUIREMENT FOR FRAUD AND ABUSE COMPLIANCE PROGRAM AS A CONDITION OF PARTICIPATION FOR HOME HEALTH AGENCIES UNDER THE MEDICARE PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 1891(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395bbb(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(8) The agency has developed and implemented a fraud and abuse compliance program.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) applies to services furnished on or after such date as the Secretary of Health and Human Services specifies in regulations promulgated to carry out such amendment.
The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act.