This Act may be cited as the ``Criminal Alien Deportation and Native Country Confinement Act of 1994''.
INCARCERATION OF OR PAYMENT FOR CRIMINAL ALIENS BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT.
Definition.--In this section, ``criminal alien who has been convicted of a felony and is incarcerated in a State or local correctional facility'' means an alien who-- (1)(A) is in the United States in violation of the immigration laws; or (B) is deportable or excludable under the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101 et sequentes); and (2) has been convicted of a felony under State or local law and incarcerated in a correctional facility of the State or a subdivision of the State.
Federal Custody.--At the request of a State or political subdivision of a State, the Attorney General shall-- (1)(A) take custody of a criminal alien who has been convicted of a felony and is incarcerated in a State or local correctional facility; and (B) provide for the imprisonment of the criminal alien in a Federal prison in accordance with the sentence of the State court; or (2) enter into a contractual arrangement with the State or local government to compensate the State or local government for incarcerating alien criminals for the duration of their sentences.
EXPEDITING CRIMINAL ALIEN DEPORTATION AND EXCLUSION.
Convicted Defined.--Section 241(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1251(a)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Convicted defined.--In this paragraph, the term `convicted' means a judge or jury has found the alien guilty or the alien has entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, whether or not the alien appeals therefrom.''.
Deportation of Convicted Aliens.-- (1) Immediate deportation.--Section 242(h) of such Act (8 United States Code 1252(h)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(h) An alien'' and inserting ``(h)(1) Subject to paragraph (2), an alien''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) An alien sentenced to imprisonment may be deported prior to the termination of such imprisonment by the release of the alien from confinement, if the Service petitions the appropriate court or other entity with authority concerning the alien to release the alien into the custody of the Service for execution of an order of deportation.''.
Prohibition of reentry into the united states.--Section 212(a)(2) of such Act (8 United States Code 1182(a)(2)) is amended-- (A) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (G); and (B) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Aliens deported before serving minimum period of confinement.--An alien deported pursuant to section 242(h)(2) is excludable during the minimum period of confinement to which the alien was sentenced.''.
Execution of Deportation Orders.--Section 242(i) of such Act (8 United States Code 1252(i)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``An order of deportation may not be executed until all direct appeals relating to the conviction which is the basis of the deportation order have been exhausted.''.
Notification Requirement.--The Attorney General shall notify each alien incarcerated in a State or Federal prison of any available option for voluntary deportation and prisoner transfer where the alien would be incarcerated for the remainder of the sentence of confinement in the country to which deported.
CONGRESSIONAL STATEMENT CONCERNING INCARCERATION IN COUNTRY TO WHICH CRIMINAL ALIENS ARE DEPORTED.
Congressional Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Aliens entering the United States without the knowledge or permission of the Federal Government have become a major economic and social problem in many States.
The number of undocumented aliens committing felony crimes has reached staggering proportions in California and in other States.
In 1988, 5,500 undocumented aliens were incarcerated in California prisons; in 1994 there are 16,000.
In 1993 incarcerated undocumented aliens represented approximately 15 percent of the total California State prison population.
The cost of incarcerating each State prisoner in California ranges between $15,000 to $30,000 and the cost to the taxpayers of California for the incarceration of undocumented criminal aliens in the State is approximately $402,000,000.
The State of California has spent over a billion dollars in the past 5 years to incarcerate undocumented criminal aliens.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service (INS) estimates that the average cost to deport an undocumented criminal alien is $600.
The United States has bilateral treaties concerning prisoner transfers with several countries.
The treaties have strict criteria requiring that all parties, the United States Department of Justice, the United States Department of State, the foreign government, and the prisoner, consent to the transfer.
The prisoner must voluntarily request such a transfer.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the President should direct the Secretary of State to enter into negotiations with other countries in order to conclude bilateral or multilateral agreements to provide for incarceration in the country to which an alien is deported when an alien is deported while subject to a term of imprisonment in the United States; (2) all existing agreements regarding prisoner transfer should be renegotiated to remove the requirement of prisoner approval and all other barriers to prisoner transfer; and (3) any prisoner transfer agreement should include the assurance that prisoners will complete the full term of any sentence upon transfer to another country.