This Act may be cited as the ``Combined Sewer Overflow Control and Partnership Act of 1999''.
Section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1342) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(q) Combined Sewer Overflows.-- ``(1) Requirement for permits, orders, and decrees.--Each permit, order, or decree issued under this Act for a discharge from a combined storm and sanitary sewer shall conform to the Combined Sewer Overflow Control Policy signed by the Administrator on April 11, 1994.
Term of permit, order, or decree.-- ``(A) Authority to issue.--Notwithstanding any schedule for compliance authorized by section 301(b), or any permit limitation authorized by subsection (b)(1)(B) of this section, the Administrator or the State (in the case of a State with a program approved under subsection (b)) may issue or execute a permit, order, or decree consistent with this section for a discharge from a combined storm and sanitary sewer.
Schedule for compliance.-- ``(i) In general.--A permit, order, or decree issued under subparagraph (A) shall include a schedule for compliance, within a period not to exceed 15 years, with a long-term control plan under the Control Policy referred to in paragraph (1).
Exception.--Notwithstanding clause (i), a compliance schedule of longer than 15 years may be granted if the owner or operator demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Administrator or the State, as appropriate, reasonable further progress towards compliance with a long-term plan under the Control Policy and if the Administrator or the State, as appropriate, determines that-- ``(I) compliance within 15 years is not within the economic capability of the owner or operator; or ``(II) a longer period is otherwise appropriate.
Water quality standards-designated use review.-- ``(A) In general.--No permit, order, or decree issued under this Act should require compliance with water quality-based requirements contained in a long- term control plan under the Control Policy referred to in paragraph (1) unless the Administrator or the State, as appropriate, has completed the water quality standards-designated use review process called for in the Control Policy, including the adoption of any refinements needed-- ``(i) to reflect the site-specific wet weather impact of combined sewer overflows; and ``(ii) to ensure that the long-term control plan provides for cost-effective compliance with water quality standards.
Inclusion of watershed.--Consideration shall be given to conducting these reviews on a watershed basis where appropriate.
Savings provision.--Nothing in this subsection affects the authority to conduct or scheduling of water quality standard reviews required under section 303(c).
Guidance.--Not later than March 15, 2000, the Administrator shall develop and publish for implementation by the States and by regions of the Environmental Protection Agency, the guidance document recommended by H. Rept.
105- 769 at 280 (1998) (conference report on H.R.
4194), to facilitate water quality and designated use reviews.
Grants.-- ``(A) In general.--The Administrator may make grants to any municipality or municipal entity for planning, design, and construction of facilities to intercept, transport, control, or treat combined storm and sanitary sewer flows.
Federal share.-- ``(i) In general.--The Federal share of the cost of activities carried out using amounts from a grant made under subparagraph (A) shall be at least 55 percent of the cost as determined by the Administrator.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost may include, in any amount, public and private funds and in-kind services.
Reports.--Not later than January 1, 2004, and once every 2 years thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a report containing recommended funding levels for the 2 fiscal years following the date of the report for activities relating to combined storm and sanitary sewer flows described in subparagraph (A).
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this paragraph, to remain available until expended-- ``(i) $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2000; ``(ii) $750,000,000 for fiscal year 2001; and ``(iii) $1,000,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2004.