This Act may be cited as the ``Lewis and Clark Rural Water System Act of 1994''.
As used in this Act (unless the context clearly requires otherwise): (1) Environmental enhancement.--The term ``environmental enhancement'' means the wetland and wildlife enhancement activities that are carried out substantially in accordance with the environmental enhancement component of the feasibility study.
Environmental enhancement component.--The term ``environmental enhancement component'' means the component described in the report entitled ``Wetlands and Wildlife Enhancement for the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System'', dated April 1991, that is included in the feasibility study.
Feasibility study.--The term ``feasibility study'' means the study entitled ``Feasibility Level Evaluation of a Missouri River Regional Water Supply for South Dakota, Iowa and Minnesota'', dated September 1993, that includes a water conservation plan, environmental report, and environmental enhancement component.
Member entity.--The term ``member entity'' means a rural water system or municipality that signed a Letter of Commitment to participate in the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System.
Project construction budget.--The term ``project construction budget'' means the description of the total amount of funds that are needed for the construction of the water supply system, as contained in the feasibility study.
Pumping and incidental operational requirements.--The term ``pumping and incidental operational requirements'' means all power requirements that are incidental to the operation of intake facilities, pumping stations, water treatment facilities, reservoirs, and pipelines up to the point of delivery of water by the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System to each member entity that distributes water at retail to individual users.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Water supply system.--The term ``water supply system'' means the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System that is established and operated substantially in accordance with the feasibility study.
FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR THE WATER SUPPLY SYSTEM.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc., a nonprofit corporation, for the planning and construction of the water supply system.
Service Area.--The water supply system shall provide for safe and adequate municipal, rural, and industrial water supplies, environmental enhancement, mitigation of wetland areas, and water conservation in-- (1) Lake County, McCook County, Minnehaha County, Turner County, Lincoln County, Clay County, and Union County, in southeastern South Dakota; (2) Rock County, and Nobles County, in southwestern Minnesota; and (3) Lyon County, Sioux County, Osceola County, O'Brien County, Dickinson County, and Clay County, in northwestern Iowa.
Amount of Grants.--Grants made available under subsection (a) to the Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc. shall not exceed the amount of funds authorized under section 10.
Limitation on Availability of Construction Funds.--The Secretary shall not obligate funds for the construction of the water supply system until-- (1) the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) have been met; (2) a final engineering report has been prepared and submitted to Congress not less than 90 days before the commencement of construction of the system; and (3) a water conservation program has been developed and implemented.
FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR WETLAND AND WILDLIFE ENHANCEMENT.
Initial Development.--The Secretary shall make grants and other funds available to Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc., and other private, State, and Federal entities, for the initial development of the environmental enhancement component.
Nonreimbursement.--Funds provided under subsection (a) shall be nonreimbursable and nonreturnable.
Purpose.--The water conservation program required under this section shall be designed to ensure that users of water from the water supply system will use the best practicable technology and management techniques to conserve water use.
Description.--The water conservation programs shall include-- (1) low consumption performance standards for all newly installed plumbing fixtures; (2) leak detection and repair programs; (3) rate schedules that do not include declining block rate schedules for municipal households and special water users (as defined in the feasibility study); (4) public education programs and technical assistance to member entities; and (5) coordinated operation among each rural water system, and each water supply facility in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, in the service area of the system.
Review and Revision.--The programs described in subsection (b) shall contain provisions for periodic review and revision, in cooperation with the Secretary.
MITIGATION OF FISH AND WILDLIFE LOSSES.
Mitigation for fish and wildlife losses incurred as a result of the construction and operation of the water supply system shall be on an acre-for-acre basis, based on ecological equivalency, concurrent with project construction, as provided in the feasibility study.
USE OF PICK-SLOAN POWER.
In General.--From power designated for future irrigation and drainage pumping for the Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin program, the Western Area Power Administration shall make available the capacity and energy required to meet the pumping and incidental operational requirements of the water supply system during the period beginning May 1, and ending October 31, of each year.
Conditions.--The capacity and energy described in subsection (a) shall be made available on the following conditions: (1) The water supply system shall be operated on a not-for- profit basis.
The water supply system shall contract to purchase the entire electric service requirements of the system, including the capacity and energy made available under subsection (a), from a qualified preference power supplier that itself purchases power from the Western Area Power Administration.
The rate schedule applicable to the capacity and energy made available under subsection (a) shall be the firm power rate schedule of the Pick-Sloan Eastern Division of the Western Area Power Administration in effect when the power is delivered by the Administration.
It shall be agreed by contract among-- (A) the Western Area Power Administration; (B) the power supplier with which the water supply system contracts under paragraph (2); (C) the power supplier of the entity described in subparagraph (B); and (D) Lewis and Clark Rural Water System, Inc.; that in the case of the capacity and energy made available under subsection (a), the benefit of the rate schedule described in paragraph (3) shall be passed through to the water supply system, except that the power supplier of the water supply system shall not be precluded from including, in the charges of the supplier to the water system for the electric service, the other usual and customary charges of the supplier.
NO LIMITATION ON WATER PROJECTS IN STATES.
This Act shall not limit the authorization for water projects in South Dakota, Iowa, and Minnesota under law in effect on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) invalidates or preempts State water law or an interstate compact governing water; (2) alters the rights of any State to any appropriated share of the waters of any body of surface or ground water, whether determined by past or future interstate compacts or by past or future legislative or final judicial allocations; (3) preempts or modifies any Federal or State law, or interstate compact, governing water quality or disposal; or (4) confers on any non-Federal entity the ability to exercise any Federal right to the waters of any stream or to any ground water resource.
The Secretary is authorized to provide funds equal to 80 percent of-- (1) the amount allocated in the total project construction budget for the planning and construction of the water supply system under section 3; and (2) such sums as are necessary to defray increases in development costs reflected in appropriate engineering cost indices after September 1, 1993.
The non-Federal share of the costs allocated to the water supply system shall be 20 percent of the-- (1) the amount allocated in the total project construction budget for the planning and construction of the water supply system under section 3; and (2) such sums as are necessary to defray increases in development costs reflected in appropriate engineering cost indices after September 1, 1993.
Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to allow the Bureau of Reclamation to provide project construction oversight to the water supply system and environmental enhancement component for those areas of the water supply system that are described in section 3(b).
Project Oversight Administration.--The amount of funds used by the Bureau of Reclamation for planning and construction of the water supply system may not exceed an amount equal to 1 percent of the amount provided in the total project construction budget for the entire project construction period.
There are authorized to be appropriated $226,320,000 to carry out this Act, of which not less than $8,487,000 shall be used for the initial development of the environmental enhancement component under section 4, to remain available until expended.