This Act may be referred to as the ``Farmer's Privacy Act of 2012''.
LIMITATION ON USE OF AERIAL SURVEILLANCE.
Aerial Surveillance Restricted.--Subject to subsection (b), in exercising any authority under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes), the Administrator may not conduct aerial surveillance of agricultural land.
Exceptions.--The Administrator may conduct aerial surveillance of agricultural land under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act if the Administrator-- (1) has obtained the voluntary written consent of the owner or operator of the land to be surveilled in accordance with section 3; or (2) has obtained a certification of reasonable suspicion in accordance with section 4.
Consent Required.--In order to conduct aerial surveillance under section 2(b)(1), the Administrator shall obtain from the owner or operator of the land to be surveilled written consent to such surveillance.
Contents.--The Administrator shall ensure that any written consent required under subsection (a)-- (1) specifies the period during which the consent is effective, which may not exceed one year; (2) contains a specific description of the geographical area to be surveilled; and (3) if requested by the owner or operator of the land to be surveilled, contains limitations on the days and times during which the surveillance may be conducted.
Assurance of Voluntary Consent.--The Administrator shall ensure that any written consent required under subsection (a) is granted voluntarily by the owner or operator of the land to be surveilled, and the Administrator may not threaten additional, more detailed, or more thorough inspections, or otherwise coerce or entice such owner or operator, in order to obtain such consent.
CERTIFICATION OF REASONABLE SUSPICION.
In General.--In order to conduct aerial surveillance under section 2(b)(2), the Administrator shall obtain a certification of reasonable suspicion from the United States District Court for the District of Columbia in accordance with this section.
Certification Requirements.--The court may issue to the Administrator a certification of reasonable suspicion if-- (1) the Administrator submits to the court an affidavit setting forth specific and articulable facts that would indicate to a reasonable person that a violation of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act exists in the area to be surveilled; and (2) the court finds that the Administrator has shown reasonable suspicion that an owner or operator of agricultural land in the area to be surveilled has violated the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (c), or for the purposes of an investigation or prosecution by the Administrator as described in section 6, the Administrator may not disclose information collected through aerial surveillance conducted under section 2(b).
Applicability of FOIA.--Section 552 of title 5, United States Code, shall not apply to any information collected through aerial surveillance conducted under section 2(b) of this Act.
Right to Petition.--The owner or operator of land surveilled under this Act has the right to petition for copies of the information collected through such surveillance.
The Administrator shall destroy information collected through aerial surveillance conducted under section 2(b) not later than 30 days after collection, unless the information is pertinent to an active investigation or prosecution by the Administrator.
Nothing in this Act shall be interpreted as expanding the power of the Administrator to inspect, monitor, or conduct surveillance of agricultural lands pursuant to the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes) or any other Federal law.
In this Act: (1) Aerial surveillance.--The term ``aerial surveillance'' means any surveillance from the air, including-- (A) surveillance conducted from manned or unmanned aircraft; or (B) the use of aerial or satellite images, regardless of whether the images are publicly available.
Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, or in the case of an action taken pursuant to a permit program approved under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1342), the head of the State agency administering the program.
Agricultural land.--The term ``agricultural land'' means land used primarily for agricultural production, including cropland, grassland, prairie land, improved pastureland, rangeland, cropped woodland, marshes, reclaimed land, fish or other aquatic species habitat, and land used for agro-forestry or the production of livestock.
Court.--The term ``court'' means the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.