This Act may be cited as the ``Airline Bankruptcy Passenger Protection Act of 1993''.
REPORTING AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--Title IV of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
1371-1389) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
Development.-- ``(1) Order.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall issue an order authorizing covered air carriers to develop a plan for providing air transportation for any person who holds an airline ticket for provision of such transportation by a covered air carrier who, after the date of purchase of such ticket, becomes a debtor in a case under title 11, United States Code.
Such order shall also include an exemption in accordance with section 414.
Deadline for submission.--Any plan developed under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Secretary for approval within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this section.
Time Limit and Basis for Approval.--If a plan is submitted to the Secretary in accordance with subsection (a), the Secretary shall approve or disapprove such plan within 60 days after the date of such submission.
If the Secretary determines that such plan will provide (or would provide if all covered air carriers participate in implementation of such plan) satisfactory protection for all persons who hold airline tickets described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall approve such plan.
Otherwise, the Secretary shall disapprove such plan.
Implementation of Approved Plans.--If the Secretary approves a plan under this section, the Secretary shall issue an order requiring implementation of such plan by the covered air carriers who submitted such plan and any other covered air carriers.
If there are any covered air carriers who did not participate in development of a plan approved under this section, such carriers shall be treated under such order and plan in the same manner as carriers who did participate in development of such plan.
Regulations.--If a plan described in subsection (a) is not submitted within 180 days after the date of the enactment of this section, or if the Secretary disapproves a plan submitted in accordance with subsection (a), or if the Secretary determines that a plan approved under this section is not being implemented in a manner which provides satisfactory protection for all persons who hold airline tickets described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall issue regulations requiring all covered air carriers to provide air transportation for persons who hold such tickets.
Such regulations must be issued within 90 days after the expiration of such 180-day period, the date of disapproval of such plan, or the date of such determination, as the case may be.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Airline ticket.--The term `airline ticket' means any written instrument that embodies a contract of carriage between a covered air carrier and a passenger thereof for interstate or overseas air transportation.
Covered air carrier.--The term `covered air carrier' means-- ``(A) an air carrier which provides interstate or overseas air transportation primarily with aircraft having seating for more than 60 passengers and which in the 12-month period preceding the date of the enactment of this section, enplaned more than .2 percent of the total number of passengers enplaned on all aircraft used to provide interstate and overseas air transportation in such period; and ``(B) an air carrier not described in subparagraph (A) who enters into an agreement with an air carrier who is described in subparagraph (A) to operate under or use a single air carrier designator code to provide interstate or overseas air transportation, but only with respect to those operations of the carrier not described in subparagraph (A) which are carried out under such code.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.''.
Conforming Amendment to Table of Contents.--The table of contents in the first section of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 is amended by adding at the end of the material relating to title IV the following: ``Sec.
Time limit and basis for approval.
Implementation of approved plans.