This Act may be cited as the ``Escrow Account Reform Act of 1993''.
LIMITATION OF PAYMENTS INTO ESCROW ACCOUNTS.
Payments at Settlement.-- (1) In general.--Section 10(a)(1) of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609(a)(1)) is amended by striking ``, plus one-sixth'' and all that follows through ``twelve-month period''.
Effective date.--The amendment under paragraph (1) shall be made and shall take effect upon the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Regular Monthly Payments.-- (1) In general.--Section 10(a) of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new undesignated paragraphs: ``Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) and (2) and any mortgage agreement, each lender or servicer maintaining any such escrow account shall provide that, not less than once during each annual escrow period, the balance in each such escrow account shall equal an amount not greater than the amount equal to one-sixth of the sum of the total amount of taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges anticipated to be paid during such annual escrow period (or such lesser amount as provided in the mortgage agreement or other mortgage instrument).
``For 12 consecutive calendar months (the first such month being the month in which the first installment payment under the mortgage is due), an amount in each such month not exceeding \1/72\ of the estimated total amount of taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges which are reasonably anticipated to be paid on dates during the annual escrow period may be collected by the lender as a sum in excess of the amount sufficient to pay such taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges during the annual period.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply to any annual escrow period (as such term is defined in section 10(h) of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974, as amended by this Act) for a federally related mortgage loan that begins after the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on date of the enactment of this Act.
Coverage of Servicers.--Section 10(a) of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609(a)) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``or servicer (as the term is defined in section 6(i))'' after ``lender''; and (2) by inserting ``or servicer'' after ``lender'' each place it appears in paragraphs (1) and (2).
INTEREST ON AMOUNTS IN ESCROW ACCOUNTS.
In General.--Section 10 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Interest on Amounts in Escrow Accounts.--Any lender or servicer that establishes or maintains an escrow account in connection with a federally related mortgage loan shall pay interest on the balance in the escrow account at an annual rate of not less than the current passbook savings rate, as determined by the Secretary (in the same manner determined for purposes of determining family annual income under title I of the United States Housing Act of 1937).
Interest accrued under this subsection shall be payable annually, except that any amounts accrued upon termination of an escrow account shall be payable upon the termination of the account.
The Secretary shall, by regulation, provide for the manner and timing of payment of interest accrued under this section to the borrower or the account of the borrower.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to any escrow account (in connection with a federally related mortgage loan) that is established after the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
OPTION OF BORROWER TO TERMINATE ESCROW ACCOUNT.
In General.--Section 10 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609), as amended by section 3 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Borrower Assumption of Escrow Account Responsibility.--Any borrower in connection with a federally related mortgage loan for which less than 80 percent of the original principal obligation under the loan remains outstanding may terminate any escrow account for the loan by submitting to the lender or servicer of the loan a statement certifying that the borrower agrees to make timely payments of all taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges paid from the escrow account.
Notwithstanding subsection (a) or any mortgage agreement, a lender or servicer may not require the establishment or maintenance of any escrow account for any federally related mortgage loan for which the escrow account is terminated under this subsection.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment under subsection (a) shall be made and shall take effect upon the expiration of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
ENFORCEMENT OF BORROWER RIGHTS.
Civil Money Penalties.--Section 10(d) of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609(d)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``failure to submit a statement to a borrower as required under subsection (c)'' and inserting ``failure by a lender or servicer to comply with the provisions of this section''; and (B) by striking ``failing to submit the statement'' and inserting ``failing to comply''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``the requirement to submit the statement'' and inserting ``a provision of this section''.
Actions.--Section 10 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609), as amended by sections 3 and 4 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Actions to Enforce Borrower Rights.-- ``(1) Damages and costs.--Whoever fails to comply with any provision of this section shall be liable to the borrower for each such failure in the following amounts: ``(A) Individuals.--In the case of any action by an individual, an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(i) any actual or incidental damages to the borrower as a result of the failure; and ``(ii) in the case of a pattern or practice of noncompliance with the provisions of this section, any punitive damages as the court may allow, in an amount not to exceed $10,000.
Class actions.--In the case of a class action, an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(i) any actual or incidental damages to each of the borrowers in the class as a result of the failure; and ``(ii) in the case of a pattern or practice of noncompliance with the provisions of this section, any punitive damages as the court may allow.
Attorneys fees.--In any action pursuant to this section, the court shall award to the prevailing party the court costs of the action together with reasonable attorneys fees.''.
Section 10 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2609), as amended by sections 3, 4, and 5 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `annual escrow period' means a period of 12 consecutive calendar months occurring during the term of a federally related mortgage loan.
The annual escrow period beginning in each calendar year shall begin with the calendar month during which the first installment payment under the mortgage was due.
The term `balance', with respect to any escrow account, means the total of any amounts remaining in the escrow account, irrespective of the purpose or manner in which such amounts were deposited or are to be used.''.
Section 16 of the Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act of 1974 (12 United States Code 2614) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) Kickback and Title Company Violations.--'' after ``Sec.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Escrow Account Violations.--Any action brought pursuant to the provisions of section 10 may be brought in the United States district court or in any other court of competent jurisdiction, for the district in which the property involved is located or where the violation is alleged to have occurred, within 3 years from the date that the borrower under the federally related mortgage loan first had actual knowledge of the violation.
Actions pursuant to section 10 may be brought by the borrower, the Secretary, the Attorney General of any State, or the insurance commissioner of any State.''.
STUDY OF STANDARD ESCROW ACCOUNT MANAGEMENT PROCEDURES.
In General.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall conduct a study of the accrual and disbursement dates for taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges under escrow accounts maintained by lenders and servicers in connection with federally related mortgage loans, procedures regarding shortages and surplus amounts in such escrow accounts, and the impact and treatment of inflation with respect to such accounts, to determine the feasibility of requiring standard procedures for managing such escrow accounts.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``accrual date'' means, with respect to taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges to escrow accounts, the date on which the amount for a charge is required to be deposited in an escrow account maintained for payment of such charges; and (2) the term ``disbursement date'' means, with respect to taxes, insurance premiums, and other charges to escrow accounts, the date on which the amount of a charge is withdrawn from an escrow account maintained for payment of such charges.
Report.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall submit to the Congress a report regarding the results of the study under subsection (a), not later than June 30, 1993.
The report shall include the following information: (1) A determination of the overall cost to lenders and servicers of converting accounting procedures used for escrow accounts from single item analysis to an aggregate analysis procedure.
A determination of the feasibility of establishing an accrual date for each charge to an escrow account that occurs 30 days before the disbursement date for the charge.
A determination of (A) the feasibility of identifying the disbursement dates for various State and local tax collection agencies throughout the United States and (B) any cost to the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development of issuing a list of such disbursement dates on an annual basis.
A description and comparison of various accounting methods for estimating the annual percentage increase in property taxes for a property securing a federally related mortgage loan.
An examination of mortgage agreements and a determination of the extent to which such agreements permit any increase in the amounts required to be deposited by a borrower upon transfer of the servicing rights for the mortgage loan.
A determination of the extent and frequency of deficiencies of amounts in escrow accounts and a description and comparison of the various procedures used to remedy such deficiencies.
A description of the various procedures used by State and local tax authorities and lenders and servicers in increasing tax charges and collecting related amounts for escrow accounts.
A recommendation regarding the feasibility of requiring standard procedures for management of escrow accounts.
Any other information relating to the study conducted under subsection (a) that the Secretary considers appropriate.
Requirement.--Not later than the expiration of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue any proposed regulations necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
Not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the expiration of such 180-day period, the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue final regulations to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
The regulations issued pursuant to this section shall be subject to section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
Rule of Construction.--Any failure by the Secretary to issue any regulations required under subsection (a) shall not affect the effectiveness of the provisions of this Act or of the amendments made by this Act.