This Act may be cited as the ``Steel Industry National Historic Park Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) certain sites and structures in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania symbolize in physical form the heritage of the United States steel industry; (2) a large proportion of the buildings and other structures in the Commonwealth are nationally significant historical resources, including the United States Steel Homestead Works, the Carrie Furnace complex, and the Hot Metal Bridge; and (3) despite substantial efforts by the Commonwealth, as well as individuals and public and private entities in the Commonwealth, to preserve and interpret these significant historical and cultural buildings and structures, such buildings and structures may be lost without the assistance of the Federal Government.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the nationally significant historical and cultural buildings, structures, and sites described in subsection (a) for the benefit and inspiration of present and future generations.
In this Act: (1) Commonwealth.--The term ``Commonwealth'' means the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania.
Park.--The term ``park'' means the Steel Industry National Historic Park established by section 4.
Plan.--The term ``plan'' means the management plan for the park required under section 7.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
STEEL INDUSTRY NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK.
Establishment.--There is established as a unit of the National Park System the Steel Industry National Historic Park in the Commonwealth.
Components.--The park shall consist of land and interests in land comprising the former United States Steel Homestead Works, including-- (1) the Battle of Homestead site in the borough of Munhall, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 3 acres of land, including the pumphouse and water tower and related structures, within the property bounded by the Monongahela River, the CSX railroad, Waterfront Drive, and the Damascus-Marcegaglia Steel Mill; (2) the Carrie Furnace complex in the boroughs of Swissvale and Rankin, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 35 acres of land, including blast furnaces 6 and 7, the ore yard, the cast house, the blowing engine house, the AC power house, and related structures, within the property bounded by the proposed southwesterly right-of-way line needed to accommodate the Mon/ Fayette Expressway and the relocated CSX railroad right-of-way, the Monongahela River, and a property line drawn northeast to southwest approximately 100 yards east of the AC power house; (3) the Hot Metal Bridge, consisting of the Union railroad bridge and its approaches, spanning the Monongahela River and connecting the mill sites in the boroughs of Rankin and Munhall; and (4) all other property included in the park-- (A) by Federal law; or (B) acquired by the Secretary for inclusion in the park under section 5 or other Federal law.
Real Property.--The Secretary may acquire-- (1) land and interests in land described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 4(b); and (2) not more than 10 acres of land adjacent to, or in the general vicinity of, the property described in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 4(b), for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities.
Personal Property.--The Secretary may acquire personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the park.
Means.--An acquisition of real property or personal property shall be made by donation.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the park in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (1) the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes); and (2) the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with interested public and private entities and individuals to carry out this Act.
Reimbursement.--A payment made by the Secretary under the terms of a cooperative agreement entered into under this subsection shall be subject to an agreement that if at any time the project assisted is converted, used, or disposed of in a manner that is contrary to the purposes of this Act, as determined by the Secretary, the interested entity or individual shall reimburse the Secretary for the greater of-- (A) the amount of assistance provided for the project; or (B) the portion of the increased value of the project that is attributable to that assistance, determined as of the date of the conversion, use, or disposal.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may provide to any person technical assistance for-- (1) preserving historic structures of the park; (2) maintaining the cultural landscape of the park; and (3) local preservation planning for the park.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) prepare a plan for the park; and (2) submit the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Consultation With Local Officials.--In preparing the plan under subsection (a)(1), the Secretary shall consult with-- (1) a representative of each political subdivision of the Commonwealth that has jurisdiction over all or a portion of the park; and (2) a representative of the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation.