This Act may be cited as the ``Child Care Expansion Act''.
TITLE I--GENERAL EXPANSION OF ACTIVITIES SEC.
SMALL BUSINESS CHILD CARE GRANT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a program to award grants to States to assist States in providing funds to encourage the establishment and operation of employer operated child care programs.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a State shall prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including an assurance that the State will provide the funds required under subsection (e).
Amount of Grant.--The Secretary shall determine the amount of a grant to a State under this section based on the population of the State as compared to the population of all States.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--A State shall use amounts provided under a grant awarded under this section to provide assistance to small businesses located in the State to enable such small businesses to establish and operate child care programs.
Such assistance may include-- (A) technical assistance in the establishment of a child care program; (B) assistance for the start-up costs related to a child care programs; (C) assistance for the training of child care providers; (D) scholarships for low-income wage earners; (E) the provision of services to care for sick children or to provide care to school aged children; (F) the entering into of contracts with local resource and referral or local health departments; (G) assistance for any other activity determined appropriate by the State; or (H) care for children with disabilities.
Application.--To be eligible to receive assistance from a State under this section, a small business shall prepare and submit to the State an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the State may require.
Preference.-- (A) In general.--In providing assistance under this section, a State shall give priority to applicants that desire to form consortium to provide child care in geographic areas within the State where such care is not generally available or accessible.
Consortium.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), a consortium shall be made up of 2 or more entities which may include businesses, nonprofit agencies or organizations, local governments, or other appropriate entities.
Limitation.--With respect to grant funds received under this section, a State may not provide in excess of $50,000 in assistance from such funds to any single applicant.
A State may not provide assistance under a grant to more than 10 entities.
Matching Requirement.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section a State shall provide assurances to the Secretary that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by an entity receiving assistance in carrying out activities under this section, such entity will make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions to such costs in an amount equal to-- (1) for the first fiscal year in which the entity receives such assistance, not less than 25 percent of such costs ($1 for each $3 of assistance provided to the entity under the grant); (2) for the second fiscal year in which an entity receives such assistance, not less than 33\1/3\ percent of such costs ($1 for each $2 of assistance provided to the entity under the grant); and (3) for the third fiscal year in which an entity receives such assistance, not less than 50 percent of such costs ($1 for each $1 of assistance provided to the entity under the grant).
Requirements of Providers.--To be eligible to receive assistance under a grant awarded under this section a child care provider shall comply with all applicable State and local licensing and regulatory requirements and all applicable health and safety standards in effect in the State.
Administration.-- (1) State responsibility.--A State shall have responsibility for administering the grant awarded under this section and for monitoring entities that receive assistance under such grant.
Audits.--A State shall require that each entity receiving assistance under a grant awarded under this section conduct of an annual audit with respect to the activities of the entity.
Such audits shall be submitted to the State.
Misuse of funds.-- (A) Repayment.--If the State determines, through an audit or otherwise, that an entity receiving assistance under a grant awarded under this section has misused such assistance, the State shall notify the Secretary of such misuses.
The Secretary, upon such a notification, may seek from such an entity the repayment of an amount equal to the amount of any misused assistance plus interest.
Appeals process.--The Secretary shall by regulation provide for an appeals process with respect to repayments under this paragraph.
Reporting Requirement.-- (1) Study.--Not later than 2 years after the date on which the Secretary first provides grants under this section, the Secretary shall conduct a study to determine-- (A) the capacity of entities to meet the child care needs of communities within a State; (B) the kinds of partnerships that are being formed with respect to child care at the local level; and (C) who is using the programs funded under this section and the income levels of such individuals.
Report.--Not later than 28 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the appropriate committees of Congress, a report concerning the effectiveness of the grant programs under this section.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``small business'' means an employer who employed an average of at least 2 but not more than 50 employees on business days during the preceding calendar year.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2000.
Termination of Program.--The program established under subsection (a) shall terminate on September 30, 2001.
PROJECTS FOR CHILD CARE BY OLDER INDIVIDUALS.
Community Service Employment Program.--Section 502 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3056) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) In carrying out this title, the Secretary, and any entity entering into an agreement under this title, shall take necessary steps, including the development of special projects, where appropriate, to encourage the fullest participation of eligible individuals (including eligible individuals described in subsection (e), as appropriate), in projects to provide child care under this title.
Such child care projects shall, to the extent practicable, be carried out in communities with child care shortages, as determined by the appropriate State agency designated under section 658D(a) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858b(a)).''.
Domestic Volunteer Service Act.--Title IV of the Domestic Volunteer Service Act of 1973 (42 United States Code 5043 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PARTICIPATION IN PROJECT TO PROVIDE CHILD CARE.
In General.--In carrying out this Act, the Director, and any recipient of a grant or contract under this Act, shall take necessary steps, including the development of special projects, where appropriate, to encourage the fullest participation of individuals 55 and older, in projects to provide child care under this Act.
Such child care projects shall, to the extent practicable, be carried out in communities with child care shortages, as determined by the appropriate State agency designated under section 658D(a) of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858b(a)).
Funding of Projects.--The Director may, using amounts available for experimental projects under section 502(e), provide for the development of special projects under subsection (a).''.
TITLE II--TAX INCENTIVES FOR DEPENDENT CARE SEC.
EXPANSION OF CHILD AND DEPENDENT CARE CREDIT.
Increase in Credit Percentage for Low and Middle Income Workers.--Section 21(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for expenses for household and dependent care services necessary for gainful employment) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Applicable percentage defined.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `applicable percentage' means 30 percent reduced (but not below 20 percent) by 1 percentage point for each $2,000 (or fraction thereof) by which the taxpayer's adjusted gross income exceeds $20,000.''
Increase in Maximum Amount Creditable.--Section 21(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to dollar limit on amount creditable) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$2,400'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``$3,600'', and (2) by striking ``$4,800'' in paragraph (2) and inserting ``$5,400''.
Phase-Out of Credit for Higher Income Taxpayers.-- (1) In general.--Section 21(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to dollar limit on amount creditable) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Phaseout of credit.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount of the credit allowed under subsection (a) shall be reduced (but not below zero) by the amount determined under subparagraph (B).
Amount of reduction.--The amount determined under this paragraph equals the amount which bears the same ratio to the credit (determined without regard to this subsection) as-- ``(i) the excess of-- ``(I) the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for such taxable year, over ``(II) the threshold amount, bears to ``(ii) $10,000.
Any amount determined under this subparagraph which is not a multiple of $10 shall be rounded to the next lowest $10.
Threshold amount.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `threshold amount' means-- ``(i) $90,000 in the case of a joint return, ``(ii) $65,000 in the case of an individual who is not married, and ``(iii) $45,000 in the case of a married individual filing a separate return.
For purposes of this subparagraph, marital status shall be determined under section 7703.
Adjusted gross income.--For purposes of this paragraph, adjusted gross income of any taxpayer shall be increased by any amount excluded from gross income under section 911, 931, or 933.''
Conforming amendments.--Section 21(c) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``(c) Dollar Limit on Amount Creditable.--The'' and inserting: ``(c) Limitations.-- ``(1) Dollar limit.--The'', (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1) and (2) as subparagraphs (A) and (B), respectively, and (C) by striking ``paragraph (1) or (2)'' in the last sentence and inserting ``subparagraph (A) or (B)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
EXPANSION OF HOME OFFICE DEDUCTION TO INCLUDE USE OF OFFICE FOR DEPENDENT CARE.
In General.--Section 280A(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain business use) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``A portion of a dwelling unit and the exclusive use of such portion otherwise described in this paragraph shall not fail to be so described if such portion is also used by the taxpayer during such exclusive use to care for a dependent of the taxpayer.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section applies to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.