This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Remote Monitoring Services Coverage Act of 2001''.
COVERAGE OF REMOTE MONITORING SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (U); (2) by inserting ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (V); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (V) the following new subparagraph: ``(W) remote monitoring services that are-- ``(i) determined by the Secretary to provide comparable data to face-to-face encounter-based monitoring services (as such terms are defined in subsection (ww)); and ``(ii) provided to an individual who would otherwise be entitled to receive coverage under this title of the face-to-face encounter-based monitoring service that the Secretary determines under clause (i) to provide comparable data to the remote monitoring service;''.
Services Described.--Section 1861 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``remote monitoring services ``(ww)(1) The term `remote monitoring services' means any service provided through a system of technology that allows the collection of clinical data and the transmission of such data between a patient at a distant location and a physician through a remote interface so that the physician may conduct a clinical review of such data or provide a response relating to such data.
The term `face-to-face encounter-based monitoring services' means any in-office or facility-based service for which payment may be made under this title with a code that is specific to the collection of clinical data and the transmission of such data between a patient and a physician so that the physician may conduct a clinical review of such data or provide a response relating to such data.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `distant location' means any location that is outside of the office or the facility of the patient's physician.
Coverage of remote monitoring services under this title with respect to an individual may not be restricted based on the geographic area of residence of the individual.''.
Payment Under Physician Fee Schedule.--Section 1848 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395w-4) is amended-- (1) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Treatment of remote monitoring services.-- ``(A) Conversion factor and relative value units.-- The Secretary may not decrease the conversion factor or the number of relative value units applicable to a remote monitoring service (as defined in section 1861(ww)(1)) covered under this title pursuant to section 1861(s)(2)(W) from the conversion factor or the number of relative value units applicable to the face- to-face encounter-based monitoring service (as defined in section 1861(ww)(2)) that the Secretary determines provides comparable data to such remote monitoring service.
Frequency guidelines.--A remote monitoring service (as so defined) covered under this title pursuant to section 1861(s)(2)(W) shall be subject to the same guidelines developed on the frequency of billing for the face-to-face encounter-based monitoring service (as so defined) that the Secretary determines provides comparable data to such remote monitoring service.
''; and (2) in subsection (j)(3), by inserting ``(2)(W),'' after ``(2)(S),''.
Budget Neutrality.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall implement the amendments made by this section in a budget-neutral manner.
In applying subparagraph (D) of section 1848(f)(2) of the Social Security Act, the enactment of this section shall not be treated as a change in law or regulations resulting, but the Secretary shall adjust the sustainable growth rate under such section so as to eliminate a new increase in expenditures (if any) resulting from the enactment of this section.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the request for, or the issuance by the Secretary of Health and Human Services of, a separate billing code for any remote monitoring service (as defined in section 1861(ww)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ww)(1)), as added by subsection (b)) through an authority of the Secretary of Health and Human Services other than the authority provided by the amendments made by this section.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to services furnished on or after January 1, 2003.