SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``American-Made Energy Freedom Act of 2006''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--TAX INCENTIVES FOR CELLULOSIC BIOMASS ETHANOL, SOLAR AND FUEL CELL PROPERTY, AND CERTAIN LIQUID FUEL DERIVED FROM COAL Sec.
Increased tax credits for cellulosic biomass ethanol.
Extension of energy credit for solar and fuel cell property.
Extension and modification of credit for residential energy efficient property.
Extension and modification of excise tax credits for certain liquid fuel derived from coal.
TITLE II--AMERICAN-MADE ENERGY TRUST FUND Sec.
Establishment of American-Made Energy Trust Fund.
TITLE III--DEVELOPMENT OF OIL AND GAS RESOURCES OF THE COASTAL PLAIN OF ALASKA Sec.
Leasing program for lands within the Coastal Plain.
Grant of leases by the Secretary.
Lease terms and conditions.
Coastal plain environmental protection.
Federal and State distribution of revenues.
Rights-of-way across the Coastal Plain.
Local government impact aid and community service assistance.
TITLE I--TAX INCENTIVES FOR CELLULOSIC BIOMASS ETHANOL, SOLAR AND FUEL CELL PROPERTY, AND CERTAIN LIQUID FUEL DERIVED FROM COAL SEC.
INCREASED TAX CREDITS FOR CELLULOSIC BIOMASS ETHANOL.
Income Tax Credit.-- (1) In general.--Section 40 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alcohol used as fuel) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Increased Credit for Cellulosic Biomass Ethanol.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of cellulosic biomass ethanol-- ``(A) subsection (h) shall not apply, ``(B) if such ethanol has a proof of at least 150 but less than 190-- ``(i) subsection (b)(3) shall not apply, and ``(ii) subsections (b)(1)(A), (b)(2)(A), (d)(3)(A), and (d)(3)(B) shall each be applied by substituting `the low-proof cellulosic ethanol amount' for `60 cents', and ``(C) if such alcohol has a proof of at least 190, subsections (b)(1)(A), (b)(2)(A), (d)(3)(A), and (d)(3)(B) shall each be applied by substituting `the cellulosic ethanol amount' for `60 cents'.
Limitations.-- ``(A) Overall dollar limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any cellulosic biomass ethanol which is sold or used after the date on which the Secretary certifies that, in the estimation of the Secretary, more than $1,250,000,000 has been allowed, in the aggregate, as a credit under this section with respect to cellulosic biomass ethanol taken into account under this subsection and subsection (c).
Per taxpayer maximum.-- ``(i) In general.--With respect to any taxpayer, paragraph (1) shall only apply to the first 25,000,000 gallons of cellulosic biomass ethanol sold or used by the taxpayer during any calendar year.
Termination of taxpayer maximum.-- Clause (i) shall not apply with respect to any calendar year after the first calendar year with respect to which the Secretary certifies that, in the estimation of the Secretary, at least 10 taxpayers sell or use cellulosic biomass ethanol to which paragraph (1) applies.
Per taxpayer minimum.--With respect to any taxpayer, paragraph (1) shall not apply to any cellulosic biomass ethanol sold or used by the taxpayer during any calendar year unless the aggregate amount of cellulosic biomass ethanol sold or used by such taxpayer during such calendar year exceeds 5,000,000 gallons.
Cellulosic ethanol amount; low-proof cellulosic ethanol amount.-- ``(A) In general.--The terms `cellulosic ethanol amount' and `low-proof cellulosic ethanol amount' mean $1.25 and $1.10, respectively.
Phase-out based on price of oil.-- ``(i) In general.--The $1.25 and $1.10 amounts contained in subparagraph (A) shall each be reduced (but not below $0.51 and $0.3778, respectively) by an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount so contained in subparagraph (A) (as so increased) as-- ``(I) the amount (if any) by which the price of a barrel of crude oil exceeds $40, bears to ``(II) $71.
Determination by secretary.--The price of a barrel of crude oil shall be determined periodically by the Secretary under such methodology as the Secretary determines appropriate.
The price determined under this clause and the reduction required by clause (i) shall apply with respect to cellulosic biomass ethanol sold or used during the period with respect to which such determination relates.
Inflation adjustment of phase-out based on price of oil.--In the case of any period beginning in a calendar year after 2007, the dollar amounts contained in subclauses (I) and (II) of subparagraph (B)(i) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, determined by substituting `calendar year 2006' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
Any increase determined under the preceding sentence shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $1.
Cellulosic biomass ethanol.--The term `cellulosic biomass ethanol' means ethanol produced by enzymatic hydrolysis of any lignocellulosic or hemicellulosic feedstock that is available on a renewable or recurring basis, including agricultural residues, agricultural fibers, dedicated energy crops, grasses, plants, and wood and wood residues.
Application of aggregation, etc., rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (g) shall apply for purposes of the limitations under subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (2).''.
Termination.--Subsection (e) of section 40 of such Code (relating to termination) is amended-- (A) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3), (B) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) Cellulosic biomass ethanol.--In the case of cellulosic biomass ethanol with respect to which subsection (i)(1) applies-- ``(A) paragraph (1) shall not apply, and ``(B) this section shall not apply to any sale or use of such ethanol for any period after the earlier of the date on which the Secretary makes the certification described in subsection (i)(2)(A) or December 31, 2023.
'', and (C) by inserting ``or (2)'' after ``paragraph (1)'' in paragraph (3) (as redesignated by this paragraph).
Excise Tax Credit.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 6426(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to applicable amount) is amended-- (A) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Cellulosic biomass ethanol.--In the case of cellulosic biomass ethanol to which section 40(i)(1) applies or to which such section would apply but for subsections (c) and (e) of section 40, the applicable amount is the cellulosic ethanol amount (as defined in section 40(i)(3)).
'', and (B) by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``subparagraphs (B) or (C)''.
Termination.--Paragraph (5) of section 6426(b) of such Code (relating to termination) is amended to read as follows: ``(5) Termination.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), this subsection shall not apply to any sale, use, or removal for any period after December 31, 2010.
Cellulosic biomass ethanol.--In the case of any cellulosic biomass ethanol with respect to which paragraph (2)(C) applies-- ``(i) subparagraph (A) shall not apply, and ``(ii) this subsection shall not apply to any sale or use of such ethanol for any period after the earlier of the date on which the Secretary makes the certification described in section 40(i)(2)(A) or December 31, 2023.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to fuel sold or used after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF ENERGY CREDIT FOR SOLAR AND FUEL CELL PROPERTY.
30 Percent Credit for Solar.--Subclause (II) of section 48(a)(2)(A)(i) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``2008'' and inserting ``2013''.
Qualified Fuel Cell Property.-- (1) In general.--Subparagraph (E) of section 48(c)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``2007'' and inserting ``2012''.
Termination of special rule.--Subparagraph (D) of section 48(c)(1) of such Code is amended by inserting ``placed in service before January 1, 2008, and'' after ``qualified fuel cell property which is''.
Fiber-Optic Distributed Sunlight.--Clause (ii) of section 48(a)(3)(A) of such Code is amended by striking ``2008'' and inserting ``2013''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF CREDIT FOR RESIDENTIAL ENERGY EFFICIENT PROPERTY.
In General.--Subsection (g) of section 25D of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``2007'' and inserting ``2012''.
Modification of Maximum Credit for Qualified Solar Electricity Property.--Subparagraph (A) of section 25D(b)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(A) $2,000 with respect to each half kilowatt of capacity of property for which qualified solar electricity property expenditures are made,''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 25D(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``photovoltaic'' and inserting ``solar electricity''.
Paragraph (2) of section 25D(d) of such Code is amended in the text and in the heading by striking ``photovoltaic'' and inserting ``solar electricity''.
Paragraph (4)(A)(i) of section 25D(e) of such Code is amended by striking ``photovoltaic'' and inserting ``solar electricity''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Increase in credit for solar electricity property.--The amendments made by subsections (b) and (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2005.
Hold harmless transition rule.--In the case of any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2005, and before the date of the enactment of this Act, the taxpayer may elect (at such time and in such form and manner as the Secretary of the Treasury may determine) to apply the limitation under section 25D(b)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 which was in effect immediately before the date of the enactment of this Act for purposes of determining the credit under section 25D of such Code for such taxable year in lieu of such limitation as otherwise in effect for such year.
EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF EXCISE TAX CREDITS FOR CERTAIN LIQUID FUEL DERIVED FROM COAL.
Modification of Excise Tax Credits.--Section 6426 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (h) and by inserting after subsection (f) the following new subsection: ``(g) Special Rules for Liquid Fuel Derived From Coal.-- ``(1) Limitations.-- ``(A) Overall dollar limitation.--No liquid coal fuel shall be taken into account in determining the alternative fuel credit under subsection (d) or the alternative fuel mixture credit under subsection (e) if such fuel is sold or used after the date on which the Secretary certifies that, in the estimation of the Secretary, more than $1,500,000,000 has been allowed, in the aggregate, as a credit under this section with respect to liquid coal fuel taken into account under subsections (d) and (e).
Per taxpayer maximum.-- ``(i) In general.--With respect to any taxpayer, only the first 150,000,000 gallons of liquid coal fuel which is sold or used by the taxpayer during any calendar year may be taken into account under subsection (d) or (e).
Termination of taxpayer maximum.-- Clause (i) shall not apply with respect to any calendar year after the first calendar year with respect to which the Secretary certifies that, in the estimation of the Secretary, at least 5 taxpayers sell or use liquid coal fuel which is taken into account under subsection (d) or (e).
Per taxpayer minimum.--With respect to any taxpayer, liquid coal fuel sold or used by the taxpayer during any calendar year shall not be taken into account in determining the alternative fuel credit under subsection (d) or the alternative fuel mixture credit under subsection (e) unless the aggregate amount of liquid coal fuel sold or used by such taxpayer during such calendar year exceeds 15,000,000 gallons.
Adjustment of credit amount.--Solely for purposes of determining that portion of the alternative fuel credit under subsection (d) and the alternative fuel mixture credit under subsection (e) which is allowed with respect to liquid coal fuel-- ``(A) Phase-out based on price of oil.-- ``(i) In general.--The 50 cent amounts contained in subsections (d)(1) and (e)(1) shall each be reduced (but not below zero) by an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount so contained in subsection (d)(1) or (e)(1) (as so increased) as-- ``(I) the amount (if any) by which the price of a barrel of crude oil