This Act may be cited as the ``Forest Service Cost Reduction and Efficiency Demonstration Act of 1997''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Budgetary reductions and project delays caused by litigation have reduced certain levels of accomplishments and resource outputs by the Forest Service in recent years, with the result that many targets and goals of land and resource management plans that were developed with years of public and scientific input are not being met.
Certain staffing levels of the Forest Service have been reduced in recent years, but not to the extent that related accomplishments and resource outputs have been reduced.
Per unit costs and overhead of the Forest Service are rising substantially.
Staffing reductions and retirements have cost the Forest Service substantial expertise in certain technical and scientific disciplines.
Technical and scientific expertise relevant to Forest Service needs is available in the private sector.
Contractor performance of certain tasks would be less costly than performing those tasks using Forest Service personnel, would free agency personnel to devote their time to necessary tasks now being left undone, and would provide the Forest Service with the ability to maintain an on-demand skilled workforce to meet changing demands on public lands.
The purpose of this Act is to implement Government reform, reduce costs, and increase efficiency in the Forest Service, which has been designated as a reinvention laboratory by the Vice President, and to demonstrate that contractor performance of certain Forest Service tasks can lower the cost, improve the efficiency, and increase the accomplishment of tasks necessary to achieve the targets, goals, and desired forest conditions established by final land and resource management plans developed as required by section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604).
CONTRACTOR PERFORMANCE OF CERTAIN FOREST SERVICE TASKS.
Establishment of National Forest System Efficiency Fund.--There is established in the Office of the Secretary of Agriculture a fund to be known as the ``National Forest System Efficiency Fund'', which shall be available to the Secretary as provided in this section.
The Fund shall consist of one percent of the amount appropriated for the National Forest System account of the Forest Service budget for each of the next three fiscal years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
No other funds are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section.
Duration of Fund.--Amounts in the Fund are available for obligation during the three fiscal years referred to in subsection (a) and are available for expenditure until all obligations incurred under this section are paid.
Use of Fund for Contractor Performance.--Amounts in the Fund are available for obligation by units of the National Forest System to pay for the contractor performance of tasks related to the planning and implementation of programs and projects in the National Forest System.
The total amount expended shall be distributed among the various resource fields in approximately the same proportions as the total National Forest System budget is distributed to the resource fields in appropriation Acts.
Application and Approval Process.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall provide for an efficient and timely system of application for, and approval of, the use of amounts in the Fund for the purpose specified in subsection (c).
The Secretary may designate particular units of the National Forest System as special demonstration units for purposes of this section.
Exemption From Contracting Requirements for Small Contracts.-- In the case of a contract under $50,000 to be entered into under this section using amounts in the Fund, the preparation, solicitation, and award of the contract shall be exempt from-- (1) the requirements of the Competition in Contracting Act (41 United States Code 253 et sequentes) and the implementing regulations in the Federal Acquisition Regulation issued pursuant to section 25(c) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 421(c)) and any departmental acquisition regulations; and (2) the notice and publication requirements in section 18 of such Act (41 United States Code 416) and section 8(e) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(e)) and the implementing regulations in the Federal Acquisition Regulations and any departmental acquisition regulations.
Administrative Expenses.--A unit of the National Forest System entering into a contract under this section shall be permitted to receive from the Fund for credit to the unit's account for unit administration and overhead directly related to the contract an amount equal to not more than 20 percent of the contract price.
Use of Fund by Regional and National Offices.--Not more than five percent annually of amounts in the Fund may be used in connection with contracts entered into by regional offices of the Forest Service.
None of the amounts in the Fund may be used in connection with contracts entered into by the national office of the Forest Service.
Retention of Decisionmaking Following Public Input.--Tasks related to planning and implementation of programs and projects requiring public input prior to decisionmaking may be contracted out in accordance with this section, except that the Secretary of Agriculture shall ensure that final consideration of public input and decisionmaking following that consideration is made by an appropriate officer of the Forest Service.
Reports to Congress.--Not later than six months after the end of each fiscal year during which amounts are expended from the Fund, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to Congress a report on the tasks undertaken during the preceding fiscal year pursuant to contracts entered into under this section.
The report shall include information on costs saved as a result of using private contractors and the additional accomplishments of Forest Service employees during the time saved by using private contractors and recommendations for further expansion of the authority provided by this section.
Other Contracting Authorities.--This section shall not be construed as in any way eliminating, restricting, or replacing any other authority for the Secretary of Agriculture to contract out any tasks of the Forest Service.
The Secretary shall continue to make use of other available contracting authority, including the use of expedited fire contracting procedures.