This Act may be cited as the ``International Tuberculosis Control Act of 2002''.
Congress finds that: (1) Tuberculosis is a great health and economic burden to impoverished nations and a health and security threat to the United States and other industrialized countries.
Tuberculosis kills 2,000,000 people each year (a person every 15 seconds) and is second only to HIV/AIDS as the greatest infectious killer of adults worldwide.
Tuberculosis is today the leading killer of women of reproductive age and of people who are HIV-positive.
One-third of the world's population is currently infected with the tuberculosis bacterium, including 10,000,000 through 15,000,000 persons in the United States, and someone in the world is newly infected with tuberculosis every second.
With 46 percent of tuberculosis cases in the United States in the year 2000 found in foreign-born persons, as compared to 24 percent in 1990, it is clear that the only way to control tuberculosis in the United States is to control it worldwide.
Left untreated, a person with active tuberculosis can infect an average of 10 through 15 people in one year.
Pakistan and Afghanistan are among the 22 countries identified by the World Health Organization as having the highest tuberculosis burden globally.
More than one-quarter of all adult deaths in Pakistan are due to tuberculosis, and Afghan refugees entering Pakistan have very high rates of tuberculosis, with refugee camps, in particular, being areas where tuberculosis runs rampant.
The tuberculosis and AIDS epidemics are inextricably linked.
Tuberculosis is the first manifestation of AIDS in more than 50 percent of cases in developing countries and is responsible for 40 percent or more of deaths of people with AIDS worldwide.
An effective, low-cost cure exists for tuberculosis: Directly Observed Treatment Short-course or DOTS.
Expansion of DOTS is an urgent global priority.
DOTS is one of the most cost-effective health interventions available today.
A full course of DOTS drugs costs as little as US$10 in low-income countries.
Proper DOTS treatment is imperative to prevent the development of dangerous multidrug resistant tuberculosis (MDR- TB) that arises through improper or incomplete tuberculosis treatment.
The Global Fund to fight AIDS, Tuberculosis, and Malaria is an important new global partnership established to combat these 3 infectious diseases that together kill 6,000,000 people a year.
Expansion of effective tuberculosis treatment programs should constitute a major component of Global Fund investment.
In this Act: (1) DOTS.--The term ``DOTS'' or ``Directly Observed Treatment Short-course'' means the World Health Organization- recommended strategy for treating standard tuberculosis.
Global alliance for tuberculosis drug development.--The term ``Global Alliance for Tuberculosis Drug Development'' means the public-private partnership that brings together leaders in health, science, philanthropy, and private industry to devise new approaches to tuberculosis and to ensure that new medications are available and affordable in high tuberculosis burden countries and other affected countries.
Global plan to stop tuberculosis.--The term ``Global Plan to Stop Tuberculosis'' means the plan developed jointly by the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership Secretariat and Partners in Health that lays out what needs to be done to control and eliminate tuberculosis.
Global tuberculosis drug facility.--The term ``Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility (GDF)'' means the new initiative of the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership to increase access to high- quality tuberculosis drugs to facilitate DOTS expansion.
Stop tuberculosis partnership.--The term ``Stop Tuberculosis Partnership'' means the partnership of the World Health Organization, donors including the United States, high tuberculosis burden countries, multilateral agencies, and nongovernmental and technical agencies committed to short- and long-term measures required to control and eventually eliminate tuberculosis as a public health problem in the world.
ASSISTANCE FOR TUBERCULOSIS PREVENTION, TREATMENT, CONTROL, AND ELIMINATION.
Section 104(c) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151b(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(7)(A) Congress recognizes the growing international problem of tuberculosis and the impact its continued existence has on those countries that had previously largely controlled the disease.
Congress further recognizes that the means exist to control and treat tuberculosis by implementing the Global Plan to Stop Tuberculosis and by adequately investing in newly created mechanisms, including the Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility, and that it is therefore a major objective of the foreign assistance program to control the disease.
To this end, Congress expects the agency primarily responsible for administering this part-- ``(i) to coordinate with the World Health Organization, the Centers for Disease Control, the National Institutes of Health, and other organizations with respect to the development and implementation of a comprehensive tuberculosis control program; and ``(ii) to set as a goal the detection of at least 70 percent of the cases of infectious tuberculosis, and the cure of at least 85 percent of the cases detected, by December 31, 2005, in those countries classified by the World Health Organization as among the highest tuberculosis burden, and by December 31, 2010, in all countries in which the agency has established development programs.
(i) There is authorized to be appropriated $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2005 for carrying out this paragraph.
Funds appropriated under this paragraph are authorized to remain available until expended.
In carrying out subparagraph (A), not less than 75 percent of the amount authorized to be appropriated under subparagraph (B) shall be expended for antituberculosis drugs, supplies, patient services, and training in diagnosis and care, in order to increase directly observed treatment shortcourse (DOTS) coverage, including funding for the Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility.
In carrying out subparagraph (A), of the amount authorized to be appropriated under subparagraph (B)-- ``(i) not less than 10 percent shall be used for funding of the Global Tuberculosis Drug Facility; ``(ii) not less than 7.5 percent shall be used for funding of the Stop Tuberculosis Partnership; and ``(iii) not less than 2.5 percent shall be used for funding of the Global Alliance for Tuberculosis Drug Development.
The President shall submit a report to Congress annually specifying the increases in the number of people treated and the increases in number of tuberculosis patients cured through each program, project, or activity receiving United States foreign assistance for tuberculosis control purposes.