This Act may be cited as the ``Diabetes Self-Management Training Act of 2004''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Diabetes is the fifth leading cause of death in the United States.
Over 18,000,000 Americans (6.2 percent of the population) currently are living with diabetes, a number that is estimated to increase to 29,000,000 by the year 2050.
In 2002, diabetes accounted for $132,000,000,000 in direct and indirect health care costs.
Diabetes is widely recognized as one of the top public health threats facing our Nation today.
Diabetes can occur in 2 forms--type 1 diabetes is caused by the body's inability to produce insulin, a hormone that allows glucose or sugar to enter and fuel cells and type 2 diabetes, which occurs when the body fails to make enough insulin or fails to properly use it.
People with type 1 diabetes are required to take daily insulin injections to stay alive.
While some people with type 2 diabetes need insulin shots, others with type 2 diabetes can control their diabetes through healthy diet, nutrition, and lifestyle changes.
Type 2 diabetes accounts for up to 95 percent of all diabetes cases affecting 8 percent of the population age 20 and older.
The prevalence of type 2 diabetes has tripled in the last 30 years, with much of that increase due to an upsurge in obesity.
In 2002, the Diabetes Prevention Program study found that participants (all of whom were at increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes) who made lifestyle changes reduced their risk of getting type 2 diabetes by 58 percent.
Diabetes self-management training (DSMT), also called diabetes education, provides knowledge and skill training to patients with diabetes, helping them identify barriers, facilitate problem solving, and develop coping skills to effectively manage their diabetes.
Unlike many other diseases, diabetes requires constant vigilance on the part of the patient and demands far more than just taking pills or insulin shots.
A certified diabetes educator is a health care professional-- often a nurse, dietitian, or pharmacist, who specializes in helping people with diabetes develop the self-management skills needed to stay healthy and avoid costly acute complications and emergency care, as well as debilitating secondary conditions caused by diabetes.
There are currently over 20,000 diabetes educators in the United States, most of whom are certified diabetes educators (CDEs) credentialed by the National Certification Board for Diabetes Educators (NCBDE).
To earn a CDE designation, a health care professional must be licensed or registered, or have received an advanced degree in a relevant public health concentration, have professional practice experience and have met minimum hours requirements in diabetes self-management training, and have met certification and recertification requirements.
Many other health care professionals that are able to bill for diabetes education through the medicare program have far less experience or ability to provide the skilled expertise to help people with diabetes self-manage the disease.
CDEs represent the only group of health care professionals who provide diabetes self-management training that have not been recognized as health care providers and are therefore precluded from directly billing the medicare program for DSMT.
Adding CDEs as providers to that program would give diabetes patients access to the care they need.
RECOGNITION OF CERTIFIED DIABETES EDUCATORS AS MEDICARE PROVIDERS FOR PURPOSES OF DIABETES OUTPATIENT SELF- MANAGEMENT TRAINING SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1861(qq) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(qq)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by inserting ``and includes a certified diabetes educator (as defined in paragraph (3)) who is credentialed by a nationally recognized certifying body for diabetes educators and who provides services within a diabetes self-management training program that is lawfully operated under all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations'' before the semicolon at the end; and (B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``or is a certified diabetes educator (as so defined) who is credentialed by a nationally recognized certifying body for diabetes educators and who provides services within a diabetes self-management training program that is lawfully operated under all applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) For purposes of paragraph (2), the term `certified diabetes educator' means an individual who-- ``(A) is a health care professional who specializes in helping individuals with diabetes develop the self-management skills needed to overcome the daily challenges and problems caused by the disease; ``(B) has an advanced degree in a relevant public health concentration or is a licensed or registered health care professional, has met eligibility requirements for initial certification, including meeting the minimum requirements for professional practice experience and hours for diabetes self- management, and has passed a certification exam approved by a nationally recognized certifying body for diabetes educators; and ``(C) has periodically renewed certification status following initial certification.''.
GAO Study and Report.-- (1) Study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study to identify the barriers that exist for individuals with diabetes in accessing diabetes self-management training, including economic and geographic barriers and availability of appropriate referrals and access to adequate, qualified providers.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to Congress regarding the study conducted under paragraph (2).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to diabetes outpatient self-management training services furnished on or after the date that is 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.