This Act may be cited as the ``Congressional Reform and Compliance Act of 1992''.
APPLICATION OF LAWS RELATING TO PART-TIME CAREER EMPLOYEES.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, sections 3401 through 3408 of title 5, United States Code, shall apply to the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the Instrumentalities of the Congress in the same manner and to the same extent as they apply to agencies.
APPLICATION OF LAWS RELATING TO LABOR STANDARDS AND OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the provisions of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et seq.)
and the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes) shall, to the extent that they relate to the terms and conditions of employment (including hiring, promotion or demotion, salary, benefits, work assignments or reassignments, overtime, and termination), occupational safety and health, and the rights and responsibilities of employers and employees, apply with respect to the Senate, House of Representatives, and Instrumentalities of the Congress in the same manner and to the same extent as they apply with respect to a private person.
Right of Appeal.--If an individual referred to in section 4 is aggrieved by a violation of the laws referred to in subsection (a), such individual may, after exhausting any procedures established pursuant to rules or regulations promulgated under section 5, seek redress in a Federal district court of competent jurisdiction and shall have the same rights and remedies provided to private persons under the laws referred to in subsection (a).
INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY ACT.
This Act shall apply to the following individuals: (1) A Senator or Representative in, or Resident Commissioner or Delegate to, the Congress, for purposes of section 3.
An employee or officer of either House of Congress, of a committee of either House, or a joint committee of the two Houses.
An employee of a Member if the pay of the employee is paid by the Secretary of the Senate or the Clerk of the House of Representatives.
An employee of an Instrumentality of the Congress.
The Congress.--Not later than the 120-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the House of Representatives and the Senate shall each promulgate rules and regulations to carry out this Act as it applies to the respective Houses.
Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with Federal law.
If a House of Congress fails to promulgate such rules and regulations within such time period-- (1) in the case of a failure to promulgate rules and regulations to apply the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1939 (29 United States Code 201 et sequentes), the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor pertaining to such Act shall apply to such House; (2) in the case of a failure to promulgate rules and regulations to apply the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes), the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor pertaining to such Act shall apply to such House; and (3) in the case of a failure to promulgate rules and regulations to apply sections 3401 through 3408 of title 5, United States Code, the Secretary of Labor shall promulgate rules and regulations to make such sections applicable to such House.
Instrumentalities of the Congress.--Not later than the 120-day period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the head of each Instrumentality of the Congress shall promulgate rules and regulations to carry out this Act as it applies to such Instrumentality of the Congress.
Such rules and regulations shall be consistent with Federal law.
If an Instrumentality of the Congress fails to promulgate such rules and regulations within such time period-- (1) in the case of a failure to promulgate rules and regulations to apply the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1939 (29 United States Code 201 et sequentes), the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor pertaining to such Act shall apply to such Instrumentality of the Congress; (2) in the case of a failure to promulgate rules and regulations to apply the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes), the rules and regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor pertaining to such Act shall apply to such Instrumentality of the Congress; and (3) in the case of a failure to promulgate rules and regulations to apply sections 3401 through 3408 of title 5, United States Code, the Secretary of Labor shall promulgate rules and regulations to make such sections applicable to such Instrumentality of the Congress.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``Instrumentality of the Congress'' means the Congressional Research Service, the Office of Technology Assessment, the General Accounting Office, the Government Printing Office, the Congressional Budget Office, the Copyright Royalty Tribunal, and, for purposes of section 3, the term ``Instrumentality of the Congress'' also includes the Library of Congress, the Botanic Garden, and the Architect of the Capitol.