This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Research Product Commercialization Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROCESS REGARDING REASONABLE PRICES FOR PRODUCTS DEVELOPED AS CONSEQUENCE OF FUNDING BY NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH.
Part G of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 289 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 498 the following section: ``reasonable prices for products developed with assistance of institutes ``Sec.
In General.--Subject to the provisions of this section, for fiscal year 1994 and subsequent fiscal years, a project of biomedical research relating to the development of a drug, device, or other tangible product may not be conducted or supported by any agency of the National Institutes of Health unless there are in effect such regulations issued by the Secretary as may be necessary to ensure that, in the event the product is (in accordance with applicable law) to be made available to the public, there is compliance with the following: ``(1) The research entity, in accordance with this section, will ensure that the commercial parties involved make the product available to the public at a reasonable price, and that the commercial parties pay to the National Institutes of Health royalties reasonably related to the amounts expended by such Institutes with respect to the product.
For purposes of paragraph (1), the research entity will conduct a competitive process of bidding in order to select entities to serve as commercial parties regarding the product.
With respect to such bidding, a solicitation of applications containing bids will be published in the Federal Register.
Applicants under paragraph (2) will not be approved by the research entity as commercial parties regarding the project unless the following conditions are met: ``(A) The application specifies a formula for determining the price at which the product will be made available to the public, and the formula results in a price that is in accordance with paragraph (1).
The application specifies the royalties to be paid to the National Institutes of Health, and the royalties are in accordance with paragraph (1).
The application demonstrates that the applicant possesses the appropriate biomedical and commercial expertise.
The application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such other information as the Secretary may require.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), in selecting commercial parties under paragraph (3), the research entity will, if there are a sufficient number of qualified applicants, approve such applications as may be necessary to ensure that commercial parties compete in making the product available to the public.
The research entity will comply with subparagraph (A) only to the extent not inconsistent with paragraph (1).
(A) If there is an insufficient number of qualified applicants to provide for competing commercial parties, the research entity will, in approving applications to provide for an exclusive arrangement for making the product available to the public, require that the applicants negotiate prices and royalties under paragraph (1) with the Secretary.
If an exclusive arrangement under subparagraph (A) is to be made, the Secretary will publish in the Federal Register a notice of such fact.
An exclusive arrangement under subparagraph (A) will not become legally binding until the expiration of the 90- period beginning on the date on which the notice required in subparagraph (B) with respect to the arrangement is published in the Federal Register.
Applicability.--Subsection (a) applies with respect to a drug, device, or other tangible product only if the project of research involved provides a material contribution to achieving status as a drug, device, or other product that, under applicable law, is permitted to be made available to the public.
Required Agreements.--With respect to a project of research described in subsection (a), regulations under such subsection shall, in the case of the non-Federal entities involved, impose the requirements of this section as required agreements between such entities and the National Institutes of Health, including (if the project is supported by such Institutes) imposing the requirements as conditions of the receipt from such Institutes of the award of the grant, cooperative agreement, or contract for the conduct of the project.
Conditions for such awards shall, as necessary, include conditions governing the arrangements that the research entity involved makes with entities to serve as commercial parties regarding the drug, device, or other tangible product involved, without regard to whether the National Institutes of Health is a direct party to such arrangements.
Consultations Regarding Regulations.--In issuing regulations pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with the Director of NIH and with the Administrator of the Health Care Financing Administration.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `commercial parties' means the parties that make available to the public a drug, device, or other tangible product.
The term `make available', with respect to the use by the public of a drug, device, or other tangible product, means-- ``(A) to manufacture the product; or ``(B) to sell or trade the product, or to offer to sell or trade the product.
The term `product' means a drug, device, or other tangible product.
(A) The term `research entity', with respect to project of biomedical research described in subsection (a), means the entity with the principal property interest in the results of the research, without regard to whether the entity is the National Institutes of Health or a non-Federal entity.
An entity is a research entity under subparagraph (A) without regard to whether the property interest in the results of the project involved-- ``(i) is directly in the drug, device, or other product that is the subject of the project; or ``(ii) is only in findings that relate to the product.