CONTINUATION AND EXPANSION OF WOUNDED WARRIOR CAREERS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Continuation of Program.--The Secretary of the Army shall continue the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program being conducted in collaboration with the Army Wounded Warrior program at three locations pursuant to the memorandum of understanding on the program between the Army and the National Organization on Disability dated January 2007.
Expansion of Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Army shall expand the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program to nine additional locations in fiscal year 2011.
The expansion of the program shall be conducted under the memorandum of understanding referred to in subsection (a), as modified pursuant to subsection (f).
Additional purpose of expanded program.--The purpose of the expansion of the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program under this subsection shall be to identify and disseminate best practices related to employment counseling and job placement of severely wounded warriors into civilian communities and careers and to otherwise assess the feasibility and advisability of various additional means to support the transition and reintegration of such warriors into such communities and careers.
Locations.--Any location selected for the expansion of the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program under this subsection shall be a location at which the Army, or one or more of the other Armed Forces, have a large concentration of severely wounded warriors who are ready for career and employment counseling.
Services To Be Provided Under Program.--The services provided under the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program shall include career-development services for severely wounded warriors (and their spouses, if appropriate) that are consistent with their needs.
Such services shall be provided by utilizing a proactive, intensive, extended case-management model (including individualized counseling) pursuant to which such warriors and their families receive assistance in the following: (1) Exploring career options.
Obtaining education, skill, aptitude, and interest assessments.
Preparing resumes and career plans.
Acquiring additional education and training.
Engaging with prospective employers.
Entering into various kinds of occupations (whether full-time, part-time, paid, or volunteer, or self-employment as entrepreneurs or otherwise).
Advancing in work entered into.
Resolving obstacles through coordination with the military departments, other departments and agencies of the Federal Government, State and local governments, and other appropriate service and benefits providers.
Minimum Duration of Program.--The Secretary of the Army shall carry out the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program until not earlier than the date that is five years after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Availability of Services Under Program to Other Armed Forces.-- (1) In general.--The services provided under the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program may be provided to severely wounded warriors of one or more of the other Armed Forces pursuant to a joint agreement between the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the military department having jurisdiction over such Armed Force, and the National Organization on Disability.
Coordination.--The Secretary of Defense shall ensure coordination between the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the Navy, and the Secretary of the Air Force regarding the participation of members of other Armed Forces in the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program under this subsection, including actions to encourage and facilitate the participation of such members in the program when appropriate.
Modifications of Memorandum of Understanding.-- (1) Requirements applicable to the army.--The Secretary of the Army and the National Organization on Disability shall enter into such modifications of the memorandum of understanding referred to in subsection (a) as the Secretary and the Organization jointly consider appropriate to comply with the requirements of subsections (a) through (d).
Requirements applicable to other armed forces.--Any provision of services under the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program through a joint agreement described in subsection (e) shall be incorporated into the memorandum of understanding referred to in subsection (a) in such manner as the Secretary of the Army, the Secretary of the military department having jurisdiction over the Armed Force concerned, and the National Organization on Disability jointly consider appropriate.
Continuation of Dissemination of Lessons Learned.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Army shall continue to provide for the dissemination to other Federal departments and agencies, State and local governments, and appropriate nonprofit organizations of lessons learned and best practices developed under the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program on the provision of benefits, services, and support to severely wounded warriors.
Dissemination to va.--As part of the dissemination of information under paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall undertake such joint programs, activities, and initiatives as the Secretaries consider appropriate to facilitate and further the dissemination to the Department of Veterans Affairs of such lessons and best practices as will be of particular use to the Department in providing benefits, services, and support to veterans who were severely wounded warriors.
REPORT ON WOUNDED WARRIOR CAREERS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
In General.--Not later than six months after the completion of the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program, the Secretary of Defense shall, in conjunction with the National Organization on Disability (NOD), submit to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, and to the appropriate committees of Congress, a report on the program.
Elements.--The report required by subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) A comprehensive description of the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program, including the following: (A) Information on job placement and retention of wounded warriors who participated in the program.
A description and assessment of the career services provided under the program to wounded warriors experiencing Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) or Traumatic Brain Injury (TBI).
An assessment of the financial costs resulting from the failure of wounded warriors to gain employment or achieve self- sufficiency after service in the Armed Forces.
An assessment of the efficacy of the program in preparing wounded warriors to meet the challenges of employment after service in the Armed Forces.
Such recommendations as the Secretary considers appropriate, including recommendations for the continuation or enhancement of the services provided under the program.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means-- (A) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate; and (B) the Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.
The term ``National Organization on Disability'' refers to the non-governmental organization assisting the Department of the Army in carrying out the Wounded Warrior Careers Demonstration program in collaboration with the Army Wounded Warrior Program.