This Act may be cited as the ``Hurricane Sand Dunes National Recreation Area Act of 2014''.
In this Act: (1) Federal land.--The term ``Federal land'' means land owned and managed by the Bureau of Land Management in Washington County in the State.
Map.--The term ``map'' means the map prepared by the Bureau of Land Management entitled ``Hurricane Sand Dunes National Recreation Area'' and dated November 14, 2014.
Non-federal land.--The term ``non-Federal land'' means the State land identified on the map as State land.
Proposed exchange parcel.--The term ``proposed exchange parcel'' means the approximately 1,205 acres of Bureau of Land Management land identified on the map as ``Proposed Exchange Parcel''.
Recreation area.--The term ``Recreation Area'' means the Hurricane Sand Dunes National Recreation Area established by section 3(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Utah.
HURRICANE SAND DUNES NATIONAL RECREATION AREA, UTAH.
Designation.--There is established in the State the Hurricane Sand Dunes National Recreation Area to provide for-- (1) the enhancement of recreational uses; and (2) the use of off-highway vehicles.
Boundary.-- (1) In general.--The Recreation Area shall consist of the approximately 18,447 acres of Bureau of Land Management land in the State identified on the map as ``Open OHV Area''.
Exclusion.--The proposed exchange parcel shall be excluded from the Recreation Area.
Administration of Recreation Area and Proposed Exchange Parcel.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, shall-- (1) administer the Recreation Area and proposed exchange parcel-- (A) in accordance with-- (i) the applicable Federal laws (including regulations) and rules applicable to the Bureau of Land Management; and (ii) applicable land use plans; and (B) consistent with the administration of the Sand Mountain Open OHV Area, as in existence on the day before the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) only allow uses of the Recreation Area that are consistent with the purposes described in subsection (a).
Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this section affects the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State with respect to fish and wildlife in the State.
Adjacent Management.--Nothing in this section creates any protective perimeter or buffer zone around the Recreation Area.
Use of Off-Highway Vehicles.--The land described in subsection (b)(1) shall remain open, in perpetuity, to the use of off-highway vehicles.
EXCHANGE OF FEDERAL LAND AND NON-FEDERAL LAND.
In General.--If the State offers to convey to the United States title to the non-Federal land, the Secretary shall-- (1) accept the offer; and (2) on receipt of all right, title, and interest in and to the non-Federal land, convey to the State all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the Federal land.
Valid Existing Rights.--The exchange authorized under subsection (a) shall be subject to valid existing rights.
Title Approval.--Title to the Federal land and non-Federal land to be exchanged under this section shall be in a format acceptable to the Secretary and the State.
Appraisals.-- (1) In general.--The value of the Federal land and the non- Federal land to be exchanged under this section shall be determined by appraisals conducted by 1 or more independent appraisers retained by the State, with the consent of the Secretary.
Applicable law.--The appraisals under paragraph (1) shall be conducted in accordance with nationally recognized appraisal standards, including, as appropriate, the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions.
Approval.--The appraisals conducted under paragraph (1) shall be submitted to the Secretary and the State for approval.
Equal Value Exchange.-- (1) In general.--The value of the Federal land and non- Federal land to be exchanged under this section-- (A) shall be equal; or (B) shall be made equal in accordance with paragraph (2).
Equalization.-- (A) Surplus of federal land.--If the value of the Federal land exceeds the value of the non-Federal land, the value of the Federal land and non-Federal land shall be equalized, as determined to be appropriate and acceptable by the Secretary and the State-- (i) by reducing the acreage of the Federal land to be conveyed; or (ii) by adding additional State land to the non-Federal land to be conveyed.
Surplus of non-federal land.--If the value of the non-Federal land exceeds the value of the Federal land, the value of the Federal land and non-Federal land shall be equalized by reducing the acreage of the non-Federal land to be conveyed, as determined to be appropriate and acceptable by the Secretary and the State.
Status and Management of Non-Federal Land.--On conveyance to the Secretary, the non-Federal land shall, in accordance with section 206(c) of the Federal Land Policy Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(c)), be added to, and administered by the Secretary as part of, the Recreation Area.