This Act may be cited as the ``Environmentally Advanced Technologies Research and Development Act''.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR TECHNOLOGY ADAPTATION TO PROMOTE EXPORTS.
Establishment.--There is established a revolving fund to be known as the Environmental Technology Export Revolving Fund for the purpose of providing financial assistance for the adaptation and demonstration of United States environmental technologies to enhance exports to major international markets.
Forms of Financial Assistance.--To carry out this section, the Secretary of Commerce may, to the extent provided in appropriations Acts, use the Fund for the purpose of making loans, loan guarantees, or other forms of financial assistance to United States companies, independent research centers, institutions of higher education, and other organizations the Secretary considers appropriate.
Priorities.--In providing financial assistance under this section, the Secretary of Commerce shall give priority to environmental technologies-- (1) that require modifications through further research and development to enable commercialization in international markets; (2) that have substantial potential for use in export markets; and (3) for which substantial manufacture will remain in the United States.
Operating Plan.--Not later than January 1, 1995, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit to the Congress an operating plan to carry out this section.
The plan shall contain a description of coordination efforts with other sources of export finance assistance, including the Agency for International Development and the Overseas Private Investment Corporation, and an evaluation of alternative approaches to carrying out this section (including priorities referred to in subsection (c)).
The Secretary shall develop recommendations, as appropriate, to carry out this section in the most effective and efficient manner achievable.
The recommendations shall include a description of the system of evaluation used under this subsection.
Terms and Conditions for Financial Assistance.-- (1) Limitation on project amount.--Loans, loan guarantees, and other forms of financial assistance made under this section shall be in such form and under such terms and conditions as the Secretary of Commerce may prescribe by regulation.
The amount of assistance provided under this section for a project may not exceed 50 percent of the total eligible project costs.
The term ``total eligible project costs'' shall be defined by the Secretary of Commerce by regulation.
Limitation on total cost.--Financial assistance under this section shall be made under such terms and conditions as are necessary to ensure that the cost of carrying out this section shall not exceed 15 percent of the corresponding credit authority to carry out this section.
For purposes of this paragraph-- (A) the term ``cost'' has the meaning given such term in section 502(5) of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 (2 United States Code 661a); and (B) the term ``credit authority'' has the meaning given such term in section 3(10) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 622(10)).
Repayment.--Repayment on loans made under this section and the proceeds from any other agreement entered into by the Secretary of Commerce under this section shall be credited to the Fund.
A loan or loan guarantee agreement under this section may, at the discretion of the Secretary of Commerce, include a requirement-- (1) that a portion of any royalties received in connection with a technology developed with financial assistance under this section be paid to the United States; and (2) in any case in which the technology is used by the recipient of such financial assistance for the production and sale of goods, that a payment equal to the amount paid under paragraph (1) in connection with the technology be paid to the United States.
Interest.--Interest on a loan, or portion of a loan, awarded or guaranteed by the Federal Government under this section shall be at a rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, at the time such loan is made, to equal the then current average market yield on outstanding debt obligations of the United States with remaining periods to maturity comparable to the maturity of such loan, plus an additional charge of up to 1 percent applied by the Secretary of Commerce to cover expected defaults and reasonable administrative costs of carrying out this section.
For purposes of this section, the term ``default'' shall be defined by the Secretary of Commerce by regulation.
Management of the Fund.--The Secretary of Commerce shall manage the Fund and shall annually submit to the Congress a report on the financial condition and the results of operation of the Fund during the preceding fiscal year.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary of Commerce shall, upon request, provide technical assistance and services, as appropriate and needed, to awardees under this section and shall ensure that awardees have ready access to such assistance.
The Secretary may charge fees for technical assistance and services.
The Secretary may waive such fees on a case-by-case basis.
Fees paid to the United States under this section shall be deposited in the revolving fund.
Coordination With Other Federal Activities.--The Secretary of Commerce shall, to the maximum extent practicable, coordinate the activities under this section with similar Federal activities to avoid unnecessary duplication of effort.
Outreach to Economically Depressed Areas.--The Secretary of Commerce shall seek to ensure that qualified business concerns located in areas determined by the Secretary to have a depressed economy, or a significant concentration of defense-related industries, or chronically high unemployment, are notified of the availability of financial assistance under this section and, to the extent practicable, to encourage and facilitate the participation of such qualified business concerns in activities for which financial assistance in provided under this section.