This Act may be cited as the ``Subsidized Stafford Loan Reduced Interest Rate Extension Act of 2012''.
TITLE I--EXTENSION OF REDUCED INTEREST RATE SEC.
Section 455(b)(7)(D) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087e(b)(7)(D)) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ``and before July 1, 2012,'' and inserting ``and before July 1, 2013,''; and (2) in clause (v), by striking ``and before July 1, 2012,'' and inserting ``and before July 1, 2013,''.
TITLE II--IMPROPER PAYMENTS ELIMINATION AND RECOVERY IMPROVEMENT SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Improper Payments Elimination and Recovery Improvement Act of 2012''.
In this title, the term ``agency'' means an executive agency defined under section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
IMPROVING THE DETERMINATION OF IMPROPER PAYMENTS BY FEDERAL AGENCIES.
In General.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall on an annual basis-- (1) identify a list of high-priority Federal programs for greater levels of oversight and review-- (A) in which the highest dollar value or majority of governmentwide improper payments occur; or (B) for which there is a higher risk of improper payments; (2) in coordination with the agency responsible for administering the high-priority program-- (A) establish semi-annual or quarterly targets and actions for reducing improper payments associated with each high-priority program; or (B) if such targets are in effect on the date of enactment of this Act, establish supplemental targets; and (3) determine the entities that have received the greatest amount of improper payments (or, if improper payments are identified solely on the basis of a sample, the entities that have received the greatest amount of improper payments in the applicable sample).
Report on High-Dollar Improper Payments.-- (1) In general.--Subject to Federal privacy policies and to the extent permitted by law, each agency on a quarterly basis shall submit to the Inspector General of that agency, and make available to the public (including availability through the Internet), a report on any high-dollar improper payments identified by the agency.
Contents.--Each report under this subsection-- (A) shall describe-- (i) any action the agency-- (I) has taken or plans to take to recover improper payments; and (II) intends to take to prevent future improper payments; and (B) shall not include any referrals the agency made or anticipates making to the Department of Justice, or any information provided in connection with such referrals.
Availability of information to inspector general.-- Paragraph (2)(B) shall not prohibit any referral or information being made available to an Inspector General as otherwise provided by law.
Assessment.--After the review of each report under this subsection, the Inspector General shall-- (A) assess the level of risk associated with the applicable program and the quality of the improper payment estimates and methodology of the agency; (B) determine the extent of additional oversight or financial controls warranted to identify and prevent improper payments; and (C) provide the head of the agency with any recommendations, for modifying any plans of the agency, including improvements for improper payments determination and estimation methodology.
Improved Estimates.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall provide guidance to agencies for improving the estimates of improper payments under the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (31 United States Code 3321 note).
Guidance.--Guidance under this subsection shall-- (A) strengthen the estimation process of agencies by reviewing the underlying validity of payments to ensure amounts being billed are proper; and (B) include-- (i) access to more complete data as part of reviews; (ii) ending reliance on self-reporting of improper payments as a replacement for estimates, and relying on the development of a robust process to estimate and identify improper payments across the agency; (iii) all overpayments in the improper payments estimate, regardless of whether improperly paid funds have been or are being recovered; (iv) ensuring that-- (I) the review of payments to employees shall include analysis of employee data, including pay grade data, locality pay, and other factors that affect pay; and (II) reviews address high-risk or high-dollar personnel payments, including travel, pay, and purchase cards; (v) reassessing high-risk programs to better reflect the unique processes, procedures, and risks of improper payments, including assessments for each program to reflect different risk components and better direct corrective actions; and (vi) confirming that inter-agency transfers are proper using a methodology comparable to that used to assess program level improper payments.
Section 2(a)(3)(A)(ii) of the Improper Payments Information Act of 2002 (31 United States Code 3321 note) is amended by striking ``with respect to fiscal years following September 30th of a fiscal year beginning before fiscal year 2013 as determined by the Office of Management and Budget'' and inserting ``with respect to fiscal year 2014 and each fiscal year thereafter''.
DO NOT PAY INITIATIVE.
Prepayment and Preaward Procedures.-- (1) In general.--Each agency shall review prepayment and preaward procedures and ensure that a thorough review of available databases with relevant information on eligibility occurs to determine program or award eligibility and prevent improper payments before the release of any Federal funds, to the extent permitted by law.
Databases.--At a minimum, each agency shall, before payment and award, check the following databases (if applicable and permitted by law) to verify eligibility: (A) The Death Master File of the Social Security Administration.
The General Services Administration's Excluded Parties List System.
The Debt Check Database of the Department of the Treasury.
The Credit Alert System or Credit Alert Interactive Voice Response System of the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
The List of Excluded Individuals/Entities of the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Do Not Pay List.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the Do Not Pay List which shall consist of-- (A) the databases described under subsection (a)(2); and (B) any other database designated by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in consultation with agencies.
Other databases.--In making designations of other databases under paragraph (1)(B), the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall consider-- (A) any database that assists in preventing improper payments; and (B) the database of incarcerated individuals established under subsection (f).
Access and review by agencies.--For purposes of identifying and preventing improper payment, each agency shall have access to, and use of, the Do Not Pay List to determine payment or award eligibility when the Director of the Office of Management and Budget determines the Do Not Pay List is appropriately established for the agency.
Payment otherwise required.--When using the Do Not Pay List, an agency shall recognize that there may be circumstances under which the law requires a payment or award to be made to a recipient, regardless of whether that recipient is on the Do Not Pay List.
Database Integration Plan.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall provide to the Congress a plan for-- (1) inclusion of other databases on the Do Not Pay List; (2) to the extent permitted by law, agency access to the Do Not Pay List; and (3) the multilateral data use agreements described under subsection (e).
Initial Working System.-- (1) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall establish a working system for prepayment and preaward review that includes the Do Not Pay List as described under this section.
Initial system.--The working system established under paragraph (1)-- (A) may be located within an appropriate agency; (B) shall include not less than 3 agencies; (C) shall include fraud and improper payments detection through predictive modeling and other analytic technologies and other techniques; and (D) may provide for the use of commercial database sources, commercial analysis, and other functionality for payment or award reviews, as determined appropriate by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget for verifying Federal data.
Application to all agencies.--Not later than January 1, 2013, each agency shall review all payments and awards for all programs of that agency through the system established under this subsection.
Multilateral Data Use Agreements.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall develop a plan to establish a multilateral data use agreement authority to carry out this section, including access to databases such as the New Hire Database under section 453(j) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 653(j)).
General protocols and security.-- (A) In general.--The multilateral data use agreements shall be consistent with protocols to ensure the secure transfer and storage of any data provided to another entity or individual-- (i) under the provisions of, or amendments made by, this section; and (ii) consistent with applicable information, privacy, security, and disclosure laws, including-- (I) the regulations promulgated under the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and section 552a of title 5, United States Code; and (II) subject to any information systems security requirements under such laws or otherwise required by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
Consultation.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall consult with-- (i) the Council of Inspectors General on Integrity and Efficiency before implementing this paragraph; and (ii) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Social Security Administrator, and the head of any other agency, as appropriate.
Development and Access to a Database of Incarcerated Individuals.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General shall develop and maintain a database of individuals incarcerated at Federal and State facilities.
Availability and update.--The database developed under this subsection shall be-- (A) available to agencies to carry out this section and prevent waste, fraud, and abuse; and (B) updated no less frequently than on a weekly basis.
Plan To Improve the Social Security Administration Death Master File.-- (1) Establishment.--In conjunction with the Commissioner of Social Security and in consultation with stakeholders and the States, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall establish a plan for improving the quality and timeliness of death data maintained by the Social Security Administration, including death information reported to the Commissioner under section 205(r) of the Social Security Act (42 U.5.C.
Actions under plan.--The plan established under this subsection shall include actions agencies are required to take to-- (A) increase the quality and frequency of access; (B) achieve a goal of at least daily access as appropriate; and (C) provide for all States to use modern, electronic means for providing data.
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall submit a report to Congress on the plan established under this subsection, including recommended legislation.
IMPROVING RECOVERY OF IMPROPER PAYMENTS.
In General.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall determine-- (1) current and historical rates and amounts of recovery of improper payments (or, in cases in which improper payments are identified solely on the basis of a sample, recovery rates and amounts estimated on the basis of the applicable sample), including specific information of amounts and payments recovered by recovery audit contractors; and (2) targets for recovering improper payments, including specific information on amounts and payments recovered by recovery audit contractors.
Recovery Audit Contractor Programs.-- (1) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall establish a plan for no less than 10 Recovery Audit Contracting programs for the purpose of identifying and recovering overpayments and underpayments in 10 agencies.
Review of commercial payments.--Of the programs established under this subsection, 5 programs shall review commercial payments by an agency.
Duration.--Any program established under this subsection shall terminate not more than 3 years after the date on which the program is established.
Reports.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 3 months after the completion of a program, the head of the agency conducting the program shall submit a report on the program to Congress.
Contents.--Each report under this paragraph shall include-- (i) a description of the impact of the program on savings and recoveries; and (ii) such recommendations as the head of the agency considers appropriate on extending or expanding the program.