This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1993''.
CONSULTATION BETWEEN FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE AND THE SECRETARY OF THE TREASURY, THE DIRECTOR OF THE OMB, AND THE CHAIRMAN OF THE CEA.
Section 2A of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 225a) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``The Board of Governors'' and inserting ``(a) In General.--The Board of Governors''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Consultation Required.--The Federal Open Market Committee shall meet and consult with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, and the chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors-- ``(1) during the 30-day period immediately preceding the date on which each report required under the second sentence of subsection (a) is submitted to the Congress by the Board of Governors; and ``(2) during the 30-day period beginning on the date which is 100 days immediately preceding the date by which the President is required to submit the budget under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code.''.
APPOINTMENT OF THE CHAIRMAN AND VICE CHAIRMAN.
Appointment of the Chairman and Vice Chairman.--The second paragraph of section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 242) is amended by striking the third sentence and inserting the following: ``The President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, one member of the Board to serve as Chairman.
The term of such member as Chairman shall expire on January 31 of the first calendar year beginning after the end of the term of the President who appointed such member as Chairman.
If a member appointed as Chairman does not complete the term of such office as established in the preceding sentence, the President shall appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, another member to complete the unexpired portion of such term.
The President shall also appoint, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, one member of the Board to serve as Vice Chairman for a term of 4 years.
The Chairman and the Vice Chairman may each serve after the end of their respective terms until a successor has taken office.''.
Performance of Duties.--The second paragraph of section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 242) (as amended by subsection (a)) is amended by inserting after the seventh sentence the following: ``In the event of the absence or unavailability of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman or (in the Vice Chairman's absence) another member of the Board may be designated by the Chairman to perform the duties of the office of the Chairman.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman until a successor takes office.
If a vacancy occurs in the office of the Vice Chairman while the office of the Chairman is vacant, the member of the Board with the most years of service on the Board shall perform the duties of the Chairman until a successor takes office.''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
Current chairman to complete term.--Notwithstanding the amendment made by subsection (a), any member who holds the office of Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System on the date of enactment of this Act shall continue in such office during the remainder of the term to which such member was appointed.
DISCLOSURE OF INTERMEDIATE TARGETS.
Section 12A(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 263(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, each change, of any nature whatsoever, in the intermediate targets for monetary policy, which change is adopted by the Committee, shall be disclosed to the public on the date on which such change is adopted.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `intermediate targets' means any policy objectives regarding monetary aggregates, credit aggregates, prices, interest rates, or bank reserves.''.
AUDIT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Section 714(b) of title 31, United States Code (relating to audits by the Comptroller General), is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or'' at the end; (2) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3); and (3) by amending paragraph (4) to read as follows: ``(2) memoranda, letters, or other written communications between or among members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or officers or employees of the Federal Reserve System relating to any transaction described in paragraph (1).''.
BOARD SUBJECT TO BUDGET PROCESS.
Section 1105 of title 31, United States Code (relating to budget contents and submission to Congress), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Federal Reserve Board Budget Treatment.--Not later than October 16 of each year, the estimated receipts and proposed expenditures of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System and all Federal Reserve Banks for the current year and the next 2 succeeding years shall be transmitted by the Board to the President.
The President shall transmit to the Congress the information received in accordance with this subsection, without change, together with the budget transmitted to the Congress under subsection (a).