SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Science and Technology Innovation Act of 2008''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--REAUTHORIZATION OF PROGRAMS Sec.
Extension of SBIR and STTR Programs.
TITLE II--FEDERAL INNOVATIONS INVESTMENTS Sec.
Adjustments in SBIR and STTR award levels.
Majority equity investment in SBIR and STTR firms.
TITLE III--UTILIZATION SUPPORT Sec.
Agency databases to support program evaluation.
Agency databases to support technology utilization.
TITLE IV--OUTREACH AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE Sec.
Use of program funds for administrative costs.
SBIR discretionary technical assistance.
Conforming amendments to the SBIR and STTR policy directives.
National Research Council SBIR Study.
TITLE I--REAUTHORIZATION OF PROGRAMS SEC.
EXTENSION OF SBIR AND STTR PROGRAMS.
SBIR Program.--Section 9(m) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(m)) is amended by striking ``2008'' and inserting ``2010''.
STTR Program.--Section 9(n)(1)(A) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(n)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``2009'' and inserting ``2010''.
TITLE II--FEDERAL INNOVATIONS INVESTMENTS SEC.
Section 9(f)(1) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(f)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking ``each fiscal year thereafter,'' and inserting ``each of fiscal years 1997 through 2008; and''; and (3) by adding after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) not less than 3 percent in fiscal year 2009 and each fiscal year thereafter,''.
Section 9(n)(1)(B) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(n)(1)(B)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``fiscal year 2004 and each fiscal year thereafter.''
and inserting ``each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008; and''; and (3) by adding after clause (ii) the following new clause: ``(iii) 0.6 percent for fiscal year 2009 and each fiscal year thereafter.''.
ADJUSTMENTS IN SBIR AND STTR AWARD LEVELS.
SBIR Adjustments.--Section 9(j)(2)(D) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(j)(2)(D)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$300,000''; and (2) by striking ``$750,000'' and inserting ``$2,200,000''.
STTR Adjustments.--Section 9(p)(2)(B)(ix) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(p)(2)(B)(ix)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$100,000'' and inserting ``$300,000''; and (2) by striking ``$750,000'' and inserting ``$2,200,000''.
Annual Adjustments.--Section 9 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638) is amended-- (1) in subsection (j)(2)(D), by striking ``and an adjustment of such amounts once every 5 years to reflect economic adjustments and programmatic considerations'' and inserting ``and a mandatory annual adjustment of such amounts to reflect economic adjustments and programmatic considerations''; and (2) in subsection (p)(2)(B)(ix), by striking ``greater or lesser amounts'' and inserting ``with a mandatory annual adjustment of such amounts to reflect economic adjustments and programmatic considerations, and with lesser amounts''.
Limitation on Certain Awards.--Section 9 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(z) Limitation on Phase I and II Awards.--No Federal agency shall issue an award under the SBIR program or the STTR program if the size of the award exceeds the amounts established under subsections (j)(2)(D) and (p)(2)(B)(ix).
Subsequent Phases.-- ``(1) In general.--A small business concern which received an award from a Federal agency under this section shall be eligible to receive an award for a subsequent phase from another Federal agency, if the head of each relevant Federal agency makes a written determination that the topics of the relevant awards are the same.
Crossover between programs.--A small business concern which received an award under this section under the SBIR program or the STTR program may, at the discretion of the granting agency, receive an award under this section for a subsequent phase in either the SBIR program or the STTR program.
Phase ii sbir applications.--An agency may permit an applicant to apply directly for a Phase II award, as described in subsection (e)(4)(B), without first completing a Phase I award, as described in subsection (e)(4)(A), if the applicant can demonstrate that project feasibility was achieved without SBIR or other Federal funding.
Phase ii sttr applications.--An agency may permit an applicant to submit proposals for Phase II awards, as described in subsection (e)(6)(B), without first completing a Phase I award, as described in subsection (e)(6)(A), if the applicant can demonstrate it has accomplished Phase I through cooperative research and development achieved without STTR or other Federal funding.
Waiver of Minimum Work Requirement.--A Federal agency making an SBIR or STTR award under this section may waive the minimum small business concern or research institution work requirements under subsection (e)(7) if the agency determines that to provide such waiver would be consistent with the purposes of this section and consistent with achieving the objectives of the award proposal.''.
MAJORITY EQUITY INVESTMENT IN SBIR AND STTR FIRMS.
Section 9 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(cc) Majority Equity Investment in SBIR and STTR Firms.-- ``(1) Qualification requirements.--No small business concern shall be excluded from participation in the SBIR or STTR program on the ground that such small business concern is owned in majority part by more than 1 equity provider, except that no single equity provider shall be permitted to own more than 49 percent of such small business concern.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) the term `equity provider' means a venture capital operating company; and ``(B) the term `venture capital operating company' means a business concern that-- ``(i) is a venture capital operating company, as that term is defined in regulations promulgated by the Secretary of Labor under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974; ``(ii) is registered under the Investment Company Act of 1940 (15 United States Code 80a-51 et sequentes); or ``(iii) is an investment company, as defined in section 3(c)(14) of such Act (15 United States Code 80a-3(c)(14)), which is not registered under such Act because it is beneficially owned by less than 100 persons.''.
TITLE III--UTILIZATION SUPPORT SEC.
AGENCY DATABASES TO SUPPORT PROGRAM EVALUATION.
Section 9(k) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(k)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(A)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii); (B) by inserting ``and'' at the end of clause (iii); and (C) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) information on the ownership structure of award recipients, both at the time of receipt of the award and upon completion of the award period;''; (2) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows: ``(3) Updating information for database.-- ``(A) In general.--A Federal agency shall not make a Phase I or Phase II payment to a small business concern under this section unless the small business concern has provided all information required under this subsection with respect to the award under which the payment is made, and with respect to any other award under this section previously received by the small business concern or a predecessor in interest to the small business concern.
Apportionment.--In complying with this paragraph, a small business concern may apportion sales or additional investment information relating to more than one second phase award among those awards, if it notes the apportionment for each award.
Annual updates upon termination.--A small business concern receiving an award under this section shall-- ``(i) in the case of a second phase award, update information in the databases required under paragraphs (2) and (6) concerning that award at the termination of the award period; ``(ii) in the case of award recipients not described in clause (iii), be requested to voluntarily update such information annually thereafter for a period of 5 years; and ``(iii) in the case of a small business concern applying for a subsequent first phase or second phase award, be required to update such information annually thereafter for a period of 5 years.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Agency program evaluation databases.--Each Federal agency required to establish an SBIR or STTR program under this section shall develop and maintain, for the purpose of evaluating such programs, a database containing information required to be contained in the database under paragraph (2).
Each such database shall be designed to be accessible to other agencies that are required to maintain a database under this paragraph.''.
AGENCY DATABASES TO SUPPORT TECHNOLOGY UTILIZATION.
Section 9(k) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(k)), as amended by this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Agency databases to support technology utilization.-- Each Federal agency with an SBIR or STTR program shall create and maintain a technology utilization database, which shall be available to the public and shall contain data supplied by the award recipients specifically to help them attract customers for the products and services generated under the SBIR or STTR project, and to attract additional investors and business partners.
Each database created under this paragraph shall include information on the other databases created under this paragraph by other Federal agencies.
Participation in a database under this paragraph shall be voluntary, except that such participation is required of all award recipients who received supplemental payments from SBIR and STTR program funds above their initial Phase II award.''.
Establishment.--The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy shall establish an Interagency SBIR/STTR Policy Committee comprised of one representative from each Federal agency with an SBIR program.
Cochairs.--The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy and the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall jointly chair the Interagency Policy Committee.
Duties.--The Interagency Policy Committee shall review the following issues and make policy recommendations on ways to improve program effectiveness and efficiency: (1) The public and government databases described in section 9(k)(1) and (2) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(k)(1) and (2)).
Federal agency flexibility in establishing Phase I and II award sizes, and appropriate criteria to exercise such flexibility.
Commercialization assistance best practices in Federal agencies with significant potential to be employed by other agencies, and the appropriate steps to achieve that leverage, as well as proposals for new initiatives to address funding gaps business concerns face after Phase II but before commercialization.
Reports.--The Interagency Policy Committee shall transmit to the Committee on Science and Technology and the Committee on Small Business of the House of Representatives, and to the Committee on Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate-- (1) a report its review and recommendations under subsection (c)(1) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act; (2) a report its review and recommendations under subsection (c)(2) not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act; and (3) a report its review and recommendations under subsection (c)(3) not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE IV--OUTREACH AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE SEC.
USE OF PROGRAM FUNDS FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
Section 9 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638) is amended-- (1) in subsection (f)(2)(A), by striking ``any'' and inserting ``more than 3.0 percent''; and (2) in subsection (n)(2)(A), by striking ``any'' and inserting ``more than 3.0 percent''.
SBIR DISCRETIONARY TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
Section 9(q) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 638(q)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``paragraph (2)(A), or another Federal agency under paragraph (2)(B),''; (B) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C); (C) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``; and''; and (D) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) implementing manufacturing processes and production strategies for utilization.
''; (2) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2) Assistance providers.-- ``(A) Vendor selection.--Each agency may select a vendor to assist small business concerns to meet the goals listed in paragraph (1) for a term not to exceed 3 years.
Such selection shall be competitive and shall utilize merit-based criteria.
Interagency collaboration.--In addition, each agency may enter into a collaborative agreement with the technical extension or assistance programs of other Federal agencies in order to provide the assistance described in paragraph (1).
''; and (3) in paragraph (3)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``$4,000'' and inserting ``$5,000''; and (B) by amending subparagraph (B) to read as follows: ``(B) Second phase.--Each agency referred to in paragraph (1) may provide directly, or authorize any second phase SBIR award recipient to purchase with funds available from their SBIR awards, services described in paragraph (1), in an amount equal to not more than $8,000 per year, per award.''.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO THE SBIR AND STTR POLICY DIRECTIVES.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Small Business Administration shall promulgate amendments to the SBIR and the STTR Policy Directives to conform such directives to this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL SBIR STUDY.
Section 108(d) of the Small Business Reauthorization Act of 2000 is amended-- (1) by striking ``of the Senate'' and all that follows through ``not later than 3'' and inserting ``of the Senate, not later than 3''; and (2) by striking ``; and'' and all that follows through ``update of such report''.