This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Integrity Act of 2000''.
REQUIREMENTS APPLICABLE TO POLITICAL ORGANIZATIONS UNDER INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 527(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Political organization.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `political organization' means a party, committee, association, fund, or other organization (whether or not incorporated)-- ``(i) organized and operated primarily for the purpose of directly or indirectly accepting contributions or making expenditures, or both, for an exempt function; and ``(ii) except as provided in subparagraph (B), which files an annual statement with the Secretary under which it certifies that it is in compliance with subsections (a) and (b) of section 304A of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Exception for certain organizations.-- Subparagraph (A)(ii) does not apply with respect to any of the following: ``(i) Subject to subparagraph (C), any organization which exists for the exclusive purpose of influencing or attempting to influence-- ``(I) the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any State or local public office or office in a State or local political organization; ``(II) the appointment of any individual to any Federal public office; or ``(III) the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any office in a political organization.
Any committee, club, association, or other group of persons (other than a separate segregated fund established under section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b)) which accepts contributions or makes expenditures (as defined in this subsection) during a calendar year in an aggregate amount of less than $5,000.
Any political committee described in section 301(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Treatment of certain communications.-- ``(i) In general.--No organization may be treated as an organization described in subparagraph (B)(i) if it makes payments described in clause (ii) during an election cycle.
Communications described.--A payment described in this clause is a payment for any communication which mentions a clearly identified candidate for election for Federal office or which contains the likeness of such a candidate, other than a payment for a communication described in clause (i) of section 301(9)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(9)(B)) or a payment described in clause (v) of such section.
Election cycle defined.--In this subparagraph, the term `election cycle' means, with respect to a candidate for election for Federal office, the period beginning on the first day following the date of the last general election for such office and ending on the date of the next general election for such office.
Timing of statement of compliance.--The annual statement of compliance required under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be filed not later than the time for filing an annual return under section 6012(a)(6) (whether or not the organization is required to file a return under such section for such year).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 2000.
REPORTING REQUIREMENTS UNDER FEDERAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN ACT OF 1971 DESCRIBED.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 304 the following new section: ``reporting requirements for political organizations ``Sec.
Statement of Organization.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 527(e)(1)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, a political organization described in section 527(e)(1) of such Code is in compliance with this subsection with respect to a calendar year if it files with the Commission a statement of organization (containing the information described in paragraph (2)) not later than 10 days after the organization first receives or spends an aggregate amount equal to or greater than $5,000 during the year for an exempt function described in section 527(e)(2) of such Code.
Contents of statement.--The statement of organization filed by a political organization under paragraph (1) shall contain-- ``(A) the name, address, and type of organization; ``(B) the name, address, relationship, and type of connected or affiliated organization; ``(C) the name, address, and position of the custodian of books and accounts of the organization; and ``(D) the name, address, and position of the president, chief executive officer, or similar authority of the organization.
Report of Receipts and Disbursements.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 527(e)(1)(A)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, a political organization described in section 527(e)(1) of such Code is in compliance with this subsection if it files with the Commission reports of its receipts and disbursements (containing the information described in paragraph (2)) at the same time and in the same manner as a political committee which files reports under section 304(a)(4).
Contents of reports.--Each report filed by a political organization under paragraph (1) shall include the following information: ``(A) The amount of cash on hand at the beginning of the reporting period.
For the reporting period and the calendar year, the total amount of all receipts, and the total amount of all receipts in the following categories: ``(i) Receipts from persons other than political committees.
Receipts from political party committees.
Receipts from other political committees.
All loans (other than loans made by or guaranteed by a candidate).
Dividends, interest, and other forms of receipts.
The identification of each-- ``(i) person (other than a political committee) who makes a disbursement to the organization during the reporting period, whose disbursements have an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year, or in any lesser amount if the organization should so elect, together with the date and amount of any such disbursement; ``(ii) political committee which makes a disbursement to the organization during the reporting period, together with the date and amount of any such disbursement; ``(iii) person who makes a loan to the organization during the reporting period, together with the identification of any endorser or guarantor of such loan, and the date and amount or value of such loan; ``(iv) person who provides a rebate, refund, or other offset to operating expenditures to the organization in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year, together with the date and amount of such receipt; and ``(v) person who provides any dividend, interest, or other receipt to the organization in an aggregate value or amount in excess of $200 within the calendar year, together with the date and amount of any such receipt.
For the reporting period and the calendar year, the total amount of all disbursements, and all disbursements in the following categories: ``(i) Disbursements to persons other than political committees.
Disbursements to political party committees.
Disbursements to other political committees.
The repayment of all loans (other than loans made by or guaranteed by a candidate).
The name and address of each-- ``(i) person to whom a disbursement in an aggregate amount or value in excess of $200 within the calendar year is made by the organization to meet a candidate or organization operating expense, together with the date, amount, and purpose of such operating expenditure; ``(ii) person who receives a loan repayment from the organization during the reporting period, together with the date and amount of such loan repayment; and ``(iii) person who receives a refund or other offset to receipts from the organization where such receipt was reported under subparagraph (C)(i), together with the date and amount of such disbursement.