This Act may be cited as the ``Deep Water Outfall Treatment Systems Act of 1996''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) States that are insular areas, including the territories of the United States, have geographical, geological, and marine characteristics and island environments.
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act should, consistent with the environmental goals of the Act, be administered with sufficient flexibility to take into consideration the unique characteristics of such States.
Scientific evidence has demonstrated that some deep water outfall water treatment systems can protect marine environments as effectively as secondary waste water treatment systems.
Deep water outfalls can promote the environmental goals of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act more cost effectively than secondary treatment.
The existing secondary treatment requirements of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act have yet to be fulfilled because of the unreasonableness of some provisions as applied to the States referred to in paragraph (1).
Such States should be provided the opportunity to apply for a secondary treatment waiver for new or proposed deep water outfalls under the existing standards of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
The purpose of this Act is to allow certain States, including each territory of the United States, to apply for a waiver under section 301(h) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act that would allow the State to construct deep water outfalls and to meet the effluent standards of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act more effectively, efficiently, and expeditiously.
WAIVERS FOR DEEP WATER OUTFALLS IN ELIGIBLE STATES.
Section 301 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1311) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(q) Waivers For Deep Water Outfalls in Eligible States.-- ``(1) Studies.--Not later than 3 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection, an eligible State may initiate, expand, or continue a study of the marine environment of coastal areas to determine the feasibility of constructing a deep water outfall for any of the publicly owned treatment works in the eligible State that, on such date of enactment, uses primary treatments and is not exempt from the requirements of subsection (b)(1)(B).
Such study may recommend one or more technically feasible locations for a deep water outfall that would have beneficial effects on the marine environment.
Application for modification.--Notwithstanding subsection (j)(1)(A), not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection, an application may be submitted for a modification pursuant to subsection (h) of the requirements of subsection (b)(1)(B) by the owner of a publicly owned treatment works in an eligible State at a location recommended in a study conducted pursuant to paragraph (1).
Initial determination.--On or before the 90th day after the date of submittal of an application for a modification under paragraph (2), the Administrator shall issue to the applicant a draft initial determination regarding the modification.
Final determination.--On or before the 270th day after the date of submittal of an application for a modification under paragraph (2), the Administrator shall issue a final determination regarding the modification.
Effectiveness.--If a modification is granted pursuant to an application submitted under this subsection, such modification shall be effective only if the new deepwater outfall is operational on or before the date that is 5 years after the date of the enactment of this subsection.
In all other aspects, such modification shall be effective for the period applicable to all modifications granted under subsection (h).
Pending applications.--The requirements of subsection (b)(1)(B) shall not apply to the owner or operator of a publicly owned treatment works in an eligible State that has submitted an application for a modification under paragraph (2) during the period beginning on the date of submission of the application and ending on the date of a final determination under paragraph (4).
Definitions.--In this subsection, the following definitions apply: ``(A) Eligible state.--The term `eligible State' means a State that is an insular area and includes each territory of the United States.
Territory of the united states.--The term `territory of the United States' means all territories and possessions of the United States, including the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Northern Mariana Islands.