Congress makes the following findings: (1) A national institution in Washington, District of Columbia, the Nation's Capital, that is dedicated to the heritage of women does not exist.
In the 34-year period beginning with 1963, only 2 exhibits were authorized on women's history at the National Museum of American History.
Less than 5 percent of the Nation's 2,200 National Historic Landmarks are dedicated to women, and there are only 40 public outdoor statues of American women in our Nation.
The historic contributions of women to civilization and to our Nation have gone unnoted or are misunderstood, leaving a gap in our Nation's historical record.
Knowledge of one's heritage is critical in developing a personal sense of competence and potential.
Lack of appreciation for women's historic contributions leads to a lack of value, understanding, and respect for women and girls, and invites discrimination or violence against females.
A National Museum of Women's History is needed to profile the specific achievements that individual women have made to all aspects of human endeavor, and to explore and celebrate the contributions that women have made in their various roles in family and society.
There is established an advisory committee to be known as the National Museum of Women's History Advisory Committee (in this Act referred to as the ``Advisory Committee'').
Composition.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 5 ex officio nonvoting members and 21 voting members.
Ex Officio Nonvoting Members.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 5 ex officio nonvoting members, of whom-- (1) 1 member shall be appointed by the President; (2) 1 member shall be appointed by the Secretary of the Interior; (3) 1 member shall be appointed by the Administrator of General Services; (4) 1 member shall be appointed by the Secretary of Commerce; and (5) 1 member shall be appointed by the Secretary of Education.
Voting Members.--The Advisory Committee shall be composed of 21 voting members, of whom-- (1) 1 member shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, from among the Members of the House of Representatives; (2) 1 member shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, from among the Members of the House of Representatives; (3) 1 member shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, from among the Members of the Senate; (4) 1 member shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate, from among the Members of the Senate; (5) 5 members shall be appointed by the President of the National Museum of Women's History, Inc., from among the founding members of such Board or the members of such Board; and (6) 12 members shall be appointed by the President of the National Museum of Women's History, Inc., in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, from among private citizens who can contribute to the success of the Advisory Committee as determined by such President-- (A) at least 5 of whom shall be appointed after consultation with the Organization of American Historians, the American Studies Association, the American Historical Associations, the Women's Studies Association, the American Association of Museums, and other interested academic or professional organizations; and (B) at least 2 of whom shall be appointed on the basis of their expertise in financial matters.
Timeline.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Limitation.--Effective 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and notwithstanding subsections (a) through (d), the failure of an appointing authority to appoint a member under subsection (b), or under paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of subsection (c), shall not affect the ability of the Advisory Committee to meet and carry out the functions of the Committee under this Act.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.--The Advisory Committee shall conduct a thorough study of all matters relating to-- (1) identifying and recommending a site for the National Museum of Women's History in Washington, District of Columbia; (2) developing a business plan for the creation and maintenance of the National Museum of Women's History, which shall be funded solely through private contributions by the American people; and (3) assisting with respect to the collection and programs of the National Museum of Women's History.
First Meeting.--The Advisory Committee shall hold the first meeting of the Advisory Committee not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Final Report.--The Advisory Committee shall submit a final report to Congress regarding the matters studied under subsection (a) not later than 6 months after the date of the first meeting of the Advisory Committee.
From amounts available to the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary shall provide all necessary administrative services, facilities, support, and funds necessary for the performance of the duties of the Advisory Committee.
Each member of the Advisory Committee who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government may receive compensation for each day such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Advisory Committee at a daily rate to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior.
Such rate shall not exceed the maximum daily rate of pay for a position classified above GS-15 under section 5108 of title 5, United States Code.
Members of the Advisory Committee shall be entitled to travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized under sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons in the Federal Government service employed temporarily or intermittently.