This Act may be cited as the ``California Ocean Protection Act of 1995''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the coast of California possesses unique historical, ecological, educational, recreational, economic, and research values that are appropriate for protection under Federal law; (2) the threat to the coast of California, a national treasure, continues to intensify as a result of fossil fuel exploration and development, mineral extraction, and the burning and dumping of toxic and hazardous wastes; (3) the activities referred to in paragraph (2) could result in irreparable damage to the coast of California; and (4) the establishment of an ocean protection zone off the coast of California would enhance recreational and commercial fisheries, and the use of renewable resources within the zone.
DESIGNATION OF CALIFORNIA OCEAN PROTECTION ZONE.
There is hereby established a California Ocean Protection Zone.
The Zone consists of-- (1) waters of the Exclusive Economic Zone off the coast of California that are outside the waters of the State of California; and (2) that portion of the outer Continental Shelf underlying the waters.
Mineral Exploration, Development, and Production.-- (1) Issuance of leases, permits, and licenses.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the head of a Federal agency may not issue a lease, permit, or license for exploration for or development or production of minerals in or from the Zone.
Exploration, development, and production.-- (A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a person may not engage in exploration for or development or production of minerals in or from the Zone after the date-- (i) of the cancellation, expiration, transfer, relinquishment, or termination of a lease, permit, or license in effect on the date of enactment of this Act pursuant to which the exploration, development, or production is carried out; (ii) of the suspension of operations associated with the exploration, development, or production under regulations described in subparagraph (B); or (iii) on which a lease, permit, or license for the exploration, development, or production in any way becomes inactive, as determined by the Secretary of the Interior under regulations described in subparagraph (B).
Regulations.--The regulations referred to in subparagraph (A) are those regulations implementing the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et seq.
), as in effect on January 1, 1986.
Ocean Incineration and Dumping.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the head of a Federal agency may not issue a lease, permit, or license for-- (1) ocean incineration or harmful ocean dumping within the Zone; or (2) any onshore facility that facilitates ocean incineration or harmful ocean dumping within the Zone.
This Act is not intended to regulate, restrict, or prohibit commercial or recreational fishing, or other harvesting of ocean life in the Zone.
As used in this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Development.--The term ``development'' has the meaning provided in section 2(l) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(l)).
Exclusive economic zone.--The term ``Exclusive Economic Zone'' means the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States, as defined by Presidential Proclamation 5030 of March 10, 1983.
Exploration.--The term ``exploration'' has the meaning provided in section 2(k) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(k)).
Harmful ocean dumping.--The term ``harmful ocean dumping'' has such meaning as is provided by the Administrator, in consultation with the heads of other Federal agencies whom the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
The term does not include-- (A) a de minimis disposal of vessel waste; (B) the disposal of dredged material that-- (i) would meet the requirements for disposal under the criteria that apply under section 103 of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1413), including regulations promulgated under such section; or (ii) is disposed of pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to such section; (C) a discharge that is authorized under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1342); and (D) a disposal that is carried out by an appropriate Federal agency under title I of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1411 et sequentes).
Lease.--The term ``lease'' has the meaning provided in section 2(c) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(c)).
Minerals.--The term ``minerals'' has the meaning provided in section 2(q) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(q)).
Outer continental shelf.--The term ``Outer Continental Shelf'' has the meaning provided in section 2(a) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(a)).
Person.--The term ``person'' has the meaning provided in section 2(d) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(d)).
Production.--The term ``production'' has the meaning provided in section 2(m) of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331(m)).
Territorial sea.--The term ``territorial sea'' means the territorial sea proclaimed in Presidential Proclamation 5928, dated December 27, 1988.
Zone.--The term ``Zone'' means the California Ocean Protection Zone established under section 3 of this Act.