This Act may be cited as the ``Indian Tribal Justice Technical and Legal Assistance Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds and declares that-- (1) there is a government-to-government relationship between the United States and Indian tribes; (2) Indian tribes are sovereign entities and are responsible for exercising governmental authority over Indian lands; (3) the rate of violent crime committed in Indian country is approximately twice the rate of violent crime committed in the United States as a whole; (4) in any community, a high rate of violent crime is a major obstacle to investment, job creation and economic growth; (5) tribal justice systems are an essential part of tribal governments and serve as important forums for ensuring the health and safety and the political integrity of tribal governments; (6) Congress and the Federal courts have repeatedly recognized tribal justice systems as the most appropriate forums for the adjudication of disputes affecting personal and property rights on Native lands; (7) enhancing tribal court systems and improving access to those systems serves the dual Federal goals of tribal political self-determination and economic self-sufficiency; (8) there is both inadequate funding and an inadequate coordinating mechanism to meet the technical and legal assistance needs of tribal justice systems and this lack of adequate technical and legal assistance funding impairs their operation; (9) tribal court membership organizations have served a critical role in providing training and technical assistance for development and enhancement of tribal justice systems; (10) Indian legal services programs, as funded partially through the Legal Services Corporation, have an established record of providing cost effective legal assistance to Indian people in tribal court forums, and also contribute significantly to the development of tribal courts and tribal jurisprudence; and (11) the provision of adequate technical assistance to tribal courts and legal assistance to both individuals and tribal courts is an essential element in the development of strong tribal court systems.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) to carry out the responsibility of the United States to Indian tribes and members of Indian tribes by ensuring access to quality technical and legal assistance.
To strengthen and improve the capacity of tribal court systems that address civil and criminal causes of action under the jurisdiction of Indian tribes.
To strengthen tribal governments and the economies of Indian tribes through the enhancement and, where appropriate, development of tribal court systems for the administration of justice in Indian country by providing technical and legal assistance services.
To encourage collaborative efforts between national or regional membership organizations and associations whose membership consists of judicial system personnel within tribal justice systems; non-profit entities which provide legal assistance services for Indian tribes, members of Indian tribes, and/or tribal justice systems.
To assist in the development of tribal judicial systems by supplementing prior congressional efforts such as the Indian Tribal Justice Act (Public Law 103-176).
For purposes of this Act: (1) Attorney general.--The term ``Attorney General'' means the Attorney General of the United States.
Indian lands.--The term ``Indian lands'' shall include lands within the definition of ``Indian country'', as defined in section 1151 of title 18, United States Code; or ``Indian reservations'', as defined in section 3(d) of the Indian Financing Act of 1974 (25 United States Code 1452(d)), or section 4(10) of the Indian Child Welfare Act (25 U.S.C 1903(10)).
For purposes of the preceding sentence, such section 3(d) of the Indian Financing Act shall be applied by treating the term ``former Indian reservations in Oklahoma'' as including only lands which are within the jurisdictional area of an Oklahoma Indian Tribe (as determined by the Secretary of the Interior) and are recognized by such Secretary as eligible for trust land status under part 151 of title 25, Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of enactment of this sentence).
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, pueblo, or other organized group or community which administers justice or plans to administer justice under its inherent authority or the authority of the United States and which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indian tribes because of their status as Indians.
Judicial personnel.--The term ``judicial personnel'' means any judge, magistrate, court counselor, court clerk, court administrator, bailiff, probation officer, officer of the court, dispute resolution facilitator, or other official, employee, or volunteer within the tribal judicial system.
Non-profit entities.--The term ``non-profit entity'' or ``non-profit entities'' has the meaning given that term in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Office of tribal justice.--The term ``Office of Tribal Justice'' means the Office of Tribal Justice in the United States Department of Justice.
Tribal justice system.--The term ``tribal court'', ``tribal court system'', or ``tribal justice system'' means the entire judicial branch, and employees thereof, of an Indian tribe, including, but not limited to, traditional methods and fora for dispute resolution, trial courts, appellate courts, including inter-tribal appellate courts, alternative dispute resolution systems, and circuit rider systems, established by inherent tribunal authority whether or not they constitute a court of record.
TITLE I--TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, CIVIL AND CRIMINAL LEGAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS SEC.
TRIBAL JUSTICE TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Office of Tribal Justice, shall award grants to national or regional membership organizations and associations whose membership consists of judicial system personnel within tribal justice systems which submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and manner as the Attorney General may prescribe to provide training and technical assistance for the development, enrichment, enhancement of tribal justice systems, or other purposes consistent with this Act.
TRIBAL CIVIL LEGAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Office of Tribal Justice, shall award grants to non-profit entities, as defined under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, which provide legal assistance services for Indian tribes, members of Indian tribes, or tribal justice systems pursuant to Federal poverty guidelines that submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and manner as the Attorney General may prescribe for the provision of civil legal assistance to members of Indian tribes and tribal justice systems, and/ or other purposes consistent with this Act.
TRIBAL CRIMINAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Attorney General, in consultation with the Office of Tribal Justice, shall award grants to non-profit entities, as defined by section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, which provide legal assistance services for Indian tribes, members of Indian tribes, or tribal justice systems pursuant to Federal poverty guidelines that submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and manner as the Attorney General may prescribe for the provision of criminal legal assistance to members of Indian tribes and tribal justice systems, and/or other purposes consistent with this Act.
Funding under this title may apply to programs, procedures, or proceedings involving adult criminal actions, juvenile delinquency actions, and/or guardian-ad-litem appointments arising out of criminal or delinquency acts.
No Federal agency shall offset funds made available pursuant to this Act for Indian tribal court membership organizations or Indian legal services organizations against other funds otherwise available for use in connection with technical or legal assistance to tribal justice systems or members of Indian tribes.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to-- (1) encroach upon or diminish in any way the inherent sovereign authority of each tribal government to determine the role of the tribal justice system within the tribal government or to enact and enforce tribal laws; (2) diminish in any way the authority of tribal governments to appoint personnel; (3) impair the rights of each tribal government to determine the nature of its own legal system or the appointment of authority within the tribal government; (4) alter in any way any tribal traditional dispute resolution fora; (5) imply that any tribal justice system is an instrumentality of the United States; or (6) diminish the trust responsibility of the United States to Indian tribal governments and tribal justice systems of such governments.
For purposes of carrying out the activities under this title, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
TITLE II--INDIAN TRIBAL COURTS SEC.
In General.--The Attorney General may award grants and provide technical assistance to Indian tribes to enable such tribes to carry out programs to support-- (1) the development, enhancement, and continuing operation of tribal justice systems; and (2) the development and implementation of-- (A) tribal codes and sentencing guidelines; (B) inter-tribal courts and appellate systems; (C) tribal probation services, diversion programs, and alternative sentencing provisions; (D) tribal juvenile services and multi-disciplinary protocols for child physical and sexual abuse; and (E) traditional tribal judicial practices, traditional tribal justice systems, and traditional methods of dispute resolution.
Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Attorney General may consult with the Office of Tribal Justice and any other appropriate tribal or Federal officials.
Regulations.--The Attorney General may promulgate such regulations and guidelines as may be necessary to carry out this title.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For purposes of carrying out the activities under this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for fiscal years 2000 through 2004.
Section 201 of the Indian Tribal Justice Act (25 United States Code 3621) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000'' and inserting ``2000 through 2007''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000'' and inserting ``2000 through 2007''; (3) in subsection (c), by striking ``1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000'' and inserting ``2000 through 2007''; and (4) in subsection (d), by striking ``1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000'' and inserting ``2000 through 2007''.
TITLE III--TECHNICAL AMENDMENTS TO ALASKA NATIVE CLAIMS SETTLEMENT ACT SEC.
Section 41 of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1629g) is amended as follows: (1) Subsection (a)(3)(I)(4) is amended by striking ``and Reindeer'' and inserting ``or''.
Subsection (a)(4)(B) is amended by striking ``; and'' and inserting ``; or''.
Subsection (b)(1)(B)(i) is amended by striking ``June 2, 1971'' and inserting ``December 31, 1971''.
Subsection (b)(2) is amended by striking the matter preceding subparagraph (A) and inserting the following: ``(2) The personal representative or special administrator, appointed in an Alaska State court proceeding of the estate of a decedent who was eligible under subsection (b)(1)(A) may, for the benefit of the heirs, select an allotment if the decedent was a veteran who served in South East Asia at any time during the period beginning August 5, 1964, and ending December 31, 1971, and during that period the decedent--''.
LEVIES ON SETTLEMENT TRUST INTERESTS.
Section 39(c) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1629e(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) A beneficiary's interest in a settlement trust and the distributions thereon shall be subject to creditor action (including without limitation, levy attachment, pledge, lien, judgment execution, assignment, and the insolvency and bankruptcy laws) only to the extent that Settlement Common Stock and the distributions thereon are subject to such creditor action under section 7(h) of this Act.''.
TITLE IV--NATIONAL LEADERSHIP SYMPOSIUM FOR AMERICAN INDIAN, ALASKAN NATIVE, AND NATIVE HAWAIIAN YOUTH SEC.
ADMINISTRATION OF NATIONAL LEADERSHIP SYMPOSIUM FOR AMERICAN INDIAN, ALASKAN NATIVE, AND NATIVE HAWAIIAN YOUTH.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Education for the Washington Workshops Foundation $2,200,000 for administration of a national leadership symposium for American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian youth on the traditions and values of American democracy.
Content of Symposium.--The symposium administered under subsection (a) shall-- (1) be comprised of youth seminar programs which study the workings and practices of American national government in Washington, DC, to be held in conjunction with the opening of the Smithsonian National Museum of the American Indian; and (2) envision the participation and enhancement of American Indian, Alaskan Native, and Native Hawaiian youth in the American political process by interfacing in the first-hand operations of the United States Government.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.