This Act may be cited as the ``Yates Firearm Registration and Crime Prevention Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) crimes committed with guns threaten the peace and domestic tranquillity of the citizens of the United States and the security and general welfare of the Nation and its people; (2) the unregistered and unregulated circulation of firearms in the United States increases the number of crimes committed with firearms; (3) firearms crimes have created a substantial burden on interstate and foreign commerce; (4) fear of firearms crimes discourages citizens from traveling between the States to conduct business or to visit national shrines and monuments, including the Nation's Capital; (5) in view of the ease with which firearms may be concealed and transported across State lines, individual State action to regulate firearms is made ineffective by lax regulation in other States and, accordingly, national legislation establishing minimum standards for the registration and regulation of firearms is necessary to permit effective State action; (6) crimes committed with guns have disrupted our national political processes and threaten the republican form of government within the States as guaranteed by Article IV of the United States Constitution; (7) the use of guns in homicides is not evenly distributed across population subgroups, death and injury in criminal violence from firearms are especially pronounced in the younger age groups and among minorities, and firearm homicide is the second leading cause of death for 15- to 19-year-olds and is increasing more rapidly than any other cause of death; (8) the Second Amendment to the United States Constitution was established to provide for the common defense by protecting the rights of the individual States to organize militias in times of national emergency; (9) firearm ownership is a privilege, not unlike that of driving a car, and it is the duty and obligation of the Federal Government to institute regulations and guidelines in order to safeguard the welfare of the general public; and (10) officials of the Government of the United States, including 4 Presidents of the United States and candidates for national public office, have been assassinated by use of firearms, and the lives of national officials of the legislative, executive, and judicial branches are increasingly threatened by the unregistered and unregulated circulation of firearms in the United States.
REGISTRATION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM TRANSFERS; FIREARMS PERMITS.
In General.--Title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 44 the following: ``CHAPTER 44A--REGISTRATION OF FIREARMS AND FIREARM TRANSFERS; FIREARMS PERMITS ``Sec.
Registration of firearms and firearm transfers.
Permits for possession and transfer of firearms and ammunition.
Disposition of unregistered firearms.
Effect on State law.
Definitions ``The definitions in section 921(a) shall apply for purposes of this chapter.
Registration of firearms and firearm transfers ``(a)(1) It shall be unlawful for any person who owns a firearm in the United States on the effective date of this chapter to fail to register the firearm with the Secretary in accordance with subsection (b) within 1 year after the effective date.
It shall be unlawful for any person who manufactures a firearm in, or imports a firearm into, the United States to fail to register the firearm with the Secretary in accordance with subsection (b) within 7 calendar days after the date of manufacture or importation.
(A) It shall be unlawful for any person who transfers, or to whom is transferred, a firearm in the United States to fail to register the firearm transfer with the Secretary in accordance with subsection (b) within 7 calendar days after the date of the transfer.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the delivery of a firearm by or to a common carrier, licensed pursuant to Federal or State law to transport firearms, in connection with the otherwise lawful transport of the firearm.
A person may register a firearm or firearm transfer by submitting to the Secretary, in person or by mail, the following information: ``(1) The name, age, address, and social security number (if any), of-- ``(A) the person; or ``(B) in the case of a firearm transfer, the transferor and the transferee.
The name of the manufacturer, the caliber or gauge (as appropriate), the model and type, and the serial number identification (if any) of the firearm.
It shall be unlawful for any person who discovers that the person has lost a firearm or that a firearm has been stolen from the person to fail to submit to the Secretary, during the 48-hour period that begins with the time the person discovers the loss or theft, a report of the loss or theft, which shall include such information as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe, including the date and place of the loss or theft.
Permits for possession and transfer of firearms and ammunition ``(a)(1) Beginning 1 year after the effective date of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for a person to possess a firearm or ammunition in or affecting commerce unless the Secretary has issued to the person a firearms permit under subsection (b) which has not become invalid.
(A) It shall be unlawful for a person to transfer or receive a firearm or ammunition in or affecting commerce unless the transferee or recipient has and displays to the transferor a firearms permit issued to the transferee or recipient by the Secretary under subsection (b) which has not become invalid.
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the delivery of a firearm by or to, or the receipt of a firearm from, a common carrier licensed pursuant to Federal or State law to transport firearms, in connection with the otherwise lawful transportation of the firearm.
The Secretary shall issue a firearms permit to an applicant upon receipt of a written application that contains the following: ``(1) A statement that the applicant-- ``(A) has attained 18 years of age; ``(B) is not under indictment for, or been convicted in a court of, a crime punishable by imprisonment for a term exceeding 1 year; ``(C) is not a fugitive from justice; ``(D) is not an unlawful user of, or addicted to, a controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 802)); ``(E) has not been adjudicated as a mental defective or been committed to a mental institution; ``(F) is not an alien who is illegally or unlawfully in the United States; ``(G) has not been discharged from the armed forces under dishonorable conditions; ``(H) is not a person who, having been a citizen of the United States, has renounced such citizenship; and ``(I) is not subject to a court order that-- ``(i) was issued after a hearing of which the applicant received actual notice, and at which the applicant had an opportunity to participate; ``(ii) restrains the applicant from harassing, stalking, or threatening an intimate partner of the applicant or a child of such an intimate partner or the applicant, or engaging in other conduct that would place an intimate partner in reasonable fear of bodily injury to the partner or child; and ``(iii)(I) includes a finding that the applicant represents a credible threat to the physical safety of such intimate partner or child; or ``(II) by its terms explicitly prohibits the use, attempted use, or threatened use of physical force against such intimate partner or child that would reasonably be expected to cause bodily injury.
A photograph and fingerprints of the applicant, which shall be obtained in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
Such additional information regarding the applicant, including date and place of birth, gender, height, weight, eye and hair color, and present and previous residences, as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.
The notarized signature of the applicant, who shall swear or attest to the truth of all statements, information, and material provided in the application.
A firearms permit issued to a person under subsection (b) shall be invalid if it becomes unlawful for the person to receive a firearm in interstate or foreign commerce.
It shall be unlawful for a person to fail to return to the Secretary a firearms permit issued to the person under subsection (b) within 7 calendar days after the date the permit becomes invalid.
Disposition of unregistered firearms ``(a) Within 1 year after the effective date of this chapter, the owner of a firearm may dispose of the firearm at such place as the Secretary may designate, and upon such disposition, the Secretary shall pay the owner an amount equal to the fair market value of the firearm.
The Secretary shall provide for the destruction of any firearm acquired by the Secretary pursuant to this section, except any such firearm which the Secretary finds is needed in a criminal investigation or prosecution, or has unique historic or technological value.
Penalties ``(a) Whoever knowingly owns, possesses, transfers, or receives any firearm or ammunition in violation of this chapter shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Whoever knowingly obliterates, defaces, or otherwise alters the serial number identification of a firearm shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Whoever knowingly violates section 942(c) shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Whoever, with the intent to evade a requirement or obstruct the enforcement of this chapter, furnishes to a person a firearms permit which has not been issued to the person under section 943(b) shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Whoever knowingly violates section 943(d) shall be fined under this title, imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Any firearm or ammunition involved in, or used or intended to be used in, a violation of this chapter shall be subject to seizure and forfeiture, and all provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 relating to the seizure, forfeiture, and disposition of firearms (as defined in section 5845(a) of such Code) shall, so far as applicable, extend to seizures and forfeitures under this subsection.
Administration ``(a) The Secretary shall establish and maintain records of the information submitted pursuant to this chapter.
The Secretary shall cooperate with the State and local law enforcement officers in making available to them, under appropriate safeguards, information gathered pursuant to this chapter, and shall undertake to establish reciprocal channels of information with the States to carry out this chapter.
The Secretary may prescribe such rules and regulations as the Secretary deems reasonably necessary to carry out this chapter.
To meet the expenses of carrying out this chapter, the Secretary may prescribe reasonable fees to be paid by any person who-- ``(1) registers a firearm or firearm transfer pursuant to section 942; or ``(2) applies for a permit under section 943.
Upon request of the Secretary, the head of a department or agency of the Federal Government shall assist the Secretary in the administration of this chapter, unless the President prohibits the provision of such assistance.
Effect on State law ``No provision of this chapter shall be construed as indicating an intent on the part of the Congress to occupy the field in which the provision operates to the exclusion of the law of any State or possession on the same subject matter, unless there is a direct and positive conflict between the provision and the law of the State or possession so that the 2 cannot be reconciled or consistently stand together.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.