This Act may be cited as the ``Nanotechnology in the Schools Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The rapidly growing field of nanotechnology is generating scientific and technological breakthroughs that will benefit society by improving the way many things are designed and made.
Nanotechnology is likely to have a significant, positive impact on the security, economic well-being, and health of Americans as fields related to nanotechnology expand.
In order to maximize the benefits of nanotechnology to individuals in the United States, the United States must maintain world leadership in the field of nanotechnology, including nanoscience and microtechnology, in the face of determined competition from other nations.
According to the National Science Foundation, foreign students on temporary visas earned 32 percent of all science and engineering doctorates awarded in the United States in 2003, the last year for which data is available.
Foreign students earned 55 percent of the engineering doctorates.
Many of these students expressed an intent to return to their country of origin after completing their study.
To maintain world leadership in nanotechnology, the United States must make a long-term investment in educating United States students in secondary schools and institutions of higher education, so that the students are able to conduct nanoscience research and develop and commercialize nanotechnology applications.
Preparing United States students for careers in nanotechnology, including nanoscience, requires that the students have access to the necessary scientific tools, including scanning electron microscopes designed for teaching, and requires training to enable teachers and professors to use those tools in the classroom and the laboratory.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to strengthen the capacity of United States secondary schools and institutions of higher education to prepare students for careers in nanotechnology by providing grants to those schools and institutions to provide the tools necessary for such preparation.
In this Act: (1) Eligible institution.--The term ``eligible institution'' means an institution that is-- (A) a public or charter secondary school that offers 1 or more advanced placement science courses or international baccalaureate science courses; (B) a community college, as defined in section 3301 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7011); or (C) a 4-year institution of higher education or a branch, within the meaning of section 498 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1099c), of such an institution.
Institution of higher education; secondary school; secretary.--The terms ``institution of higher education'', ``secondary school'', and ``Secretary'' have the meanings given the terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Qualified nanotechnology equipment.--The term ``qualified nanotechnology equipment'' means equipment, instrumentation, or hardware that is-- (A) used for teaching nanotechnology in the classroom; and (B) manufactured in the United States at least 50 percent from articles, materials, or supplies that are mined, produced, or manufactured, as the case may be, in the United States.
In General.--The Director of the National Science Foundation (referred to in this Act as the ``Director'') shall establish a nanotechnology in the schools program to strengthen the capacity of eligible institutions to provide instruction in nanotechnology.
In carrying out the program, the Director shall award grants of not more than $150,000 to eligible institutions to provide such instruction.
Activities Supported.-- (1) In general.--An eligible institution shall use a grant awarded under this Act-- (A) to acquire qualified nanotechnology equipment and software designed for teaching students about nanotechnology in the classroom; (B) to develop and provide educational services, including carrying out faculty development, to prepare students or faculty seeking a degree or certificate that is approved by the State, or a regional accrediting body recognized by the Secretary of Education; and (C) to provide teacher education and certification to individuals who seek to acquire or enhance technology skills in order to use nanotechnology in the classroom or instructional process.
Limitation.-- (A) Uses.--Not more than \1/4\ of the amount of the funds made available through a grant awarded under this Act may be used for software, educational services, or teacher education and certification as described in this subsection.
Programs.--In the case of a grant awarded under this Act to a community college or institution of higher education, the funds made available through the grant may be used only in undergraduate programs.
Applications and Selection.-- (1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this Act, an eligible institution shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Procedure.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director shall establish a procedure for accepting such applications and publish an announcement of such procedure, including a statement regarding the availability of funds, in the Federal Register.
Selection.--In selecting eligible institutions to receive grants under this Act, and encouraging eligible institutions to apply for such grants, the Director shall, to the greatest extent practicable-- (A) select eligible entities in geographically diverse locations; (B) encourage the application of historically Black colleges and universities (meaning part B institutions, as defined in section 322 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1061)) and minority institutions (as defined in section 365 of such Act (20 United States Code 1067k)); and (C) select eligible institutions that include institutions located in States participating in the Experimental Program to Stimulate Competitive Research (commonly known as ``EPSCoR'').
Matching Requirement and Limitation.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Requirement.--The Director may not award a grant to an eligible institution under this Act unless such institution agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the institution in carrying out the program for which the grant was awarded, such institution will make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions in an amount equal to \1/4\ of the amount of the grant.
Waiver.--The Director shall waive the matching requirement described in subparagraph (A) for any institution with no endowment, or an endowment that has a dollar value lower than $5,000,000, as of the date of the waiver.
Limitation.-- (A) Branches.--If a branch described in section 3(1)(C) receives a grant under this Act that exceeds $100,000, that branch shall not be eligible, until 2 years after the date of receipt of the grant, to receive another grant under this Act.
Other eligible institutions.--If an eligible institution other than a branch referred to in subparagraph (A) receives a grant under this Act that exceeds $100,000, that institution shall not be eligible, until 2 years after the date of receipt of the grant, to receive another grant under this Act.
ANNUAL REPORT AND EVALUATION.
Report by Institutions.--Each institution that receives a grant under this Act shall prepare and submit a report to the Director, not later than 1 year after the date of receipt of the grant, on its use of the grant funds.
Review and Evaluation.-- (1) Review.--The Director shall annually review the reports submitted under subsection (a).
Evaluation.--At the end of every third year, the Director shall evaluate the program authorized by this Act on the basis of those reports.
The Director, in the evaluation, shall describe the activities carried out by the institutions receiving grants under this Act and shall assess the short- range and long-range impact of the activities carried out under the grants on the students, faculty, and staff of the institutions.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 6 months after conducting an evaluation under subsection (b), the Director shall prepare and submit a report to Congress based on the evaluation.
In the report, the Director shall include such recommendations, including recommendations concerning the continuing need for Federal support of the program carried out under this Act, as may be appropriate.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Director to carry out this Act $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2008, and such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2009 through 2011.