This Act may be cited as the ``Low Income Taxpayer Protection Act of 2001''.
REGULATION OF INCOME TAX RETURN PREPARERS AND REFUND ANTICIPATION LOAN PROVIDERS.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Income tax return preparer.-- (A) In general.--The term ``income tax return preparer'' means any individual who is an income tax return preparer (within the meaning of section 7701(a)(36) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) who prepares not less than 5 returns of tax imposed by subtitle A of such Code or claims for refunds of tax imposed by such subtitle A per taxable year.
Exception.--Such term shall not include a federally authorized tax practitioner within the meaning of section of 7526(a)(3) of such Code.
Refund anticipation loan provider.--The term ``refund anticipation loan provider'' means a person who makes a loan of money or of any other thing of value to a taxpayer because of the taxpayer's anticipated receipt of a Federal tax refund.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
Regulations.-- (1) Registration required.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations that-- (i) require the registration of income tax return preparers and of refund anticipation loan providers with the Secretary or the designee of the Secretary, and (ii) prohibit the payment of a refund of tax to a refund anticipation loan provider or an income tax return preparer that is the result of a tax return which is prepared by the refund anticipation loan provider or the income tax return preparer which does not include the refund anticipation loan provider's or the income tax return preparer's registration number.
No disciplinary action.--The regulations shall require that an applicant for registration must not have demonstrated any conduct that would warrant disciplinary action under part 10 of title 31, Code of Federal Regulations.
Burden of registration.--In promulgating the regulations, the Secretary shall minimize the burden and cost on the registrant.
Rules of conduct.--All registrants shall be subject to rules of conduct that are consistent with the rules that govern federally authorized tax practitioners.
Reasonable fees and interest rates.--The Secretary, after consultation with any expert as the Secretary deems appropriate, shall include in the regulations guidance on reasonable fees and interest rates charged to taxpayers in connection with loans to taxpayers made by refund anticipation loan providers.
Renewal of registration.--The regulations shall determine the time frame required for renewal of registration and the manner in which a registered income tax return preparer or a registered refund anticipation loan provider must renew such registration.
Fees.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may require the payment of reasonable fees for registration and for renewal of registration under the regulations.
Purpose of fees.--Any fees required under this paragraph shall inure to the Secretary for the purpose of reimbursement of the costs of administering the requirements of the regulations.
Prohibition.--Section 6695 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to other assessable penalties with respect to the preparation of income tax returns for other persons) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Actions on a Taxpayer's Behalf by a Non-Registered Person.-- Any person not registered pursuant to the regulations promulgated by the Secretary under the Low Income Taxpayer Protection Act of 2001 who-- ``(1) prepares a tax return for another taxpayer for compensation, or ``(2) provides a loan to a taxpayer that is linked to or in anticipation of a tax refund for the taxpayer, shall be subject to a $500 penalty for each incident of noncompliance.''.
Coordination with Section 6060(a).--The Secretary shall determine whether the registration required under the regulations issued pursuant to this section should be in lieu of the return requirements of section 6060.
Paperwork Reduction.--The Secretary shall minimize the amount of paperwork required of a income tax return preparer or a refund anticipation loan provider to meet the requirements of these regulations.
IMPROVED SERVICES FOR TAXPAYERS.
Electronic Filing Efforts.-- (1) In General.--The Secretary shall focus electronic filing efforts on benefiting the taxpayer by-- (A) reducing the time between receipt of an electronically filed return and remitting a refund, if any, (B) reducing the cost of filing a return electronically, (C) improving services provided by the Internal Revenue Service to low and moderate income taxpayers, and (D) providing tax-related computer software at no or nominal cost to low and moderate income taxpayers.
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report on the efforts made pursuant to paragraph (1).
Volunteer Income Tax Assistance Program.-- (1) Study.--The Secretary shall undertake a study on the expansion of the volunteer income tax assistance program to service more low income taxpayers.
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report on the study conducted pursuant to paragraph (1).
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (A) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary for volunteer income tax assistance clinics $6,000,000, to remain available until expended.
Use of funds.--Such amounts appropriated under subparagraph (A) shall be used for the operating expenses of volunteer income tax assistance clinics, expenses for providing electronic filing expenditures through such clinics, and related expenses.
Tele-Filing.--The Secretary shall ensure that tele-filing is available for all taxpayers for the filing of tax returns with respect to taxable years beginning in 2001.
Deposit Indicator Program.-- (1) Review.--The Secretary shall review the decision to reinstate the Deposit Indicator program.
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress a report on the review made pursuant to paragraph (1).
Direct Deposit Accounts.--The Secretary shall allocate resources to programs to assist low income taxpayers in establishing accounts at financial institutions that receive direct deposits from the United States Treasury.
Pilot Program for Mobile Tax Return Filing Offices.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish a pilot program for the creation of four mobile tax return filing offices with electronic filing capabilities.
Location of service.-- (A) In general.--The mobile tax return filing offices shall be located in communities that the Secretary determines have a high incidence of taxpayers claiming the earned income tax credit.
Indian reservation.--At least one mobile tax return filing office shall be on or near an Indian reservation (as defined in section 168(j)(6) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986).