This Act may be cited as the ``Libby Health Care Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the vermiculite ore mined and milled in Libby, Montana, was contaminated by high levels of asbestos, particularly tremolite asbestos; (2) the vermiculite mining and milling processes released thousands of pounds of asbestos-contaminated dust into the air around Libby, Montana, every day, exposing mine workers and Libby residents to high levels of asbestos over a prolonged period of time; (3) the Federal Government has known for over 50 years that there are severe health risks associated with prolonged exposure to asbestos, including higher incidences of asbestos related disease such as asbestosis, lung cancer, and mesothelioma; (4) the United States was aware of accumulating asbestos pollution in Libby, Montana, as early as 1941, but failed to take any corrective action for decades, and once corrective action was taken, it was inadequate to protect workers and residents and asbestos-contaminated vermiculite dust continued to be released into the air in and around Libby, Montana, until the early 1990s when the vermiculite mining and milling process was finally halted; (5) the United States Environmental Protection Agency did not respond to massive asbestos contamination in Libby, Montana, until 1999, when the high rates of disease and death associated with exposure to asbestos in Libby, Montana, made national headlines; (6) current and former residents of Libby, Montana, and former vermiculite mine workers from the Libby mine suffer from asbestos related diseases at a rate 40 to 60 times the national average, and they suffer from the rare and deadly asbestos- caused cancer, mesothelioma, at a rate 100 times the national average; (7) the State of Montana and the town of Libby, Montana, face an immediate and severe health care crisis because-- (A) many sick current and former residents and workers who have been diagnosed with asbestos-related exposure or disease cannot access private health insurance; (B) the costs to the community and State government related to providing health coverage for uninsured sick residents and former mine workers are creating significant pressures on the State's medicaid program and threaten the viability of other community businesses; (C) asbestos-related disease can have a long latency period; and (D) the only significant responsible party available to compensate sick residents and workers has filed for bankruptcy protection; and (8) the United States should recognize that it has a responsibility to work in partnership with the State of Montana, the town of Libby, Montana, and appropriate health care organizations to address escalating health care costs caused by decades of asbestos pollution in Libby, Montana.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide a permanent source of funding for medical benefit payments to current and former residents of Libby, Montana, who suffer from asbestos related disease or illness.
In this Act: (1) Asbestos related disease or illness.--The term ``asbestos related disease or illness'' means a malignant or non-malignant respiratory disease or illness related to tremolite asbestos exposure.
Eligible medical expense.--The term ``eligible medical expense'' means an expense related to services for the diagnosis or treatment of an asbestos-related disease or illness, including expenses incurred for hospitalization, prescription drugs, outpatient services, home oxygen, respiratory therapy, nursing visits, or diagnostic evaluations.
HEALTH CARE TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund, to be known as the ``Montana Asbestos Related Disease Health Care Trust Fund'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Trust Fund''), which shall be administered by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Use of Funds.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available only for disbursement for medical benefit payments as provided under section 5 of this Act.
Corpus.--The Trust Fund shall consist of-- (1) such amounts as may be appropriated to the Trust Fund as provided in subsection (e); (2) such amounts as may be transferred to the Trust Fund from payments to the United States as provided in subsection (f); and (3) contributions from individuals, businesses, or non- profit organizations as provided in subsection (g).
Investment.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be invested in accordance with section 9702 of title 31, United States Code, and any interest on, and proceeds from, any such investment shall be credited to and become a part of the Trust Fund.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Trust Fund $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
Availability.--Any amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.
CERCLA Funds.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any payment received by the United States for recovery of costs associated with the United State's actions to address asbestos contamination in Libby, Montana, as authorized by the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et seq.
), shall first be used to repay the Treasury for any funds appropriated to the Trust Fund, and any remaining funds over and above the amount necessary to repay the Treasury shall be deposited in the Trust Fund.
Contributions.-- (1) In general.--Any individual, business, or non-profit organization may contribute funds to the Trust Fund and any such funds shall be credited to and become a part of the Trust Fund.
Tax deductions.--Any funds contributed to the Trust Fund under paragraph (1) shall be considered a tax-deductible contribution in accordance with section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
DETERMINATION AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS.
Application.-- (1) In general.--An individual who wishes to receive a medical benefit payment under this Act shall file an application with the Attorney General.
Documentation.--An application shall contain such documentation as the Attorney General determines is necessary to support a claim for a medical benefit payment.
Filing procedures.--The Attorney General, in consultation with the chief executive officer of the State of Montana and the Clinic Director of the Center for Asbestos Related Disease in Libby, Montana, shall establish procedures whereby individuals may file applications for medical benefit payments under this Act.
Eligibility.--An individual is eligible for medical benefit payments under this Act if the individual-- (1) has an asbestos-related disease or illness; (2) has an eligible medical expense; and (3) either-- (A) was a worker at the vermiculite mining and milling facility in Libby, Montana; or (B) lived, worked, or played in Libby, Montana, for at least 6 consecutive months before December 31, 1990.
Payments.-- (1) In general.--The Attorney General shall pay, from amounts available in the Trust Fund, any claim for a medical benefit payment made under this Act if the Attorney General determines that the individual filing the application is eligible for the payment under subsection (b).
Limitation.--No individual shall receive more than $100,000 in aggregate payments from the Trust Fund.
Action on claims.--Not later than 6 months after the date a application is filed under this Act, the Attorney General shall make a determination on the claim.
No Limitation on Other Federal Benefits.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed as precluding any individual who receives medical benefits payments under this Act from also receiving other benefits, including benefits which the individual may be eligible to receive under title II, XVI, XVIII, XIX, or XXI of the Social Security Act.
Regulatory Authority.--The Attorney General may issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.