It is the purpose of this Act to allow each public secondary school to hire a director of school safety, discipline, and student assistance to develop or improve a safety plan.
The Secretary is authorized to provide grants on a competitive basis to specially designated agencies and State educational agencies to enable each public secondary school to employ a director to develop or improve a school safety plan.
State Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant award under this Act, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Local Application.--To be eligible to receive a subgrant under this Act, a local educational agency, other than a specially designated agency, shall submit an application to the State educational agency in such form and containing or accompanied by such information as the State educational agency shall require.
Specially Designated Agency Application.--If a State educational agency does not apply for a grant award under this Act in a fiscal year, any specially designated agency in such State that desires to receive a grant under this Act in such fiscal year shall apply to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--An application submitted under subsections (a), (b), or (c) shall include assurances that-- (1) funds provided under this Act shall be used only to hire a director to develop or improve a public secondary school safety plan and implement security measures approved in the school safety plan; (2) funds provided under this Act shall supplement, not supplant, State and local funds; (3) the director shall have the authority-- (A) to discipline (in accordance with the school safety plan) any student whose actions or words threaten the safety of any student, teacher, employee, or administrator of the school; and (B) refer any student to the appropriate law enforcement authority, family and children services, or any other agency or organization the Director considers appropriate to meet the requirements of the school safety plan; (C) the applicant that receives funds under this Act shall use not more than 1.5 percent of the funds to pay administrative expenses; (4) the applicant shall provide parents, students, faculty, school administrators, and any other individuals or groups who the director requests, an opportunity to present their views and make recommendations regarding the safety plan; and (5) in the case of a State educational agency, such agency shall evaluate the effectiveness of each public secondary school safety plan on an annual basis.
As used in this Act: (1) Director.--The term ``director'' means the individual or entity hired as director of school safety, discipline, and student assistance for a public secondary school, employed directly or through a contract with a school board, to develop or improve the school safety plan.
If the individual employed as director is a school tenured employee when hired, the director shall waive tenure.
Local educational agency.--The term ``local educational agency'' has the same meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Outlying area.--The term ``outlying area'' means the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of Palau.
Secondary school.--The term ``secondary school'' has the same meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Specially designated agency.--The term ``specially designated agency'' means a local educational agency, located in a State that did not receive a grant under this Act in a fiscal year, that applies directly to the Secretary for a grant in accordance with section (3)(a)(3).
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and each outlying area.
Section 444(b)(1) of the General Education Provisions Act (20 United States Code 1232g) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (I), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in subparagraph (J), by striking the period and inserting ``and;''; and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (J), the following: ``(K) the individual or entity hired, either directly or through a contract by a school board, as a director of school safety, discipline, and student assistance to develop and implement a school safety plan.