This Act may be cited as the ``Employee Partnership Reward Act of 1994''.
TITLE I--REFUNDABLE INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR NONDEFERRED DISTRIBUTIONS FROM PERFORMANCE-BASED REWARD PLANS.
REFUNDABLE INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR NONDEFERRED DISTRIBUTIONS FROM PERFORMANCE-BASED REWARD PLANS.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 the following new section: ``SEC.
NONDEFERRED DISTRIBUTIONS FROM PERFORMANCE-BASED REWARD PLANS.
General Rule.--In the case of an eligible employee, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this subtitle for the taxable year an amount equal to 10 percent of the value of the rewards received by such employee from a qualified performance-based reward plan for any plan year ending with or within such taxable year.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any reward with respect to a plan year which is made more than 2 months following the close of such plan year.
Limitations on Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not exceed $500 with respect to each eligible employee.
Minimum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for the taxable year shall not be less than $100.
Cost-of-living adjustment.--In the case of any calendar year after 1994, each dollar amount in paragraph (1) or (2) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for such calendar year by substituting `1993' for `1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any increase under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50.
Eligible Employee.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible employee' means any employee of an employer who is a participant in a qualified performance-based reward plan of such employer.
Such term shall not include any highly compensated employee (within the meaning of section 414(q)) and shall not include any employee engaged in sales.
Qualified Performance-Based Reward Plan.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified performance-based reward plan' means a written plan maintained by an employer-- ``(1) the principal purpose of which is to improve the performance of the organization and reward employees as a function of that improvement, and ``(2) which meets-- ``(A) the determination requirements of subsection (e), ``(B) the allocation requirements of subsection (f), ``(C) the distribution requirements of subsection (g), ``(D) the nondiscrimination requirements of subsection (h), and ``(E) the plan approval requirements of subsection (i).
Determination Requirements.--A plan meets the requirements of this subsection if the amount to be distributed under the plan for any year is determined in accordance with a fixed formula set forth in the plan which is based on a measurable and auditable indicator of the employer's performance or, at the election of the employer, of the organizational unit in which the employees covered by the plan perform services.
Allocation Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--A plan meets the requirements of this subsection if, under the plan, amounts are distributed to employees of the employer maintaining the plan only in accordance with a fixed formula set forth in the plan.
Change in formula.--For purposes of paragraph (1), a formula shall be treated as a fixed formula only if under the plan any change in the formula may not take effect until the plan year following the plan year in which the change is adopted by the plan.
Distribution Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--A plan meets the requirements of this subsection if the plan requires that, for each year, the total value of rewards made under the plan to nonhighly compensated employees is not less than the lesser of-- ``(A) 2 percent of the total wages paid to such employees during such year by the employer maintaining such plan, or ``(B) the amount which, when added to the total rewards made under the plan to such employees during the 2 preceding years, is equal to 2 percent of the sum of the total wages paid to such employees by such employer during such year and such 2 preceding years.
Wages.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `wages' has the meaning given such term by section 3306(b), except that-- ``(A) any dollar limitation in such section shall be disregarded, and ``(B) rewards from a qualified performance-based reward plan shall not be taken into account.
Antidiscrimination Requirements.-- ``(1) In general.--A plan meets the requirements of this subsection if the plan benefits such employees as qualify under a classification set up by the employer and found by the Secretary not to be discriminatory in favor of highly compensated employees (within the meaning of section 414(q)).
Excluded employees.--In determining whether the requirements of paragraph (1) are met, there shall be excluded from consideration employees described in section 414(q)(8).
Benefits may bear uniform relationship to compensation.--A plan shall not be considered discriminatory merely because the benefits under the plan bear a uniform relationship to the compensation (within the meaning of section 414(s)) of the employees.
Plan Approval Requirements.--A plan meets the requirements of this subsection if the plan-- ``(1) is submitted to the Secretary in such form and manner as the Secretary may provide, and ``(2) is approved by the Secretary.
Special Rule and Definition.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(1) Plans which are part of deferred plan.--A plan shall not be treated as failing to be a qualified performance-based reward plan merely because such plan includes a qualified cash or deferred arrangement (as defined in section 401(k)(2)).
Self-employed individuals.--The term `employee' does not include an individual who is an employee (within the meaning of section 401(c)(1)).
Employee Rights.--For purposes of section 502 of Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, a qualified performance-based reward plan shall be treated as a welfare benefit plan.''
Conforming Amendment.-- (1) Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period ``or from section 35 of such Code''.
The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 35 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Nondeferred distributions from performance-based reward plans.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ADDITIONAL DEDUCTION TO EMPLOYERS FOR PERFORMANCE-BASED REWARDS.
In General.--Section 162 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating subsection (o) as subsection (p) and by inserting after subsection (n) the following new subsection: ``(o) Performance-Based Rewards.--In addition to the deduction otherwise allowed under this chapter for rewards under a performance- based reward plan (as defined in section 35(c)), there shall be allowed an additional deduction equal to 10 percent of the amount allowed as a deduction under this chapter (other than this subsection) for the taxable year for such awards.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
STUDY OF EFFECT OF CREDIT.
The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Labor, shall-- (1) conduct a study of the effect of the credit under section 35 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by this Act) in stimulating productivity and full employment, and (2) report the results of such study to the Congress no later than January 1, 2002.
Performance-Based Reward Plans.--The Secretary of Labor and the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service each shall-- (1) collect statistics on the extent of performance-based reward plans in the United States; and (2) prepare studies which describe the nature and terms of these performance-based reward plans.
Such studies shall differentiate between various types of such plans and between plans which do and do not have fixed formulas for determining amounts payable to employees.
Profit-Sharing and Employee Stock Ownership Plans.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall publish annually estimates of the annual tax expenditures for deferred profit-sharing plans and employee stock ownership plans.
TITLE II--ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM TO PROMOTE PERFORMANCE-BASED REWARD PLANS AND EMPLOYEE DECISIONMAKING PARTICIPATION PROGRAMS SEC.
EMPLOYEE PARTNERSHIP PILOT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall establish and carry out an Employee Partnership Pilot Program (in this section referred to as the ``program'') in accordance with the requirements of this section.
Grant Awards.--Under the program, the Administrator shall make grants to not to exceed 5 eligible entities for the purpose of promoting implementation of performance-based reward plans and employee decisionmaking participation programs.
Selection of Grant Recipients.--The Administrator shall select eligible entities to receive grants under the program on the basis of competitive, merit-based criteria to be established by the Administrator, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor.
Such criteria, at a minimum, shall provide for consideration of the following: (1) The ability of an applicant to carry out the purposes of the program.
The ability of an applicant to integrate implementation of the program with existing Federal and State business assistance resources.
The ability of an applicant to continue to carry out the purposes of the program after termination of the program.
Use of Grant Amounts.--Amounts from grants received under the program shall be used for activities which promote the purposes of the program, including the following: (1) The collection and dissemination of information regarding successful implementation of performance-based reward plans and employee decisionmaking participation programs.
The development of best practices guidelines concerning performance-based reward plans and employee decisionmaking participation programs.
The provision of technical assistance and training to aid firms in designing and implementing performance-based reward plans and employee decisionmaking participation programs.
Proactive education and outreach to key groups such as business owners, unions, managers, trade associations, and community associations to inform such groups about the benefits of performance-based reward plans and employee decisionmaking participation programs.
Non-Federal Share.--In order to be eligible for a grant under the program, an eligible entity shall agree to provide from non-Federal sources for activities described in subsection (d) an amount at least equal to the amount of the grant.
Term of Program.--The program shall terminate on the last day of the 5th fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Report.--The Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report containing an evaluation of the program, together with recommendations for appropriate legislative and administrative actions.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Small Business Administration.
Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means an educational institution, a non-profit organization, or a unit of State or local government.