This Act may be cited as the ``Training for Realtime Writers Act of 2002''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) As directed by Congress in section 723 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 613), as added by section 305 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-104; 110 United States Statutes at Large 126), the Federal Communications Commission adopted rules requiring closed captioning of most television programming, which gradually require new video programming to be fully captioned beginning in 2006.
More than 28,000,000 Americans, or 8 percent of the population, are considered deaf or hard of hearing and many require captioning services to participate in mainstream activities.
More than 24,000 children are born in the United States each year with some form of hearing loss.
According to the United States Department of Health and Human Services and a study done by the National Council on Aging-- (A) 25 percent of Americans over 65 years old are hearing impaired; (B) 33 percent of Americans over 70 years old are hearing impaired; and (C) 41 percent of Americans over 75 years old are hearing impaired.
The National Council on Aging study also found that depression in older adults may be directly related to hearing loss and disconnection with the spoken word.
Over the past 5 years, student enrollment in programs that train court reporters to become realtime writers has decreased significantly, causing such programs to close on many campuses.
AUTHORIZATION OF GRANT PROGRAM TO PROMOTE TRAINING AND JOB PLACEMENT OF REALTIME WRITERS.
In General.--The National Telecommunications and Information Administration shall make grants to not more than 20 eligible entities under subsection (b) to promote training and placement of individuals, including individuals who have completed a court reporting training program, as realtime writers in order to meet the requirements for closed captioning of video programming set forth in section 723 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 613) and the rules prescribed thereunder.
Eligible Entities.--For purposes of this Act, an eligible entity is a court reporting program that is-- (1) approved by the National Court Reporters Association; (2) accredited by an accrediting agency recognized by the Department of Education; and (3) participating in student aid programs under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965.
Duration of Grant.--A grant under this section shall be for a period of two years.
Maximum Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant provided under subsection (a) to an entity eligible may not exceed $1,000,000 for the two-year period of the grant under subsection (c).
In General.--To receive a grant under section 3, an eligible entity shall submit an application to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration at such time and in such manner as the Administration may require.
The application shall contain the information set forth under subsection (b).
Information.--Information in the application of an eligible entity under subsection (a) for a grant under section 3 shall include the following: (1) A description of the training and assistance to be funded using the grant amount, including how such training and assistance will increase the number of realtime writers.
A description of performance measures to be utilized to evaluate the progress of individuals receiving such training and assistance in matters relating to enrollment, completion of training, and job placement and retention.
A description of the manner in which the eligible entity will ensure that recipients of scholarships, if any, funded by the grant will be employed and retained as realtime writers.
A description of the manner in which the eligible entity intends to continue providing the training and assistance to be funded by the grant after the end of the grant period, including any partnerships or arrangements established for that purpose.
A description of how the eligible entity will work with local workforce investment boards to ensure that training and assistance to be funded with the grant will further local workforce goals, including the creation of educational opportunities for individuals who are from economically disadvantaged backgrounds or are displaced workers.
Such other information as the Administration may require.
In General.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under section 3 shall use the grant amount for purposes relating to the recruitment, training and assistance, and job placement of individuals, including individuals who have completed a court reporting training program, as realtime writers, including-- (1) recruitment; (2) subject to subsection (b), the provision of scholarships; (3) distance learning; (4) education and training; (5) job placement assistance; (6) encouragement of individuals with disabilities to pursue a career in realtime writing; and (7) the employment and payment of personnel for such purposes.
Scholarships.-- (1) Amount.--The amount of a scholarship under subsection (a)(2) shall be based on the amount of need of the recipient of the scholarship for financial assistance, as determined in accordance with part F of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1087kk).
Agreement.--Each recipient of a scholarship under subsection (a)(2) shall enter into an agreement with the National Telecommunications and Information Administration to provide realtime writing services for a period of time (as determined by the Administration) that is appropriate (as so determined) for the amount of the scholarship received.
Coursework and employment.--The Administration shall establish requirements for coursework and employment for recipients of scholarships under subsection (a)(2), including requirements for repayment of scholarship amounts in the event of failure to meet such requirements for coursework and employment.
Requirements for repayment of scholarship amounts shall take into account the effect of economic conditions on the capacity of scholarship recipients to find work as realtime writers.
Administrative Costs.--The recipient of a grant under section 3 may not use more than 5 percent of the grant amount to pay administrative costs associated with activities funded by the grant.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Grants amounts under this Act shall supplement and not supplant other Federal or non-Federal funds of the grant recipient for purposes of promoting the training and placement of individuals as realtime writers SEC.
Annual Reports.--Each eligible entity receiving a grant under section 3 shall submit to the National Telecommunications and Information Administration, at the end of each year of the grant period, a report on the activities of such entity with respect to the use of grant amounts during such year.
Report Information.-- (1) In general.--Each report of an entity for a year under subsection (a) shall include a description of the use of grant amounts by the entity during such year, including an assessment by the entity of the effectiveness of activities carried out using such funds in increasing the number of realtime writers.
The assessment shall utilize the performance measures submitted by the entity in the application for the grant under section 4(b).
Final report.--The final report of an entity on a grant under subsection (a) shall include a description of the best practices identified by the entity as a result of the grant for increasing the number of individuals who are trained, employed, and retained in employment as realtime writers.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, amounts as follows: (1) $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003, 2004, and 2005.
Such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 and 2007.