This Act may be cited as the ``Bosnia-Hercegovina Self-Defense Act of 1993''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) On July 10, 1991, the United States adopted a policy suspending all licenses and other approvals to export or otherwise transfer defense articles and defense services to Yugoslavia.
On September 25, 1991, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 713, which imposed a mandatory international embargo on all deliveries of weapons and military equipment to Yugoslavia.
The United States considered the policy adopted July 10, 1991, to comply fully with Resolution 713 and therefore took no additional action in response to that resolution.
On January 8, 1992, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 727, which decided that the mandatory arms embargo imposed by Resolution 713 should apply to any independent states that might thereafter emerge on the territory of Yugoslavia.
On February 29 and March 1, 1992, the people of Bosnia- Hercegovina voted in a referendum to declare independence from Yugoslavia.
On April 7, 1992, the United States recognized the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
On May 22, 1992, the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina was admitted to full membership in the United Nations.
Consistent with Resolution 727, the United States has continued to apply the policy adopted July 10, 1991, to independent states that have emerged on the territory of the former Yugoslavia, including Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Subsequent to the adoption of Resolution 727 and Bosnia-Hercegovina's independence referendum, the siege of Sarajevo began and fighting spread to other areas of Bosnia- Hercegovina.
The Government of Serbia intervened directly in the fighting by providing significant military, financial, and political support and direction to Serbian-allied irregular forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina.
In statements dated May 1 and May 12, 1992, the Conference on Security and Cooperation in Europe declared that the Government of Serbia and the Serbian-controlled Yugoslav National Army were committing aggression against the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina and assigned to them prime responsibility for the escalation of bloodshed and destruction.
On May 30, 1992, the United Nations Security Council adopted Resolution 757, which condemned the Government of Serbia for its continued failure to respect the territorial integrity of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Serbian-allied irregular forces have, over the last year, occupied approximately 70 percent of the territory of Bosnia-Hercegovina, committed gross violations of human rights in the areas they have occupied, and established a secessionist government committed to eventual unification with Serbia.
The military and other support and direction provided to Serbian-allied irregular forces in Bosnia-Hercegovina constitutes an armed attack on the Government of Bosnia- Hercegovina by the Government of Serbia within the meaning of Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Under Article 51, the Government of Bosnia- Hercegovina, as a member of the United Nations, has an inherent right of individual or collective self-defense against the armed attack from the Government of Serbia until the United Nations Security Council has taken measures necessary to maintain international peace and security.
The measures taken by the United Nations Security Council in response to the armed attack on Bosnia-Hercegovina have not been adequate to maintain international peace and security.
Bosnia-Hercegovina has been unable successfully to resist the armed attack from Serbia because it lacks the means to counter heavy weaponry that Serbia obtained from the Yugoslav National Army upon the dissolution of Yugoslavia, and because the mandatory international arms embargo has prevented Bosnia-Hercegovina from obtaining from other countries the means to counter such heavy weaponry.
On December 18, 1992, with the affirmative vote of the United States, the United Nations General Assembly adopted Resolution 47/121, which urged the United Nations Security Council to exempt Bosnia-Hercegovina from the mandatory arms embargo imposed by Resolution 713.
In the absence of adequate measures to maintain international peace and security, continued application to the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina of the mandatory international arms embargo imposed by the United Nations Security Council prior to the armed attack on Bosnia-Hercegovina undermines that government's right of individual or collective self-defense and therefore contravenes Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Bosnia-Hercegovina's right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter includes the right to ask for military assistance from other countries and to receive such assistance if offered.
UNITED STATES ARMS EMBARGO OF THE GOVERNMENT OF BOSNIA- HERCEGOVINA.
Termination.--The President shall terminate the United States arms embargo of the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina upon receipt from that government of a request for assistance in exercising its right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``United States arms embargo of the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina'' means the application to the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina of-- (1) the policy adopted July 10, 1991, and published in the Federal Register of July 19, 1991 (58 Fed.
33322) under the heading ``Suspension of Munitions Export Licenses to Yugoslavia''; and (2) any similar policy being applied by the United States Government as of the date of receipt of the request described in subsection (a) pursuant to which approval is routinely denied for transfers of defense articles and defense services to the former Yugoslavia.
UNITED STATES MILITARY ASSISTANCE FOR BOSNIA-HERCEGOVINA.
Policy.--The President should provide appropriate military assistance to the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina upon receipt from that government of a request for assistance in exercising its right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Authorization of Military Assistance.-- (1) Drawdown authority.--If the Government of Bosnia- Hercegovina requests United States assistance in exercising its right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, the President is authorized to direct the drawdown of defense articles from the stocks of the Department of Defense, defense services of the Department of Defense, and military education and training in order to provide assistance to the Government of Bosnia-Hercegovina.
Such assistance shall be provided on such terms and conditions as the President may determine.
Limitation on value of transfers.--The aggregate value (as defined in section 664(m) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961) of defense articles, defense services, and military education and training provided under this subsection may not exceed $200,000,000.
Expiration of authorization.--The authority provided to the President in paragraph (1) expires at the end of fiscal year 1994.
Limitation on activities.--Members of the United States Armed Forces who perform defense services or provide military education and training outside the United States under this subsection may not perform any duties of a combatant nature, including any duties related to training and advising that may engage them in combat activities.
Reports to congress.--Within 60 days after any exercise of the authority of paragraph (1) and every 60 days thereafter, the President shall report in writing to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate concerning the defense articles, defense services, and military education and training being provided and the use made of such articles, services, and education and training.
Reimbursement.--(A) Defense articles, defense services, and military education and training provided under this subsection shall be made available without reimbursement to the Department of Defense except to the extent that funds are appropriated pursuant to subparagraph (B).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the President such sums as may be necessary to reimburse the applicable appropriation, fund, or account for the value (as defined in section 664(m) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961) of defense articles, defense services, or military education and training provided under this subsection.