This Act may be cited as the ``Voting Technology Standards Act of 2001''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``technical standards'' means performance- based standards and conformance specifications; and (2) the term ``voting products and systems'' includes products and systems relating to every stage of the voting process, from voter registration through recounts and archiving.
Commission.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established a commission to develop voluntary technical standards to ensure the usability, accuracy, security, and integrity of United States voting products and systems.
Membership.--The Commission shall consist of-- (A) the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology, who shall serve as the chair of the Commission; (B) two representatives of the National Association of State Election Directors, selected by that association, one Republican and one Democrat; (C) one representative of the American National Standards Institute, selected by that institute; and (D) nine additional members selected by the members described in subparagraphs (A) through (C) by unanimous vote, of which at least two shall be local election officials; (3) Terms.--(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), (C), or (D) of this paragraph, each member selected under paragraph (2)(B), (C), or (D) shall serve a term of 6 years.
Four of the members initially appointed under paragraph (2)(D) shall be appointed for an initial term of 3 years.
The members initially appointed under paragraph (2)(B) shall be appointed for an initial term of 4 years.
The member initially appointed under paragraph (2)(C) shall be appointed for an initial term of 5 years.
Members may serve for more than 1 term, but not more than 3 terms.
Any member appointed under paragraph (2)(D) to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office, but not more than 1 year.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--The Commission shall conduct no business, other than appointing members under paragraph (2)(D), before all members of the Commission have been appointed.
Nine members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Administrative and technical support.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall provide to the Commission the ad- ministrative and technical support necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Development of Voluntary Technical Standards.-- (1) Procedures.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall publish in the Federal Register a description of the procedures it will use to establish voluntary technical standards under this subsection, along with a list of the members of the Commission.
Establishment of voluntary technical standards.--Not later than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall establish, and publish in the Federal Register, such voluntary technical standards as are necessary to ensure the usability, accuracy, security, and integrity of United States voting products and systems.
Review and update.--The Commission shall review the voluntary technical standards established under this subsection at the conclusion of every even-numbered year, and shall determine whether new or updated voluntary technical standards are necessary to ensure the usability, accuracy, security, and integrity of United States voting products and systems.
If the Commission determines that such new or updated voluntary technical standards are necessary, the Commission shall publish in the Federal Register the findings of its review, an explanation for its decision, and the new or updated voluntary technical standards.
Not later than 6 months after the initial publication of voluntary technical standards established under section 3(b)(2), the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall accredit independent, non- Federal laboratories to test and certify that voting products and systems conform with the voluntary technical standards established by the Commission.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology shall make an effort to accredit at least one minority-owned laboratory.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology, after consultation with the Commission, shall-- (1) disseminate voluntary technical standards established under section 3(b), other relevant technical information, guidelines for usage of the voluntary technical standards, and any other information appropriate to assist in the implementation of the voluntary technical standards; (2) maintain and make available a list of laboratories accredited under section 4; and (3) maintain and make available, including through the Internet, a list of United States voting products and systems that have been certified by a laboratory accredited under section 4 to conform with the voluntary technical standards established by the Commission.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
The Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall establish a program for research and development in areas to support the development of voluntary technical standards established under section 3(b) for voting products and systems, including research and development on-- (1) the security of computers, computer networks, and computer data storage used in voting products and systems, including methods to detect and prevent fraud; (2) protection of voter privacy; (3) human factors in the design and application of voting products and systems, including assistive technologies for persons with disabilities and varying levels of literacy; and (4) remote access voting, including Internet voting.
One-Year Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall transmit to the Congress a report that-- (1) assesses the areas of human factors research, including usability engineering and human-computer and human-machine interaction, that feasibly could be applied to voting products and systems design to ensure the usability and accuracy of United States voting products and systems, including to improve access by the disabled and to reduce voter error and the number of spoiled ballots in elections; (2) assesses the potential demand by State and local governments for technical assistance in implementing voluntary technical standards established under section 3(b), and makes recommendations on how best to address that demand; (3) makes recommendations for methods of promoting the implementation of voluntary technical standards established under section 3(b); and (4) assesses the need for a grant program or other mechanism to ensure the accreditation and operation of a sufficient number of laboratories to test and certify voting products and systems.
Ten-Year Report.--Not later than 10 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall transmit to the Congress a report that-- (1) identifies the States that have voluntarily complied with standards established pursuant to this Act; and (2) assesses the impact of this Act on the accuracy of vote tabulation.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to ensure the usability, accuracy, integrity, and security of United States voting products and systems through the development of voluntary consensus standards, the provision of technical assistance, and laboratory accreditation, and for other purposes.