This Act may be cited as the ``Digital Television Consumer Education Act''.
LABELING AND CONSUMER EDUCATION.
Section 330 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 330) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Labeling and Consumer Education.-- ``(1) Requirements for manufacturers.--Effective 180 days after the date of enactment of the Digital Television Consumer Education Act, any manufacturer of any television receiving equipment described in section 303(s) that does not include a digital tuner shall-- ``(A) place a label on any television screen, removable by the purchaser, that displays in clear and conspicuous print, the following consumer advisory label: `After February 17, 2009, this television will receive broadcast television signals only by using additional equipment.
For more information, call the Federal Communications Commission at 1-888-225-5322 (TTY: 1-888-835-5322) or visit the Commission's website at: www.dtv.gov or www.fcc.gov.
Despues del 17 de Febrero del 2009, este televisor solo podra recibir senales de emisoras de television unicamente con la ayuda de equipo adicional.
Si requiere mas informacion, llame a la Comision Federal de Comunicaciones al 1-888- 225-5322 (TTY: 1-888-835-5322) o visite el sitio web de la Comision en: www.dtv.gov o www.fcc.gov '; and ``(B) place such advisory label permanently and conspicuously on the outside of the retail packaging of such television set.
Requirements for retail distributors and other vendors.-- ``(A) Retail distributors.--Any retail distributor of any television receiving equipment described in section 303(s) that does not include a digital tuner shall-- ``(i) effective 180 days after the date of enactment of the Digital Television Consumer Education Act, place adjacent to each unit of such equipment that such distributor displays for sale or rent a consumer advisory label as provided by the manufacturer pursuant to paragraph (1), except that such distributor shall not be required to affix such label to the television screen on such equipment, as long as the label is-- ``(I) in the close vicinity of, and associated with, the unit on display; and ``(II) clearly visible to consumers; and ``(ii) effective 90 days after the enactment of the Digital Television Consumer Education Act, provide information to consumers, on signs and in pamphlet form, in the display area for product categories that include any television receiving equipment described in section 303(s) that does not include a digital tuner television, sufficient to convey the information carried in the consumer advisory label.
Such signs and pamphlets shall also include information on recycling old televisions and other consumer electronics.
Other vendors.--Effective 180 days after the date of enactment of the Digital Television Consumer Education Act, any seller via direct mail, catalog, or electronic means, such as the Internet, of any television receiving equipment described in section 303(s) that does not include a digital tuner, shall include in clear and conspicuous print the consumer advisory label required by paragraph (1) at the point of display for the apparatus, or, if there is no display, at the point of sale.
Such information shall also include information on recycling old televisions and other consumer electronics.
Other devices.--For devices other than television sets that are included in section 303(s) and that contain an analog tuner, but not a digital tuner, the Commission shall require the clear and conspicuous placement of a comparable consumer advisory label on such devices, as well as on the outside of the retail packaging of such devices.
Additional disclosures.-- ``(A) Announcements and notices required.--From November 1, 2007, through March 31, 2009-- ``(i) each television broadcaster shall air, at a minimum, 120 seconds per day of public service announcements between the hours of 6 a.m. and 11:35 p.m., at variable time slots throughout the week, with at least half aired between the hours of 5 p.m. and 11:35 p.m.; and ``(ii) any multichannel video program distributor shall include a notice in or with each periodic bill.
Content of announcements and notices.--The announcements and notices required by this paragraph shall educate consumers about the deadline for termination of analog television broadcasting and the equipment options consumers have after such termination.
Announcements aired and notices distributed after January 1, 2008, shall also educate consumers about the need for and availability of the converter box voucher program and the steps to redeem the voucher.
Advisory committee.-- ``(A) Establishment.--The Commission shall, after consultation with the National Telecommunications and Information Administration and the Federal Trade Commission, create a DTV Transition Federal Advisory Committee to lead the effort to educate the public about the digital television transition and to ensure that the public knows the information described in paragraph (3)(B).
Such consumer education shall commence no later than September 1, 2007.
Composition.--The committee shall be composed of representatives from the following groups: commercial broadcasters, noncommercial broadcasters, cable operators, satellite providers, retailers and manufacturers of consumer electronics equipment, electronic recyclers, minority groups, Hispanic Americans, Americans whose primary language is not English, Americans with disabilities, Americans living in rural communities, general business, senior citizens, commercial advertising, and consumers in general.
Advisory committee role.--The committee shall-- ``(i) develop a comprehensive education plan for consumers regarding the digital television transition which includes-- ``(I) specific and targeted messages to reach various consumer constituencies (such as low income, minorities, Spanish-speaking, and the elderly); ``(II) best methods to deliver the message to affected consumers; ``(III) implementation of the plan; ``(IV) website information and toll-free numbers; and ``(V) information on recycling old televisions and other consumer electronics; ``(ii) coordinate with stakeholders to ensure that the transition is properly implemented; and ``(iii) report to Congress every 6 months on how the transition is progressing.
First meeting.--The advisory committee shall conduct its first meeting within 60 days after the date of enactment of the Digital Television Consumer Education Act.
Commission information services.--The Commission's toll-free number for consumers information and the Commission's Internet website shall provide information concerning the digital television transition, in the English and Spanish languages, not later than September 1, 2007.