This Act may be cited as the ``Haqqani Network Terrorist Designation Act of 2012''.
FINDINGS; SENSE OF CONGRESS; STATEMENT OF CONGRESS.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) A report of the Congressional Research Service on relations between the United States and Pakistan states that ``[t]he terrorist network led by Jalaluddin Haqqani and his son Sirajuddin, based in the FATA, is commonly identified as the most dangerous of Afghan insurgent groups battling United States Reports-led forces in eastern Afghanistan.''.
The report further states that, in mid-2011, the Haqqanis undertook several high-visibility attacks in Afghanistan.
A late June 2011 assault on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul by eight Haqqani gunmen and suicide bombers left 18 people dead.
On September 10, 2011, a truck bomb attack on a United States military base by Haqqani fighters in the Wardak province injured 77 United States troops and killed five Afghans.
The September 13, 2011, attack on the United States Embassy compound in Kabul involved an assault that sparked a 20-hour-long gun battle and left 16 Afghans dead, five police officers and at least six children among them.
The report further states that ``United States Reports and Afghan officials concluded the Embassy attackers were members of the Haqqani network.''.
General John Allen, Commander, United States Forces Afghanistan, has stated that the Haqqanis are responsible for the deaths of hundreds of United States and coalition service members, and is responsible for planning and conducting high- profile attacks against United States interests, including the deadly assault on the Capital, Kabul in April 2012.
In September 22, 2011, testimony before the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate, Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Admiral Mullen stated that ``[t]he Haqqani network, for one, acts as a veritable arm of Pakistan's Inter-Services Intelligence agency.
With ISI support, Haqqani operatives plan and conducted that [September 13] truck bomb attack, as well as the assault on our embassy.
We also have credible evidence they were behind the June 28th attack on the Intercontinental Hotel in Kabul and a host of other smaller but effective operations.''.
In October 27, 2011, testimony before the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives, Secretary of State Hillary Clinton stated that ``I think everyone agrees that the Haqqani Network has safe havens inside Pakistan; that those safe havens give them a place to plan and direct operations that kill Afghans and Americans.''.
On November 1, 2011, the United States Government added Haji Mali Kahn to a list of specially designated global terrorists under Executive Order 13224.
The Department of State described Haji Mali Khan as ``a Haqqani Network commander'' who has ``overseen hundreds of fighters, and has instructed his subordinates to conduct terrorist acts.''.
The designation continued, ``Mali Khan has provided support and logistics to the Haqqani Network, and has been involved in the planning and execution of attacks in Afghanistan against civilians, coalition forces, and Afghan police.''.
According to Jason Blazakis, the chief of the Terrorist Designations Unit of the Department of State, Haji Mali Khan also has links to al-Qaeda.
Five other top Haqqani Network leaders have been placed on the list of specially designated global terrorists under Executive Order 13224 since 2008, and three of them have been so placed in the last year.
Sirajuddin Haqqani, the overall leader of the Haqqani Network as well as the leader of the Taliban's Mira shah Regional Military Shura, was designated by the Secretary of State as a terrorist in March 2008, and in March 2009, the Secretary of State put out a bounty of $5,000,000 for information leading to his capture.
The other four individuals so designated are Nasiruddin Haqqani, Khalil al Rahman Haqqani, Badruddin Haqqani, and Mullah Sangeen Zadran.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of State should designate the Haqqani Network as a foreign terrorist organization in accordance with section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1189).
Statement of Congress.--Congress encourages continued and thorough cooperation between the Secretary of State and the intelligence community regarding the Haqqani Network.
REPORT ON HAQQANI NETWORK.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees-- (1) a detailed report on whether the Haqqani Network meets the criteria for designation as a foreign terrorist organization as specified in section 219 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1189); and (2) if the Secretary determines that the Haqqani Network does not meet such criteria, a detailed justification as to which of such criteria have not been met.
Form.--The report required under subsection (a) shall be submitted in unclassified form, but may include a classified annex.
Appropriate Congressional Committees Defined.--In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and (2) the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed to infringe upon the sovereignty of Pakistan to combat militant or terrorist groups operating inside the international boundaries of Pakistan.