This Act may be cited as the ``AIDS Orphans Relief Act of 2000''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) By the end of 2000, 10,400,000 children in Sub-Saharan Africa will have lost their mother, or both parents, to Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS).
In the next decade, 40,000,000 children will become orphans as a result of the AIDS pandemic, most of them located in Sub-Saharan Africa.
Over the next 20 years, AIDS threatens to reduce substantially economic progress in the nations of Sub-Saharan Africa.
Success or failure in fighting the AIDS pandemic will effect the spread of the disease to India, Asia, and the states of the former Soviet Union.
By 2005, more than 100,000,000 people worldwide will have been infected with Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), the precursor to AIDS.
Effective assistance for children orphaned by AIDS, and for those caring for such children, must strengthen the surviving families.
The development and expansion of sustainable microfinance institutions that provide access to credit, savings, and other financial services to the very poor, especially women, are critical components in a global strategy to address the devastating economic and social effects of AIDS.
Microfinance programs are particularly effective in helping those left to care for AIDS orphans by providing the caregivers the means of pursuing a livelihood.
Microfinance programs have been shown to be particularly effective in permitting individuals with AIDS to have access to services and credit not otherwise available to such individuals, including health insurance, life insurance, counseling, and group support.
Food aid can be a critical component in mitigating the impact of AIDS on communities by addressing the nutritional needs of individuals with AIDS and assisting households left destitute by AIDS, and as a part of a larger, comprehensive effort to strengthen and restore sustainable livelihood strategies for households and communities affected by AIDS.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to make microfinance programs an important component of United States policy in fighting the effects of the Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) pandemic worldwide; and (2) to encourage targeted use of food and food-related assistance for humanitarian purposes and for sustainable development in communities affected by AIDS.
Chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ASSISTANCE FOR MICROCREDIT PROGRAMS FOR COMMUNITIES AFFECTED BY AIDS.
In General.--In addition to any other funds authorized to be appropriated by this chapter for micro-enterprise activities or activities relating to Human Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) or Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS), there is authorized to be appropriated each fiscal year, $50,000,000 for purposes of assisting microcredit programs that serve the very poor, especially women, in communities heavily affected by AIDS.
Program Elements.--(1) The maximum amount of credit provided an individual under a microcredit program under subsection (a) may not exceed $600 and (b) the average loan size for a program receiving resources under this section may not exceed $300.
To the maximum extent practicable, amounts shall be provided under subsection (a) for programs that-- ``(A) provide HIV prevention or AIDS care and support, whether directly or through linkages with other programs; ``(B) employ best practices for assisting the very poor; and ``(C) operate in a sustainable manner.''.
Title IV of the Agricultural Trade and Development Assistance Act of 1954 (7 United States Code 1731 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITIES AFFECTED BY AIDS.
In General.--The President may provide food assistance under this Act to developing countries in order to assist such countries in mitigating the effects of Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS) on communities in such countries, including-- ``(1) assistance to address the nutritional needs of individuals in such communities who have AIDS; ``(2) assistance for households affected by AIDS; and ``(3) assistance as part of other aid or assistance designed to create or restore sustainable livelihood strategies in communities affected by AIDS.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- ``(1) Authorization.--There is authorized to appropriated each fiscal year, $50,000,000 for purposes of providing assistance under this section.
Relationship to other authorizations.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated for a fiscal year by paragraph (1) are in addition to any other amounts authorized to be appropriated by this Act for such fiscal year.