This Act may be cited as the ``Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Gifted and talented students give evidence of high performance capability in specific academic fields, or in areas such as intellectual, creative, artistic, or leadership capacity, and require services or activities not ordinarily provided by a school in order to fully develop such capabilities.
Gifted and talented students are from all cultural, racial, and ethnic backgrounds, and socioeconomic groups.
Some such students have disabilities and for some, English is not their first language.
Many students from such diverse backgrounds have been historically underrepresented in gifted education programs.
Because gifted and talented students generally are more advanced academically, are able to learn more quickly and study in more depth and complexity than others their age, the students have special educational needs that require opportunities and experiences that are different from those generally available in regular education programs.
Parents and families are essential partners to schools in developing appropriate educational services for gifted and talented students.
They need access to information, research and support regarding the characteristics of gifted children and their educational and social and emotional needs, as well as information on available strategies and resources for education in State and local communities.
There currently is no Federal requirement to identify or serve the Nation's approximately 3,000,000 gifted and talented students.
While some States and school districts allocate resources to educate gifted and talented students, others do not.
Additionally, State laws and State and local funding, identification, and accountability mechanisms vary widely, resulting in a vast disparity of services for this special- needs population.
If the United States is to compete successfully in the global economy, it is important that more students achieve to higher levels, and that highly capable students receive an education that prepares them to perform the most highly innovative and creative work that is necessary in today's workplace.
The performance of twelfth-grade advanced students in the United States on the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) was among the lowest in the world.
In each of 5 physics content areas in the study and in each of 3 math content areas in the study, the performance of physics and advanced mathematics students in the United States was among the lowest of participating countries.
Elementary school students that are gifted and talented have already mastered 35 to 50 percent of the material covered in a school year in several subject areas before the school year begins.
In 1990, fewer than 2 cents out of every $100 spent on elementary and secondary education in the United States was devoted to providing challenging programming for the Nation's gifted and talented students.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide grants to States to support programs, classes, and other services designed to meet the needs of the Nation's gifted and talented students in elementary and secondary schools.
PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION AND ACTIVITIES.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to States for use by public schools to develop or expand gifted and talented education programs and to provide direct educational services and materials through 1 or more of the following activities: (1) Professional development programs.--States may expend funds to develop and implement programs to address State and local needs for inservice training programs for general educators, specialists in gifted and talented education, administrators, school counselors, or other personnel at the elementary and secondary levels.
Technical assistance.--A State may make materials and services available through State regional education service centers, universities, colleges, or other entities.
Programs and services.-- (A) Direct services and materials.--States may expend funds to provide direct educational services and materials to gifted and talented students.
Strategies developed with such funds may include curriculum compacting, modified or adapted curriculum, acceleration, independent study, and dual enrollment.
Innovative approaches.--States may support innovative approaches and curricula used by school districts, individual schools, or consortia of schools or school districts.
Emerging technologies.--States may provide funds to provide challenging, high-level course work to individual students or groups of students in schools and school districts that do not have the resources to otherwise provide the courses through new and emerging technologies, including distance learning.
Funds may be used to develop curriculum packages, compensate distance-learning educators, or for other relevant purposes, but may not be used for the purchase or upgrading of technological hardware.
State Infrastructure Costs.-- (1) Administrative Costs.--Not more than 10 percent of the total amount received under this Act may be used for State educational agency administrative costs, such as-- (A) facilitating the coordination of gifted and talented education programs and services; (B) disseminating information and materials to teachers and parents; (C) creating State gifted education advisory boards; and (D) administering funds received under this Act.
Education and support.--Not more than 2 percent of the total amount received under this Act may be used by a State to provide information, education, and support to parents and caregivers of gifted and talented children to enhance their ability to participate in decisions regarding their children's educational programs.
Such education shall be developed and carried out by parents and caregivers or by parents and caregivers in partnership with the State.
In General.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this Act, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--The application described in subsection (a) shall include assurances that-- (1) funds received under this Act shall be used to identify and support gifted and talented students, including students from all economic, ethnic, and racial backgrounds, students of limited English proficiency, students with disabilities, and highly gifted students; (2) not less than 88 percent of the funds received by the State will be distributed to public schools within the State; (3) funds received under this Act shall be used only to supplement, but not supplant, the amount of State and local funds expended for the specialized education and related services provided for the education of gifted and talented students; and (4) the State shall develop and implement program assessment models to evaluate educational effectiveness and ensure program accountability.
Approval.--The Secretary shall approve an application of a State educational agency if such application meets the requirements of this section.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), of the total amount made available to carry out this Act for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall award to each State an amount that bears the same relation to the total amount as the number of children ages 5 through 18 in the State for the preceding academic year bears to the total number of all such children in all States for such year.
Minimum Award.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each State that meets the requirements of this Act shall receive not less than $1,000,000 for the fiscal year involved.
Ratable reduction.--If the amount made available to carry out this Act for a fiscal year is insufficient to allocate the amount specified in paragraph (1) to each State, the allocation shall be ratably reduced for each State.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act and for each subsequent year thereafter, the State educational agency shall submit an annual report to the Secretary that describes the number of students served and the activities supported with funds provided under this Act.
The report shall include a description of the measures taken to comply with the accountability requirements of section 4.
In this Act: (1) Gifted and talented.--The term ``gifted and talented'' has the meaning given such term under applicable State law or as such term is defined by the State or local educational agency involved, or in the case of a State that does not have a law that defines the term and the State or local educational agency has not defined the term, the term has the meaning given such term under section 14101(16) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(16)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
State educational agency.--The term ``State educational agency'' has the meaning given the term under section 14101(28) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(28)).
There is authorized to be appropriated $160,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000, 2001, 2002, 2003, and 2004 to carry out this Act.