This Act may be cited as the ``Saving Women's Lives through International Family Planning Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) International family planning funds provide assistance that saves the lives of women by providing vital reproductive health care, including family planning and maternal health programs which include prenatal, postpartum, HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted disease education that results in safe pregnancies and safe motherhood.
Each year more than 585,000 women die from complications with pregnancy and childbirth.
In addition, each year at least 7,000,000 women suffer serious health problems and as many as 50,000,000 women suffer some adverse health consequences after childbirth, many of which could be prevented with safe motherhood practices used in reproductive health programs.
More than 5,800,000 people were infected with HIV/AIDS in 1998.
Without funding from international family planning programs for education and prevention, most governments would not have the resources to combat the physical, social, and economic devastation inflicted by this disease.
The health of the planet is connected to the health of women and their families.
Rapid population growth exacerbates many environmental problems, including air and water pollution, loss of wildlife habitat, fisheries depletion, and climate change--global problems that transcend national boundaries.
Family planning programs give women the option to choose the number and spacing of their children, which contributes to slowing global population growth.
International family planning improves the ability of families worldwide to manage their lives and their natural resources more sustainably.
When families have access to family planning resources and are able to space their children, delay the timing of their first child, and have longer intervals between each child, there is a decrease in the risk of mortality in both women and children.
Voluntary family planning services allow women and men to exercise their fundamental human right to plan the size of their families and ensure that every pregnancy is planned and every child is wanted.
Data from around the world provides conclusive evidence that increased access to family planning reduces the incidence of abortion.
At the International Conference on Population and Development in 1994, it was estimated that making quality family planning and related health services available to all in need of such planning and services would cost $17,000,000,000 in the year 2000.
The United States and other donor countries agreed to provide one-third of these funds.
Based on the size of its economy, the United States share of the total donor population assistance should be almost $1,900,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.
While short of this funding goal, restoring funding for population assistance to fiscal year 1995 levels would be a significant step toward ensuring access to family planning and reproductive health care for couples around the world.
With world population exceeding 6,000,000,000 people, international family planning providers and related nongovernmental organizations play a critical role in meeting the physical, social, environmental, and economic needs in their societies and in expanding participation in the democratic process.
These organizations should be provided with adequate funding to fully and actively offer the best and most informative care to their citizens without restrictions on free speech.
United States assistance to these organizations should be provided under the same terms as to their governments.
INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS AND PROGRAMS.
There is authorized to be appropriated, and there is appropriated (out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated), for fiscal year 2002 $366,000,000 to carry out the provisions of section 301 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 and section 2 of the United Nations Environment Program Participation Act of 1973.
Funding.--There is authorized to be appropriated, and there is appropriated (out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated), for fiscal year 2002 $541,600,000 for population planning activities and other population assistance under part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.
Eligibility of Nongovernmental and Multilateral Organizations for Population Planning Assistance.--Chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ELIGIBILITY OF NONGOVERNMENTAL AND MULTILATERAL ORGANIZATIONS FOR POPULATION PLANNING ASSISTANCE.
``In determining eligibility of nongovernmental and multilateral organizations for population planning assistance or other population assistance under this part, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development may not apply requirements to such organizations that are more restrictive than requirements applicable to foreign governments for such assistance.