This Act may be cited as the ``Assisted Suicide Funding Restriction Act of 1997''.
GENERAL PROHIBITION ON USE OF FEDERAL ASSISTANCE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no funds appropriated by the Congress shall be used to provide, procure, furnish, fund, or support, or to compel any individual, institution, or government entity to provide, procure, furnish, fund, or support, any item, good, benefit, program, or service, the purpose of which is to cause, or to assist in causing, the suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing of any individual.
Nothing in this Act, or in an amendment made by this Act, shall be construed to create any limitation relating to-- (1) the withholding or withdrawing of medical treatment or medical care; (2) the withholding or withdrawing of nutrition or hydration; (3) abortion; or (4) the use of an item, good, benefit, or service furnished for the purpose of alleviating pain or discomfort, even if such use may increase the risk of death, so long as such item, good, benefit, or service is not also furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, death, for any reason.
PROHIBITION OF FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION UNDER MEDICAID FOR ASSISTED SUICIDE OR RELATED SERVICES.
In General.--Section 1903(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(i)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (14); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (15) the following: ``(16) with respect to any amount expended for any item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Treatment of Advance Directives.--Section 1902(w) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(w)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create any requirement with respect to a portion of an advance directive that directs the purposeful causing, or the purposeful assisting in causing, of the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require any provider or organization, or any employee of such a provider or organization, to inform or counsel any individual regarding any right to obtain an item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of the individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
RESTRICTING TREATMENT UNDER MEDICARE OF ASSISTED SUICIDE OR RELATED SERVICES.
Prohibition of Expenditures.--Section 1862(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (14); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (15) the following: ``(16) where such expenses are for any item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Treatment of Advance Directives.--Section 1866(f) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395cc(f)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to create any requirement with respect to a portion of an advance directive that directs the purposeful causing, or the purposeful assisting in causing, of the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require any provider of services or prepaid or eligible organization, or any employee of such a provider or organization, to inform or counsel any individual regarding any right to obtain an item or service, furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of the individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
PROHIBITION AGAINST USE OF BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES FOR SOCIAL SERVICES TO PROVIDE ITEMS OR SERVICES FOR THE PURPOSE OF INTENTIONALLY CAUSING DEATH.
Section 2005(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397d(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (8); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(10) for the provision of any item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Section 201(b) of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 United States Code 1621(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Funds appropriated under the authority of this section may not be used for the provision of any item or service (including treatment or care) furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
MILITARY HEALTH CARE SYSTEM.
Members and Former Members.--Section 1074 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Under joint regulations prescribed by the administering Secretaries, a person may not furnish any item or service under this chapter (including any form of medical care) for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Prohibited Health Care for Dependents.--Section 1077(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Items or services (including any form of medical care) furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Prohibited Health Care Under CHAMPUS.-- (1) Spouses and children of members.--Section 1079(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(18) No contract for the provision of health-related services entered into by the Secretary may include coverage for any item or service (including any form of medical care) furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Other covered beneficiaries.--Section 1086(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)'' the first place it appears; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) No contract for the provision of health-related services entered into by the Secretary may include coverage for any item or service (including any form of medical care) furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFIT PLANS.
Section 8902 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(o) A contract may not be made or a plan approved which includes coverage for any benefit, item or service that is furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
HEALTH CARE PROVIDED FOR PEACE CORPS VOLUNTEERS.
Section 5(e) of the Peace Corps Act (22 United States Code 2504(e)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)(A)'' after ``(e)''; (2) by striking ``Subject to such'' and inserting the following: ``(2) Subject to such''; and (3) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) (as so designated by paragraph (1)), the following: ``(B) Health care provided under this subsection to volunteers during their service to the Peace Corps shall not include any item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
MEDICAL SERVICES FOR FEDERAL PRISONERS.
Section 4005(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Services provided under this subsection shall not include any item or service furnished for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
PROHIBITING USE OF ANNUAL FEDERAL PAYMENT TO DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA FOR ASSISTED SUICIDE OR RELATED SERVICES.
In General.--Title V of the District of Columbia Self- Government and Governmental Reorganization Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``ban on use of funds for assisted suicide and related services ``Sec.
None of the funds appropriated to the District of Columbia pursuant to an authorization of appropriations under this title may be used to furnish any item or service for the purpose of causing, or the purpose of assisting in causing, the death of any individual, such as by assisted suicide, euthanasia, or mercy killing.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections of the District of Columbia Self-Government and Governmental Reorganization Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to title V the following: ``Sec.
Ban on use of funds for assisted suicide and related services.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments to the District of Columbia for fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 1998.