This Act may be cited as the ``Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1993''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Federal motor carrier safety regulations need to be strengthened to improve information provided to motor carriers about past safety performance of drivers and to improve supporting documentation for records of duty status.
The final penalties imposed on motor carriers for violations of Federal motor carrier safety regulations are sometimes too small to motivate effective compliance with the safety regulations.
Penalties are too often considered part of the cost of doing business.
The Federal Highway Administration's ability to promote compliance would be increased by setting minimum penalty amounts and by increasing the current maximum penalties allowed for such violations.
Minimum penalty amounts would send the message to the motor carrier industry that violations of the Federal motor carrier safety regulations are significantly more serious than traffic violations.
Imposition of minimum civil penalties would increase uniformity of penalties among different regions of the Federal Highway Administration.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to increase the maximum penalty amounts for civil violations of Federal motor carrier safety regulations; (2) to set a minimum penalty amount for such violations of Federal motor carrier safety regulations; and (3) to improve information provided to motor carriers about past safety performance of drivers and to improve supporting documentation for records of duty status.
ESTABLISHMENT OF MINIMUM AMOUNT AND INCREASED MAXIMUM AMOUNTS.
Section 521(b)(2)(A) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``not to exceed $500'' and inserting ``not less than $500 and not to exceed $1,000''; (2) by striking ``not exceed $2,500'' and inserting ``not be less than $500 and shall not exceed $5,000''; (3) by striking ``$1,000'' each place it appears and inserting ``$2,000''; (4) by striking ``$10,000'' the first place it appears and inserting ``$20,000''; and (5) by striking ``$10,000'' the second place it appears and inserting ``$25,000''.
DRIVER'S RECORD OF DUTY STATUS.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall promulgate regulations amending section 395.8(k) of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, to require that any supporting document bearing on the record of duty status of a driver who operates a commercial motor vehicle-- (1) be retained, by the motor carrier using such driver, for at least 6 months following receipt of such document by the motor carrier; and (2) include information identifying the driver and vehicle related to the document.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``supporting document'' means any electronic or paper document or record generated in the normal course of business, in the provision of transportation by commercial motor vehicle, that could be used by a safety inspector or motor carrier to verify the accuracy of entries in a driver's record of duty status, including trip reports, pay slips, bills of lading or shipping papers, and receipts for fuel, lodging, and tolls.
SAFETY PERFORMANCE HISTORY OF NEW DRIVERS.
Amendment of Regulations.--Within 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall amend section 391.23 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, to-- (1) specify the safety information that must be sought under that section by a motor carrier with respect to a driver; (2) require that such information be requested from former employers and that former employers furnish the requested information within 30 days after receiving the request; and (3) ensure that the driver to whom such information applies has a reasonable opportunity to review and comment on the information.
Safety Information.--The safety information required to be specified under subsection (a)(1) shall include information on-- (1) any motor vehicle accidents in which the driver was involved during the preceding 3 years; (2) any failure of the driver, during the preceding 3 years, to undertake or complete a rehabilitation program under section 12020 of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (49 United States Code App.
2701) after being found to have used, in violation of law or Federal regulation, alcohol or a controlled substance; (3) any use by the driver, during the preceding 3 years, in violation of law or Federal regulation of alcohol or a controlled substance subsequent to completing such a rehabilitation program; and (4) any other matters determined by the Secretary of Transportation to be appropriate and useful for determining the driver's safety performance.
Former Employer.--For purposes of this section, a former employer is any person who employed the driver in the preceding 3 years.