This Act may be cited as the ``Electromagnetic Labeling Act of 1993''.
LABELING REQUIREMENTS FOR PRODUCTS THAT EMIT ELECTROMAGNETIC FIELDS.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall establish uniform labeling requirements for each product described in subsection (b).
Covered Products.--The products referred to in subsection (a) are-- (1) products that emit low-frequency electric and magnetic fields of which the strength is not less than 100 volts per meter and 1 Gauss, respectively, when measured at a distance which is one inch from the product; and (2) any other products the Secretary of Energy classifies as a covered product under this section in order to carry out this Act.
Labeling Content.--The labeling required for a product under the requirements established pursuant to subsection (a) shall-- (1) contain information regarding the strength of the low- frequency electromagnetic fields emitted by the product; (2) reasonably enable the purchaser and user of the product to make choices and comparisons among products; and (3) be simple, placed on the outside of the product, and, where appropriate, consolidated with other labels providing information to the purchaser and user.
Consultation.--In establishing labeling requirements pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary of Energy shall consult with the Federal Trade Commission, the Secretary of Commerce, leaders of affected industry, and consumer organizations.
Each manufacturer of a product described in section 2(b) shall-- (1) provide a label for the product which meets the requirements established pursuant to section 2(a) and contains the labeling content described in section 2(c); (2) maintain data derived from tests conducted on the product for the strength of emitted electromagnetic fields; and (3) annually submit to the Secretary of Energy, at a time specified by the Secretary, the data described in paragraph (2).
In General.--The Secretary of Energy may impose a civil penalty against a manufacturer of a product described in section 2(b) who commits a violation described in subsection (b).
The amount of a civil penalty imposed under this subsection may not exceed-- (1) $100 for each violation described in subsection (b)(1); and (2) $100 for each day during which a violation described in paragraphs (2) and (3) of subsection (b) occurs.
Violations for Which Penalties May Be Imposed.--For purposes of subsection (a), a violation shall be any of the following: (1) A failure by the manufacturer of a product described in section 2(b) to provide the label described in section 3(1).
A failure by the manufacturer of a product described in section 2(b) to maintain the data described in section 3(2).
A failure by the manufacturer of a product described in section 2(b) to make a submission described in section 3(3).
Procedures for Imposition of Civil Penalties.-- (1) Notice.--Before issuing an order assessing a civil penalty against a manufacturer under this section, the Secretary of Energy shall provide to the manufacturer a notice of the proposed penalty.
The notice shall provide information regarding the opportunity of the manufacturer to make an election in writing within 30 days after the receipt of the notice to have the procedures of paragraph (3) (in lieu of the procedures of paragraph (2)) apply to the assessment of the penalty.
Assessment after a hearing on the record.-- (A) In general.--Unless an election described in paragraph (1) is made, the Secretary of Energy shall assess a penalty under this section by order, after a determination of a violation has been made on the record after an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code before an administrative law judge appointed under section 3105 of such title.
The assessment order shall include the findings of the administrative law judge and the basis for the assessment.
Appeal.--A manufacturer against whom a penalty is assessed under subparagraph (A) may, within 60 calendar days after the date of the order assessing the penalty, institute an action in the United States court of appeals for the appropriate judicial circuit for judicial review of the order in accordance with chapter 7 of such title.
The court shall have jurisdiction to enter a judgment affirming, modifying, or setting aside in whole or in part the order of the Secretary of Energy, or the court may remand the proceeding to the Secretary for such further action as the court may direct.
Summary assessment.-- (A) In general.--In the case of a civil penalty with respect to which an election described in paragraph (1) is made, the Secretary of Energy shall promptly assess the penalty by order, after the date of the receipt of the notice under paragraph (1) of the proposed penalty.
Action to affirm the assessment.--If the civil penalty has not been paid within 60 days after the assessment order has been made under subparagraph (A), the Secretary of Energy shall institute an action in the appropriate district court of the United States for an order affirming the assessment of the penalty.
The court shall have authority to review de novo the law and the facts involved, and shall have jurisdiction to enter a judgment enforcing, modifying, and enforcing as so modified, or setting aside in whole or in part, the assessment of the penalty.
Revocation of election.--Any election to have this paragraph apply may not be revoked except with the consent of the Secretary of Energy.
The Secretary of Energy shall issue any regulations necessary to carry out this Act.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``electromagnetic fields'' means the electric fields and magnetic fields produced by a product described in section 2(b).
The term ``electric fields'' means fields of which the strength is determined by the voltage and is measured in volts per meter.
The term ``low-frequency'' means a frequency of 60 cycles per second or 60 Hertz.
The term ``magnetic fields'' means fields of which the strength is determined by the amount of flowing current and is measured in Gauss.