This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Compensation Equity Act of 2000''.
CONCURRENT RECEIPT OF RETIRED PAY AND DISABILITY RETIREMENT FOR VETERANS WHO RECEIVED THE PURPLE HEART.
Concurrent Receipt.--Section 5304 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of subsection (a)(1) the following new sentence: ``Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, emergency officers', regular, or reserve retirement pay (other than retired pay under chapter 61 of title 10) shall be paid to a veteran concurrently with compensation for a service- connected disability, without deduction from either the retirement pay or the compensation, in the case of a veteran who was awarded the Purple Heart and whose retirement pay is based on service of 20 years or more.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Compensation paid by the Secretary for a service-connected disability may not be considered in determining eligibility for any other benefit under any provision of Federal, State, or local law and may not be counted as income of the veteran or the veteran's family for purposes of any provision of Federal, State, or local law for which eligibility for any benefit or program is determined based upon income.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to payments for periods beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PRESERVATION OF VETERAN'S COMPENSATION BENEFIT FOR SURVIVING SPOUSE.
Compensation Benefit To Survive Death of Veteran.--Section 1311 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Notwithstanding the preceding provisions of this section, the rate of dependency and indemnity compensation paid for any month to the surviving spouse of a veteran who was awarded the Purple Heart shall be at the rate at which compensation under chapter 11 of this title would be paid for that month to that veteran if the veteran were not deceased (except that, for purposes of section 1115 of this title, such rate of compensation shall be determined as if the veteran had no spouse).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply with respect to payments for months beginning on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ANNUITIES UNDER SURVIVOR BENEFIT PLAN TO BE 100 PERCENT OF RETIRED PAY BASE AMOUNT.
Termination.--Section 1451 of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking out ``shall be'' in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) and all that follows in that paragraph and inserting in lieu thereof ``shall be the amount equal to 100 percent of the base amount.
''; and (B) in paragraph (2), by striking out ``shall be'' in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) and all that follows in that paragraph and inserting in lieu thereof ``shall be the amount equal to a percentage of the base amount that-- ``(A) is less than 100 percent; and ``(B) is determined under subsection (f).
''; and (2) in paragraph (1) of subsection (c), by striking out ``shall be'' in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) and all that follows in that paragraph and inserting in lieu thereof ``shall be the amount equal to 100 percent of the retired pay to which the member or former member would have been entitled if the member or former member had been entitled to that pay based upon his years of active service when he died.''.
Repeal of Requirement for Reduction of Annuity at Age 62.--Such section is further amended by striking out subsection (d).
Repeal of Alternative Computation for Certain Beneficiaries for Whom Social Security Offset Was More Beneficial Than Two-Tier Computation.--Such section is further amended by striking out subsection (e).
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (f) of such section is amended by striking out ``(a)(2), (b)(2), or (e)(2)(B)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(a)(2) or (b)(2)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payment of annuities for months that begin after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Recomputation of Existing Annuities.--In the case of a person who is a beneficiary under the Survivor Benefit Plan established by subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 10, United States Code, on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary concerned (as defined in section 101 of title 37, United States Code) shall recompute the amount of that person's annuity as necessary to reflect the amendments made by this section.