This Act may be cited as the ``Northern Border States Council Act''.
Establishment.--There is established a council to be known as the Northern Border States-Canada Trade Council (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Council'').
Membership.-- (1) Composition.--The Council shall be composed of 24 members consisting of 2 members from each of the following States: (A) Maine.
Appointment by state governors.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Commerce (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall appoint two members from each of the States described in paragraph (1) to serve on the Council.
The appointments shall be made from a list of nominees submitted by the Governor of each such State.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for terms that are coterminous with the term of the Governor of the State who nominated the member.
Any vacancy in the Council shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Initial Meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Council have been appointed, the Council shall hold its first meeting.
Meetings.--The Council shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Council shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Council shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among its members.
The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson shall each serve in their respective positions for a period of 2 years, unless such member's term is terminated before the end of the 2-year period.
DUTIES OF THE COUNCIL.
In General.--The duties and responsibilities of the Council shall include-- (1) advising the President, the Congress, the United States Trade Representative, the Secretary, and other appropriate Federal and State officials, with respect to-- (A) the development and administration of United States-Canada trade policies, practices, and relations, (B) taxation and regulation of cross-border wholesale and retail trade in goods and services between the United States and Canada, (C) taxation, regulation, and subsidization of agricultural products, energy products, and forest products, and (D) the potential for any United States or Canadian customs or immigration law or policy to result in a barrier to trade between the United States and Canada, (2) monitoring the nature and cause of trade issues and disputes that involve one of the Council-member States and either the Canadian Government or one of the provincial governments of Canada; and (3) if the Council determines that a Council-member State is involved in a trade issue or dispute with the Government of Canada or one of the provincial governments of Canada, making recommendations to the President, the Congress, the United States Trade Representative, and the Secretary concerning how to resolve the issue or dispute.
Response to Requests by Certain People.-- (1) In general.--Upon the request of the United States Trade Representative, the Secretary, a Member of Congress who represents a Council-member State, or the Governor of a Council-member State, the Council shall review and comment on-- (A) reports of the Federal Government and reports of a Council-member State government concerning United States-Canada trade, (B) reports of a binational panel or review established pursuant to chapter 19 of the North American Free Trade Agreement concerning the settlement of a dispute between the United States and Canada, (C) reports of an arbitral panel established pursuant to chapter 20 of the North American Free Trade Agreement concerning the settlement of a dispute between the United States and Canada, and (D) reports of a panel or Appellate Body established pursuant to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade concerning the settlement of a dispute between the United States and Canada.
Determination of scope.--Among other issues, the Council shall determine whether a trade dispute between the United States and Canada is the result of action or inaction on the part of the Federal Government of Canada or a provincial government of Canada.
Council-Member State.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Council-member State'' means a State described in section 2(b)(1) which is represented on the Council established under section 2(a).
Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act and at the end of each 2-year period thereafter, the Council shall submit a report to the President and the Congress which contains a detailed statement of the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the Council.
POWERS OF THE COUNCIL.
Hearings.--The Council may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Council considers advisable to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Notice of Council hearings shall be published in the Federal Register in a timely manner.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Council may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Council considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon the request of the Chairperson of the Council, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Council.
Postal Services.--The Council may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Council may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Members To Serve Without Compensation.--Except as provided in subsection (b), members of the Council shall receive no compensation, allowances, or benefits by reason of service to the Council.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Council shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Council.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Council may, without regard to the civil service laws, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Council to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Council and the Secretary.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Council may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Council without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Council may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Office Space.--The Secretary shall provide office space for Council activities and for Council personnel.
TERMINATION OF THE COUNCIL.
The Council shall terminate on the date that is 54 months after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall submit a final report to the President and the Congress under section 4 at least 90 days before such termination.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated from amounts made available by appropriations to the Department of Commerce an amount not to exceed $250,000 for fiscal year 1996 and for each fiscal year thereafter to the Council to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the authorization contained in this section shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.