This Act may be cited as the ``Racial Justice Act of 1993''.
PROHIBITION OF DEATH PENALTY IN DISPROPORTIONATE PATTERN.
In General.--A government shall not impose or carry out the penalty of death in criminal cases in a racially disproportionate pattern.
An individual shall not be put to death in execution of a death sentence imposed under law administered in violation of this subsection.
Disproportionate Pattern.--For purposes of subsection (a), a racially disproportionate pattern occurs when the penalty of death is imposed-- (1) more frequently upon persons of one race than upon persons of other races convicted of crimes for which such penalty may be imposed; or (2) more frequently as punishment for crimes against persons of one race than as punishment for crimes against persons of another race; and the greater frequency is not explained by relevant nonracial circumstances.
Establishing Pattern.--To establish that a racially disproportionate pattern exists for the purposes of this Act-- (1) ordinary methods of statistical proof suffice; and (2) it shall not be necessary to show discriminatory motive, intent, or purpose on the part of any individual or institution.
Prima Facie Case.--To establish a prima facie showing that a racially disproportionate pattern exists for purposes of this Act, it suffices to show that death sentences are being imposed or executed-- (1) upon persons of one race with a frequency that is disproportioned to their representation among the total numbers of persons arrested for, charged with, or convicted of, death eligible crimes; or (2) as punishment for crimes against persons of one race with a frequency that is disproportioned to their representation among the numbers of persons against whom death eligible crimes have been the subject of arrests, charges, or convictions.
Rebuttal of Prima Facie Case.--To rebut a prima facie showing of a racially disproportionate pattern, a government must establish by clear and convincing evidence that identifiable and pertinent nondiscriminatory factors persuasively explain the observable racial disparities comprising the disproportion.
DATA ON DEATH PENALTY CASES.
Designation of Central Agency.--Any State or Federal entity that provides by law for death to be imposed as a punishment for any crime shall designate a central agency to collect and maintain pertinent data on the charging, disposition, and sentencing patterns for all cases of death-eligible crimes.
Form for Data.--The central agency so designated shall devise and distribute to every local official or agency responsible for the investigation or prosecution of death-eligible crimes a standard form to collect pertinent data.
Preparation of Data by Local Officials.--Each local official responsible for the investigation or prosecution of death-eligible crimes shall complete a standard form on every case of death-eligible crime and shall transmit it to the central agency no later than three months after the disposition of each such case whether that disposition is by dismissal of charges, reduction of charges, acceptance of a plea of guilty to the death-eligible crime or to another crime, acquittal, conviction, or any decision not to proceed with prosecution.
Police and Investigative Report.--In addition to the standard form, the local official or agency shall transmit to the central agency one copy of all police and investigative reports made in connection with each case of death-eligible crime.
Other Duties of Central Agency.--The central agency shall affirmatively monitor compliance with this section by local officials and agencies.
It shall maintain all standard forms, compile and index all information contained in the forms, and make both the forms and the compiled information publicly available.
The compiled information shall be made publicly available in machine readable form.
The central agency shall also maintain a centralized, alphabetically indexed file of all police and investigative reports transmitted to it by local officials or agencies in every case of death-eligible crime.
It shall allow access to its file of police and investigative reports to counsel of record for any person charged with any death-eligible crime or sentenced to death who has made, or intends to make, a claim under section 2; and it may also allow access to this file to other persons.
Requirement.--In any action brought in a court of the United States within the jurisdiction conferred by sections 2241, 2254, or 2255 of title 28, United States Code, in which any person raises a claim under section 2-- (1) the court shall appoint counsel for any such person who is financially unable to retain counsel; and (2) the court shall furnish investigative, expert or other services necessary for the adequate development of the claim to any such person who is financially unable to obtain such services.
Nonapplication of Presumption of Correctness.--Notwithstanding section 2254 of title 28, United States Code, no determination on the merits of a factual issue made by a State court pertinent to any claim under section 2 shall be presumed to be correct unless-- (1) the State is in compliance with section 4; (2) the determination was made in a proceeding in a State court in which the person asserting the claim was afforded rights to the appointment of counsel and to the furnishing of investigative, expert, and other services necessary for the adequate development of the claim which were substantially equivalent to those provided by subsection (a); and (3) the determination is one which is otherwise entitled to be presumed to be correct under the criteria specified in section 2254.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``pertinent data'' means the data to be collected in the standard form as designated by the central agency.
Such term includes, at a minimum-- (A) pertinent demographic information on all persons charged with the crime and all victims (including race, sex, age, and national origin); (B) information on the principal features of the crime; (C) information on the aggravating and mitigating factors of the crime, and on the background and character of every person charged with the crime; and (D) a narrative summary of the crime; (2) the term ``case of death-eligible crime'' means a case in which the complaint, indictment, information, or any other initial or later charging paper charges any person with a crime for which the punishment of death is authorized to be imposed under any circumstances upon conviction.
CLAIMS BEFORE ENACTMENT NOT BARRED.
A person is not barred from raising a claim under section 2 on the ground of having failed to raise or to prosecute the same or a similar claim before the date of enactment of this Act, not by reason of any adjudication before this date.