This Act may be cited as the ``Tax Incentives for Family-Friendly Workplaces Act of 1996''.
SMALL BUSINESS FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
SMALL BUSINESS FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE CREDIT.
Amount of Credit.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an eligible small business employer, the amount of the small business family and medical leave credit determined under this section for any taxable year shall be an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified family and medical leave costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Limitation on Credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) with respect to each employee for qualified family and medical leave costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year with respect to such employee shall not exceed $2,000.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible small business employer.--The term `eligible small business employer' means any employer who complies with title I of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 but who is not required to comply with such title by reason of employing fewer than 50 employees during the periods described in section 101(4)(A) of such Act.
Qualified family and medical leave costs.--The term `qualified family and medical leave costs' means expenses incurred in connection with complying with title I of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for that portion of the qualified family and medical leave costs otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the credit determined for such taxable year under this section.''
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (10), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (11) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) in the case of an eligible small business employer (as defined in section 45C(c)), the small business family and medical leave credit determined under section 45C.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Small business family and medical leave credit.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenses paid or incurred after the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CREDIT FOR WAGES PAID TO EMPLOYEE WHO IS ALLOWED TO SHIFT HOURS OF EMPLOYMENT OR TO WORK AT HOME IN ORDER TO REDUCE CHILD CARE NEEDS.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits), as amended by section 2, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
WAGES PAID TO EMPLOYEE WHO IS ALLOWED TO SHIFT HOURS OF EMPLOYMENT OR WORK AT HOME IN ORDER TO REDUCE CHILD CARE NEEDS.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the amount of the child care-related wage credit determined under this section for any taxable year shall be an amount equal to \1/3\ of the aggregate wages paid or incurred during such year which are attributable to services performed by an employee of the taxpayer during the 1-year period beginning on the date the employee first becomes a qualified employee of the taxpayer.
Qualified Employee.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified employee' means any full-time employee if-- ``(1) such employee is permitted by the employer, solely in order to reduce the amount of dependent care services provided (to a dependent of the employee) outside the employee's household, to perform services for the employer-- ``(A) at the employee's home, or ``(B) during a period which is not within the normal business hours of the employer, and ``(2) as a result of the services performed for the employer as described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1), there is at least a 20 percent reduction in the amount of time dependent care services are provided to a dependent of the employee outside the employee's household.
Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Employee must be qualified employee for entire year.--No credit shall be determined under subsection (a) with respect to any employee unless such employee is a qualified employee throughout the 1-year period described in subsection (a).
Only $6,000 of wages per year taken into account.-- The amount of the wages which may be taken into account with respect to any employee shall not exceed $6,000 per year.
Wages.--The term `wages' has the meaning given such term by section 51(c) (determined without regard to paragraph (4) thereof).
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of section 52 and subsections (f), (g), (h), (i), and (k) of section 51 shall apply.''
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code (relating to current year business credit), as amended by section 2(b), is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) the child care-related wage credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Wages paid to employee who is allowed to shift hours of employment or work at home in order to reduce child care needs.''
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to wages paid or incurred after the date which is 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Employer practices before effective date.--For purposes of section 45D(b)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section, no reduction before the 1st taxable year to which such section applies shall be taken into account.