This Act may be cited as the ``Defense Worker Dislocation Act''.
In General.--Section 325(a) of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1662d(a)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``From the'' and inserting ``(1) From the''; (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``The Secretary may make the grants in any State in which the Governor has received a notification regarding a closure, cancellation, or reduction under section 4201(b) of the Defense Economic Adjustment, Diversification, Conversion, and Stabilization Act of 1990, and in which eligible employees have received notification of warning from their employer regarding the closure, cancellation, or reduction.
''; and (3) by striking the last sentence and inserting the following: ``(2) To be eligible to receive a grant, an entity referred to in paragraph (1) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require, including the date on which the entity anticipates that the eligible employees affected will lose employment, and information relating to the notifications described in paragraph (1).
The Secretary shall approve or deny the application not later than the later of-- ``(A) 15 days after the date described in paragraph (2); or ``(B) 30 days after submission of the application.''.
Use of Funds.--Section 325 of such Act is amended by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) Grants under subsection (a) may be used-- ``(A) to provide retraining, as described in section 314(d) or to update existing skills, with respect to an eligible employee described in subsection (f)(3)(A); and ``(B) notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, to pay for the Federal share of providing such retraining with respect to an employee of eligible defense contractors or eligible defense subcontractors if-- ``(i) the employee is currently involved in defense work; ``(ii) the retraining is designed to enable employee to achieve placement and retention in unsubsidized employment that involves nondefense work and in which the employee has not previously been substantially engaged; and ``(iii) the employer certifies that the employee would have become an eligible employee described in subsection (f)(3)(A), without the retraining.
The Federal share of providing the retaining described in paragraph (1)(B) shall be 75 percent.''.
Administration.--Section 325 of such Act is amended by-- (1) redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (e); and (2) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d)(1)(A) Not later than 15 days after the approval of an application of an entity under subsection (a)(3), the Secretary shall make available to the entity 50 percent of the amount of the grant.
On submission of the report described in subparagraph (C), the Secretary shall make available to the entity the remainder of the grant.
Each recipient of a grant under this section shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a report containing such information as the Secretary may require regarding eligible employees participating in the program, and the current education skill levels and occupational abilities of the employees.
Grants made under this section may be used to reimburse an entity for funds expended under another provision of this title for the purposes described in subsection (c).
Grants made under this section to an entity shall be in addition to assistance under any other provision of this title, and shall be made without regard to whether the entity has expended funds available under such provision.
(A) For purposes of the requirements of title I, and in particular of section 141(a), an eligible employee shall be deemed to be a person who can benefit from, and is most in need of, services provided under this section.
Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, in prescribing performance standards under section 106 for this section, the Secretary shall prescribe standards solely based on placement and retention in unsubsidized employment.
Services provided to eligible employees under this section consistent with individual readjustment plans shall be presumed to be in compliance with such standards unless any person demonstrates that the services are not in compliance.''.
Definitions.--Section 325 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term ``eligible defense contractor'' means a person that is-- ``(A) awarded a contract by the Department of Defense; and ``(B) affected by a notification issued under section 4201(b) of the Defense Economic Adjustmnent, Diversification, Conversion, and Stabilization Act of 1990.
The term ``eligible defense subcontractor'' means a subcontractor-- ``(A) for a person awarded a contract by the Department of Defense; ``(B) that is affected by such a notification; and ``(C) that is certified by a State agency described in section 3306(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
The term `eligible employee' means-- ``(A) an eligible dislocated worker, including such a worker of an eligible defense contractor or eligible defense subcontractor, who has been terminated or laid off, or has received a notice of termination or layoff, as a consequence of reductions in expenditures by the United States for defense or by closures of United States military facilities, as determined in accordance with regulations of the Secretary; and ``(B) an employee described in subsection (c)(1)(B).
The term `employer' includes an eligible defense contractor and an eligible defense subcontractor.