This Act may be cited as the ``Apprenticeship Improvement Act of 1991''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INFORMATION COLLECTION SYSTEM.
Section 2 of the Act of August 16, 1937 (50 United States Statutes at Large 664; 29 United States Code 50), popularly known as the ``National Apprenticeship Act'', (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Act'') is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
'', and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(b) The Secretary shall establish and maintain a national information collection system for apprenticeships and apprenticeship programs.''.
The Act is further amended-- (1) by redesignating section 4 as section 5, and (2) by inserting after section 3 the following new section: ``Sec.
The Secretary shall assure that from the amounts appropriated to carry out this Act in each fiscal year, not less than 1 percent of such amounts shall be available to establish outreach recruitment activities to increase the participation of women, minorities, handicapped individuals, displaced workers, and disadvantaged individuals in the apprenticeship programs authorized by this Act.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF BUREAU OF APPRENTICESHIP AND TRAINING; APPOINTMENT OF EMPLOYEES.
Establishment.--There is established in the Department of Labor, the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Bureau'') which shall carry out the policies and functions of this Act in behalf of the Secretary of Labor (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'').
The Bureau shall be under the direction of an administrator to be known as the Administrator of the Bureau of Apprenticeship and Training.
The Administrator shall report directly to the Secretary.
Transfer of Functions.--Functions of the Assistant Secretary for Employment and Training Administration of the Department of Labor with respect to the promotion of labor standards of apprenticeship, including research, information, and publications are transferred to the Bureau.
Functions related to apprenticeship, including appropriate administrative and program support services, together with personnel necessary to the administration of such functions, and unexpended balances of appropriations and other funds related thereto, are transferred to the Bureau.
Appointment of Employees.--The Secretary is authorized to appoint such employees as may be necessary for the administration of this Act in accordance with laws applicable to the appointment and compensation of employees and advisors of the United States.
In General.--The Secretary shall increase the force within the Bureau to 377 full-time employees no later than January 1, 1992.
Consideration of Employees Working Less Than Full Time.--In the administration of subsection (a)-- (1) a part-time employee shall be counted as a fraction, the numerator of which is the number corresponding to the average number of hours in such employee's regularly scheduled workweek and the denominator of which is 40; and (2) an individual employed on a temporary or intermittent basis shall not be counted.
LIMITATIONS ON REDUCTION IN FORCE.
In General.--A reduction in force may not be conducted within the Bureau if-- (1) the reduction in force would reduce the total number of civilian employees within such Bureau; and (2) such total number, after the reduction in force, would be less than the equivalent of 377 full-time employees.
Consideration of Employees Working Less Than Full Time.--In the administration of subsection (a)-- (1) a part-time employee shall be counted as a fraction, the numerator of which is the number corresponding to the average number of hours in such employee's regularly scheduled workweek and the denominator of which is 40; and (2) an individual employed on a temporary or intermittent basis shall not be counted.
In General.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Congress, not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, a detailed report concerning whether the apprenticeship program conducted by the Department of Labor under the Act of August 16, 1937 (50 United States Statutes at Large 664; 29 United States Code 50), complies with regulations governing equal opportunity.
Contents of Report.--The report required by this section shall include-- (1) a detailed description of activities carried out by the Department of Labor to ensure compliance; (2) a list of compliance reviews undertaken by the Department; and (3) a description of any sanctions imposed as a result of the compliance reviews.