SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Strengthening America's Security Act of 2005''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Necessary assets for controlling United States borders.
Expedited removal between ports of entry.
Release of aliens from noncontiguous countries.
Reducing illegal immigration and alien smuggling on tribal lands.
Detention space and removal capacity.
Increased criminal penalties for alien smuggling, document fraud, gang violence, and drug trafficking.
Increase of Federal detention space.
State Criminal Alien Assistance Program.
Subterranean Entry.-- (1) Study.--The Secretary of Homeland Security and the head of the United States Army Corps of Engineers shall carry out a joint study on methods to prevent aliens from illegally entering the United States through subterranean tunnels along the international border between the United States and Mexico and the cost, utility, and effectiveness of employing such methods for border security.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security and the head of the United States Army Corps of Engineers shall submit to Congress the results of the study required by paragraph (1).
Barriers for Land Crossings.-- (1) Study.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall carry out a study of the feasibility and effectiveness of completing primary and secondary fences along the international border between the United States and Mexico and the cost and utility of employing such fences for border security.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit to Congress the results of the study required by paragraph (1).
NECESSARY ASSETS FOR CONTROLLING UNITED STATES BORDERS.
Personnel.-- (1) Customs and border protection officers.--In each of the fiscal years 2006 through 2010, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall increase by not less than 250 the number of positions for full-time active duty Customs and Border Protection officers.
Authorization of appropriations.-- (A) Customs and border protection officers.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out paragraph (1).
Border patrol agents.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out section 5202 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (118 United States Statutes at Large 3734).
Transportation of aliens.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 for the transportation of aliens.
Technological Assets.-- (1) Acquisition.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall procure unmanned aerial vehicles, cameras, poles, sensors, and other technologies necessary to achieve operational control of the borders of the United States.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out paragraph (1).
Infrastructure.-- (1) Construction of border control facilities.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall construct all-weather roads and shall acquire vehicle barriers and necessary facilities to support its mission of achieving operational control of the borders of the United States.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out paragraph (1).
Border Patrol Checkpoints.--Temporary or permanent checkpoints may be maintained on roadways in border patrol sectors within 100 miles of the border between the United States and Mexico.
Training.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall provide all customs and border protection officers with training in identifying and detecting fraudulent travel documents.
Such training shall be developed in consultation with the Forensic Document Laboratory of Immigration and Customs Enforcement.
Forensic Document Laboratory.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall provide all customs and border protection officers with access to the Forensic Document Laboratory.
Report and Assessment.-- (1) Report.--Not later than 1 year after the effective date of this Act, and annually through 2010, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a report to the Office of the Inspector General regarding the accuracy and reliability of the Forensic Document Laboratory in identifying and detecting fraudulent documents.
Assessment.--The Office of Inspector General shall conduct an independent assessment of the accuracy and reliability of the Forensic Document Library and submit a report to Congress on the results of such assessment.
Right to Appellate Review.-- (1) Establishment of appellate review board.--There is established, within Immigration and Customs Enforcement Identity and Benefits Fraud Branch of the Department of Homeland Security, the Fraud Appellate Review Board, which shall be authorized to review determinations by the Forensic Document Laboratory that a certain document is fraudulent.
Right to appeal.--Any alien against whom a negative determination is made by the Forensic Document Laboratory regarding the authenticity of a document may appeal such determination to the Fraud Appellate Review Board for an independent determination of the findings of the Forensic Document Laboratory.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out this section.
Not later than October 26, 2007, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a report to Congress that describes-- (1) the documents that need to be machine-readable and tamper-resistant and incorporate biometric identifiers; (2) how documents described in paragraph (1) will meet those standards; (3) the locations at which the Department of Homeland Security will install document readers; (4) the estimated costs for creating such documents and installing such readers; and (5) realistic deadlines for issuing machine-readable, tamper-resistant documents that incorporate biometric documents and installing document readers.
Grounds of Inadmissibility.--Section 212 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(7), by adding at the end the following: ``(C) Withholders of biometric data.--Any alien who knowingly fails to comply with a lawful request for biometric data under section 215(c) or 235(d) is inadmissible.
''; and (2) in subsection (d), by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: ``(2) The Secretary of Homeland Security shall determine whether a ground for inadmissibility exists with respect to an alien described in subparagraph (C) subsection (a)(7) and may waive the application of such subparagraph, for an individual alien or a class of aliens, at the discretion of the Secretary.''.
Collection of Biometric Data From Aliens Departing the United States.--Section 215 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1185) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (g); and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) The Secretary of Homeland Security is authorized to require aliens departing the United States to provide biometric data and other information relating to their immigration status.''.
Inspection of Applicants for Admission.--Section 235(d) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1185(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Authority to collect biometric data.--In conducting inspections under subsection (b), immigration officers are authorized to collect biometric data from-- ``(A) any applicant for admission or alien seeking to transit through the United States; or ``(B) any lawful permanent resident who is entering the United States, but is not regarded as seeking admission under section 101(a)(13)(C).''.
Collection of Biometric Data From Alien Crewman.--Section 252 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1282) is amended by inserting ``Immigration officers are authorized to collect biometric data from any alien crewman seeking permission to land temporarily in the United States.''
Implementation.--Section 7208(l) of the 9/11 Commission Implementation Act of 2004 (8 United States Code 1365b(l)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``There are authorized'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--There are authorized''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Implementation at all land border ports of entry.-- There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 and 2007 to implement the automated biometric entry and exit data system at all land border ports of entry.''.
EXPEDITED REMOVAL BETWEEN PORTS OF ENTRY.
In General.--Section 235 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1225) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(A)(i), by striking ``the officer'' and inserting ``a supervisory officer''; and (2) in subsection (c), by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Expansion.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall make the expedited removal procedures under this subsection available in all border patrol sectors on the southern border of the United States as soon as operationally possible.
National security certification.--No alien shall be expeditiously removed until the appropriate Director of Field Operations has certified in writing that expeditious removal of the alien will pose no security risk to the United States.
Training.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall provide employees of the Department of Homeland Security with comprehensive training of the procedures authorized under this subsection.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out the amendments made by this section.
Section 222(g) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1202(g)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and any other nonimmigrant visa issued by the United States that is in the possession of the alien except upon a showing of extraordinary circumstances or in the case of technical violations'' after ``such visa''; and (2) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``(other than the visa described in paragraph (1)) issued in a consular office located in the country of the alien's nationality'' and inserting ``(other than a visa described in paragraph (1)) issued in a consular office located in the country of the alien's nationality or foreign residence''.
RELEASE OF ALIENS FROM NONCONTIGUOUS COUNTRIES.
Minimum Bond.--Section 236(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1226(a)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``on''; (2) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) by inserting ``except as provided under subparagraph (B), upon the giving of a''; and (B) by striking ``or'' at the end; (3) by redesignating subparagraph (B) as subparagraph (C); and (4) by inserting after subparagraph (A) the following: ``(B) if the alien is a national of a noncontiguous country, has not been admitted or paroled into the United States, and was apprehended within 2 years of admission and within 100 miles of the international border of the United States or presents a flight risk, as determined by the Secretary of Homeland Security, upon the giving of a bond of at least $5,000 with security approved by, and containing conditions prescribed by, the Secretary of Homeland Security or the Attorney General, and subject to review before the Executive Office of Immigration Review; or''.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the effective date of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a report to Congress on the number of aliens from noncontiguous countries who are apprehended between land border ports of entry.
REDUCING ILLEGAL IMMIGRATION AND ALIEN SMUGGLING ON TRIBAL LANDS.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of Homeland Security may award grants to Indian tribes with lands adjacent to an international border of the United States that have been adversely affected by illegal immigration.
Use of Funds.--Grants awarded under subsection (a) may be used for-- (1) law enforcement activities; (2) health care services; (3) environmental restoration; and (4) the preservation of cultural resources.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Homeland Security shall submit a report to the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives that-- (1) describes the level of access of Border Patrol agents on tribal lands; (2) describes the extent to which enforcement of immigration laws may be improved by enhanced access to tribal lands; (3) contains a strategy for improving such access through cooperation with tribal authorities; and (4) identifies grants provided by the Department of Homeland Security for Indian tribes, either directly or through State or local grants, relating to border security expenses.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out this section.
DETENTION SPACE AND REMOVAL CAPACITY.
In General.--Section 5204 of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Protection Act of 2004 (118 United States Statutes at Large 3734) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``8,000'' and inserting ``10,000''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to amounts otherwise authorized to be appropriated, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2006 through 2010 to carry out subsection (a).''.
Legal Representation.--No person shall be detained by the Department of Homeland Security in a location that limits the person's reasonable access to legal counsel.
Upon active or constructive notice that a person is represented by an attorney, that person shall not be moved without providing the attorney reasonable notice in advance of such move.
INCREASED CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR ALIEN SMUGGLING, DOCUMENT FRAUD, GANG VIOLENCE, AND DRUG TRAFFICKING.
Alien Smuggling.--Section 274(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(B)-- (A) in clause (i), by striking ``10 years'' and inserting ``15 years''; (B) in clause (ii), by striking ``5 years'' and inserting ``10 years''; and (C) in clause (iii), by striking ``20 years'' and inserting ``40 years''; (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``one year, or both; or'' and inserting ``3 years, or both''; (B) in subparagraph (B)-- (i) in clause (i), by adding at the end the following: ``be fined under title 18, United States Code, and imprisoned not less than 5 years nor more than 25 years;''; (ii) in clause (ii), by striking ``or'' at the end and inserting the following: ``be fined under title 18, United States Code, and imprisoned not less than 3 years nor more than