Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: (1) Golden Spike Rail Study.--The term ``Golden Spike Rail Study'' means the Golden Spike Rail Feasibility Study, Reconnaissance Survey, Ogden, Utah to Golden Spike National Historic Site'', National Park Service, 1993.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Study Area.--The term ``Study Area'' means the Golden Spike/Crossroads of the West National Heritage Area Study Area, the boundaries of which are described in subsection (d).
In General.--The Secretary shall conduct a study of the Study Area which includes analysis and documentation necessary to determine whether the Study Area-- (1) has an assemblage of natural, historic, and cultural resources that together represent distinctive aspects of American heritage worthy of recognition, conservation, interpretation, and continuing use, and are best managed through partnerships among public and private entities; (2) reflects traditions, customs, beliefs, and folk-life that are a valuable part of the national story; (3) provides outstanding opportunities to conserve natural, historic, cultural, or scenic features; (4) provides outstanding recreational and educational opportunities; (5) contains resources important to the identified theme or themes of the Study Area that retain a degree of integrity capable of supporting interpretation; (6) includes residents, business interests, nonprofit organizations, and local and State governments who have demonstrated support for the concept of a National Heritage Area; and (7) has a potential management entity to work in partnership with residents, business interests, nonprofit organizations, and local and State governments to develop a National Heritage Area consistent with continued local and State economic activity.
Consultation.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall-- (1) consult with the State Historic Preservation Officer, State Historical Society, and other appropriate organizations; and (2) use previously completed materials, including the Golden Spike Rail Study.
Boundaries of Study Area.--The Study Area shall be comprised of sites relating to completion of the first transcontinental railroad in the State of Utah, concentrating on those areas identified on the map included in the Golden Spike Rail Study.
Report.--Not later than 3 fiscal years after funds are first made available to carry out this section, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report on the findings and conclusions of the study and recommendations based upon those findings and conclusions.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
CROSSROADS OF THE WEST HISTORIC DISTRICT.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- (1) to preserve and interpret, for the educational and inspirational benefit of the public, the contribution to our national heritage of certain historic and cultural lands and edifices of the Crossroads of the West Historic District; and (2) to enhance cultural and compatible economic redevelopment within the District.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: (1) District.--The term ``District'' means the Crossroads of the West Historic District established by subsection (c).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Historic infrastructure.--The term ``historic infrastructure'' means the District's historic buildings and any other structure that the Secretary determines to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
Crossroads of the West Historic District.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established the Crossroads of the West Historic District in the city of Ogden, Utah.
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the District shall be the boundaries depicted on the map entitled ``Crossroads of the West Historic District'', numbered OGGO-20,000, and dated March 22, 2000.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the Department of the Interior.
Development Plan.--The Secretary may make grants and enter into cooperative agreements with the State of Utah, local governments, and nonprofit entities under which the Secretary agrees to pay not more than 50 percent of the costs of-- (1) preparation of a plan for the development of historic, architectural, natural, cultural, and interpretive resources within the District; (2) implementation of projects approved by the Secretary under the development plan described in paragraph (1); and (3) an analysis assessing measures that could be taken to encourage economic development and revitalization within the District in a manner consistent with the District's historic character.
Restoration, Preservation, and Interpretation of Properties.-- (1) Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with the State of Utah, local governments, and nonprofit entities owning property within the District under which the Secretary may-- (A) pay not more than 50 percent of the cost of restoring, repairing, rehabilitating, and improving historic infrastructure within the District; (B) provide technical assistance with respect to the preservation and interpretation of properties within the District; and (C) mark and provide interpretation of properties within the District.
Non-federal contributions.--When determining the cost of restoring, repairing, rehabilitating, and improving historic infrastructure within the District for the purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the Secretary may consider any donation of property, services, or goods from a non-Federal source as a contribution of funds from a non-Federal source.
Provisions.--A cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) shall provide that-- (A) the Secretary shall have the right of access at reasonable times to public portions of the property for interpretive and other purposes; (B) no change or alteration may be made in the property except with the agreement of the property owner, the Secretary, and any Federal agency that may have regulatory jurisdiction over the property; and (C) any construction grant made under this section shall be subject to an agreement that provides-- (I) that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purposes of this section shall result in a right of the United States to compensation from the beneficiary of the grant; and (II) for a schedule for such compensation based on the level of Federal investment and the anticipated useful life of the project.
Applications.-- (A) In general.--A property owner that desires to enter into a cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) shall submit to the Secretary an application describing how the project proposed to be funded will further the purposes of the management plan developed for the District.
Consideration.--In making such funds available under this subsection, the Secretary shall give consideration to projects that provide a greater leverage of Federal funds.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section not more than $1,000,000 for any fiscal year and not more than $5,000,000 total.
Passed the House of Representatives May 2, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.