This Act may be cited as the ``Northern Border Regional Commission Reauthorization Act of 2018''.
ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES OF REGIONAL COMMISSIONS.
Section 15304(c)(3)(A) of title 40, United States Code, is amended by striking ``unanimous'' and inserting ``majority''.
ECONOMIC AND INFRASTRUCTURE DEVELOPMENT GRANTS.
Section 15501 of title 40, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (7), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (9); and (C) by inserting after paragraph (7) the following: ``(8) to grow the capacity for successful community economic development in its region; and''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``paragraphs (1) through (3)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (7)''; and (3) in subsection (f), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, except that financial assistance may be used as otherwise authorized by this subtitle to attract businesses to the region from outside the United States.''.
STATE CAPACITY BUILDING GRANT PROGRAM.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Northern Border Regional Commission established by section 15301(a)(3) of title 40, United States Code.
Commission state.--The term ``Commission State'' means each of the States of Maine, New Hampshire, New York, and Vermont.
Eligible county.--The term ``eligible county'' means a county described in section 15733 of title 40, United States Code.
Program.--The term ``program'' means the State capacity building grant program established under subsection (b).
Establishment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall establish a State capacity building grant program to provide grants to Commission States to carry out the purpose under subsection (c).
Purpose.--The purpose of the program is to support the efforts of Commission States-- (1) to better support business retention and expansion in eligible counties; (2) to create programs to encourage job creation and workforce development; (3) to prepare economic and infrastructure plans for eligible counties; (4) to expand access to high-speed broadband; (5) to encourage initiatives that drive investments in transportation, water, wastewater, and other critical infrastructure; (6) to create initiatives to increase the effectiveness of local or regional economic developers; and (7) to implement new or innovative economic development practices that will better position the Commission States to compete in the global economy.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Funds from a grant under the program may be used to support a project, program, or expense of the Commission State in an eligible county.
Limitation.--Funds from a grant under the program shall not be used for-- (A) the purchase of furniture, fixtures, or equipment; or (B) the compensation of-- (i) any State member of the Commission (as described in section 15301(b)(1)(B) of title 40, United States Code); or (ii) any State alternate member of the Commission (as described in section 15301(b)(2)(B) of title 40, United States Code).
Annual Work Plan.-- (1) In general.--For each fiscal year, before providing a grant under the program, each Commission State shall provide to the Commission an annual work plan that includes the proposed use of the grant.
Approval.--No grant under the program shall be provided to a Commission State unless the Commission has approved the annual work plan of the State.
Amount of Grant.-- (1) In general.--The amount of a grant provided to a Commission State under the program shall be an amount equal to the share of the State of administrative expenses of the Commission for a fiscal year (as determined under section 15304(c) of title 40, United States Code).
Approval.--For each fiscal year, a grant provided under the program shall be approved and made available as part of the approval of the annual budget of the Commission.
Grant Availability.--Funds from a grant under the program shall be available only during the fiscal year for which the grant is provided.
Report.--Each fiscal year, each Commission State shall submit to the Commission and make publicly available a report that describes the use of the grant funds and the impact of the program in the State.
Funding.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as the Commission determines to be necessary, subject to the condition that the Commission may use not more than $5,000,000 to carry out this section for any fiscal year.
Supplement, not supplant.--Funds made available to carry out this section shall supplement and not supplant funds made available for the Commission and other activities of the Commission.
NORTHERN BORDER REGIONAL COMMISSION.
Section 15733 of title 40, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by inserting ``Belknap,'' before ``Carroll,''; and (B) by inserting ``Cheshire,'' before ``Coos,''; and (2) in paragraph (4)-- (A) by inserting ``Addison, Bennington,'' before ``Caledonia,''; (B) by inserting ``Chittenden,'' before ``Essex,''; (C) by striking ``and'' and inserting ``Orange,'' and (D) by inserting ``, Rutland, Washington, Windham, and Windsor'' after ``Orleans''.
Section 15751(a) of title 40, United States Code, is amended by striking ``2018'' and inserting ``2023''.
Chapters 1, 2, 3, and 4 of subtitle V of title 40, United States Code, are redesignated as chapters 151, 153, 155, and 157, respectively.