ESTABLISHMENT OF NONDEDUCTIBLE TAX-FREE INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS.
In General.--Subpart A of part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to pension, profit- sharing, stock bonus plans, etc.)
is amended by inserting after section 408 the following new section: ``SEC.
SPECIAL INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS.
General Rule.--Except as provided in this section, a special individual retirement account shall be treated for purposes of this title in the same manner as an individual retirement plan.
Special Individual Retirement Account.--For purposes of this title, the term `special individual retirement account' means an individual retirement plan which is designated at the time of establishment of the plan as a special individual retirement account.
Treatment of Contributions.-- ``(1) No deduction allowed.--No deduction shall be allowed under section 219 for a contribution to a special individual retirement account.
Contribution limit.--The aggregate amount of contributions for any taxable year to all special individual retirement accounts maintained for the benefit of an individual shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) the maximum amount allowable as a deduction under section 219 with respect to such individual for such taxable year (determined without regard to section 219(g)), over ``(B) the amount so allowed.
Special rules for qualified transfers.-- ``(A) In general.--No rollover contribution may be made to a special individual retirement account unless it is a qualified transfer.
Limit not to apply.--The limitation under paragraph (2) shall not apply to a qualified transfer to a special individual retirement account.
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of a special individual retirement account shall not be included in the gross income of the distributee.
Exception for earnings on contributions held less than 5 years.-- ``(A) In general.--Any amount distributed out of a special individual retirement account which consists of earnings allocable to contributions made to the account during the 5-year period ending on the day before such distribution shall be included in the gross income of the distributee for the taxable year in which the distribution occurs.
Ordering rule.-- ``(i) First-in, first-out rule.-- Distributions from a special individual retirement account shall be treated as having been made-- ``(I) first from the earliest contribution (and earnings allocable thereto) remaining in the account at the time of the distribution, and ``(II) then from other contributions (and earnings allocable thereto) in the order in which made.
Allocations between contributions and earnings.--Any portion of a distribution allocated to a contribution (and earnings allocable thereto) shall be treated as allocated first to the earnings and then to the contribution.
Allocation of earnings.--Earnings shall be allocated to a contribution in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
Contributions in same year.--Except as provided in regulations, all contributions made during the same taxable year may be treated as 1 contribution for purposes of this subparagraph.
Cross reference.-- ``For additional tax for early withdrawal, see section 72(t).
Qualified transfer.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (2) shall not apply to any distribution which is transferred in a qualified transfer to another special individual retirement account.
Contribution period.--For purposes of paragraph (2), the special individual retirement account to which any contributions are transferred shall be treated as having held such contributions during any period such contributions were held (or are treated as held under this subparagraph) by the special individual retirement account from which transferred.
Special rules relating to certain transfers.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, in the case of a qualified transfer to a special individual retirement account from an individual retirement plan which is not a special individual retirement account-- ``(i) there shall be included in gross income any amount which, but for the qualified transfer, would be includible in gross income, but ``(ii) section 72(t) shall not apply to such amount.
Time for inclusion.--In the case of any qualified transfer which occurs before January 1, 1994, any amount includible in gross income under subparagraph (A) with respect to such contribution shall be includible ratably over the 4-taxable year period beginning in the taxable year in which the amount was paid or distributed out of the individual retirement plan.
Qualified Transfer.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified transfer' means a transfer to a special individual retirement account from another such account or from an individual retirement plan but only if such transfer meets the requirements of section 408(d)(3).
Limitation.--A transfer otherwise described in paragraph (1) shall not be treated as a qualified transfer if the taxpayer's adjusted gross income for the taxable year of the transfer exceeds the sum of the applicable dollar amount plus $10,000.
This paragraph shall not apply to a transfer from a special individual retirement account to another special individual retirement account.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the terms `adjusted gross income' and `applicable dollar amount' have the meanings given such terms by section 219(g)(3), except subparagraph (A)(ii) thereof shall be applied without regard to the phrase `or the deduction allowable under this section'.''
Early Withdrawal Penalty.--Section 72(t) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) Rules relating to special individual retirement accounts.--In the case of a special individual retirement account under section 408A-- ``(A) this subsection shall only apply to distributions out of such account which consist of earnings allocable to contributions made to the account during the 5-year period ending on the day before such distribution, and ``(B) paragraph (2)(A)(i) shall not apply to any distribution described in subparagraph (A).''
Excess Contributions.--Section 4973(b) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``For purposes of paragraphs (1)(B) and (2)(C), the amount allowable as a deduction under section 219 shall be computed without regard to section 408A.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part I of subchapter D of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 408 the following new item: ``Sec.
Special individual retirement accounts.''
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
Qualified transfers in 1993.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to any qualified transfer during any taxable year beginning in 1993.