This Act may be cited as the ``Gifted and Talented Students Education Act of 2001''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Gifted and talented students give evidence of high performance capability in specific academic fields, or in areas such as intellectual, creative, artistic, or leadership capacity, and require services and activities not ordinarily provided by a school in order to fully develop such capabilities.
These children are from all cultural, racial, and ethnic backgrounds, and socioeconomic groups; some have disabilities and for some, English is not their first language.
Many of these students have been historically underrepresented in gifted education programs.
Because gifted and talented students generally are more advanced academically, are able to learn more quickly and study in more depth and complexity than others their age, their special educational needs require opportunities and experiences that are different from those generally available in regular education programs.
There currently is no Federal requirement to identify or serve the Nation's approximately 3,000,000 gifted and talented students.
While some States and school districts allocate resources to educate gifted and talented students, others do not.
Additionally, State laws and State and local funding, identification, and accountability mechanisms vary widely, resulting in a vast disparity of services for this special- needs population.
If the United States is to compete successfully in the global economy, it is important that more students achieve to higher levels, and that highly capable students receive an education that prepares them to perform the highly innovative and challenging work performed in today's workplace.
The performance of 12th-grade advanced students in the United States on the Third International Mathematics and Science Study (TIMSS) was among the lowest in the world.
In each of 5 physics content areas and in each of 3 math content areas, the performance of physics and advanced mathematics students in the United States was among the lowest of participating countries.
Typical elementary school students with academic gifts and talents have already mastered 35 to 50 percent of the school year's content in several subject areas before the year begins.
In 1990, fewer than 2 cents out of every $100 spent on elementary and secondary education in the United States was devoted to providing challenging programming for the Nation's gifted and talented students.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide grants to States to support programs, classes, and other services designed to meet the needs of the Nation's gifted and talented students in elementary and secondary schools.
PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION AND ACTIVITIES.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to State educational agencies to assist local educational agencies to develop or expand gifted and talented education programs through one or more of the following activities: (1) Professional development programs.--A State educational agency may expend funds to develop and implement programs to address State and local needs for inservice training programs for general educators, specialists in gifted and talented education, administrators, school counselors, or other personnel at the elementary and secondary levels.
Technical assistance.--A State educational agency may make materials and services available through State regional education service centers, universities, colleges, or other entities.
Innovative programs and services.--States may support innovative approaches and curricula used by school districts, individual schools, or consortia of schools or school districts.
Emerging technologies.--States may provide funds for challenging, high-level course work, disseminated through new and emerging technologies (including distance learning), for individual students or groups of students in schools and local educational agencies that do not have the resources otherwise to provide such course work.
Limitations on Use of Funds.--Activities under subsection (a)(4) may include development of curriculum packages, compensation of distance learning educators, or other relevant activities, but funds provided under this Act may not be used for the purchase or upgrading of technological hardware.
In General.--To be eligible to receive a grant award under this Act, a State educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such form and manner as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--The application shall include assurances-- (1) that the State educational agency is designated as the agency responsible for the administration and supervision of programs assisted under this Act; (2) of the State educational agency's ability to provide matching funds for the activities to be assisted under this Act in an amount equal to not less than 20 percent of the grant funds to be received, provided in cash or in kind; (3) that funds received under this Act shall be used to support gifted and talented students in public schools, including students from all economic, ethnic, and racial backgrounds, students of limited English proficiency, gifted students with disabilities, and highly gifted students; (4) that not less than 90 percent of the funds provided under the grant shall be used for the purpose of making subgrants, on a competitive basis, to local educational agencies; (5) that funds received under this Act shall be used only to supplement, but not supplant, the amount of State and local funds expended for the specialized education and related services provided for the education of gifted and talented students; and (6) that the State educational agency shall develop and implement program assessment models to evaluate educational effectiveness and ensure program accountability.
Approval.--To the extent funds are made available for this Act, the Secretary shall approve an application of a State educational agency if such application meets the requirements of this section.
STATE USE OF FUNDS.
A State educational agency shall not use more than 10 percent of the funds made available under this Act for-- (1) establishment and implementation of a peer review process to review applications for subgrants made under section 4(b)(4); (2) supervision of the awarding of funds to local educational agencies or consortia thereof to support gifted and talented students in the State; (3) planning, supervision, and processing of funds made available under this section; (4) monitoring and evaluation of programs and activities assisted under this Act, including the submission of the annual report to the Secretary required in section 8; (5) dissemination of general program information; (6) providing technical assistance under this Act; and (7) supplementing, but not supplanting, the amount of State and local funds expended for the education of, and related services provided for, the education of gifted and talented students; and (8) providing support for parental education.
In General.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, of the total amount made available for this Act, the Secretary shall award to each State educational agency an amount that bears the same relation to the total amount as the number of children ages 5 through 18 in the State for the preceding academic year bears to the total number of all such children in all States for such year.
Reservation of Funds.--From the amount made available to carry out this Act for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve \1/2\ of 1 percent for the Secretary of the Interior for programs under this Act for teachers, other staff, and administrators in schools operated or funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Minimum Award.--No State receiving an allotment under subsection (a) may receive less than \1/2\ of 1 percent of the total amount allotted under such subsection.
Reallotment.--If any State does not apply for an allotment under this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall reallot such amount to the remaining States in accordance with this section.
COMPETITIVE GRANTS TO STATES.
In General.--Under section 10(b), the Secretary shall use the funds under this Act for competitive grants to State educational agencies to begin implementing activities described in section 3 through competitive subgrants to local educational agencies.
Application.--The Secretary shall use the application described in section 4 for grants awarded under this section.
Any State educational agency receiving funds under this Act shall submit a report to the Secretary beginning one year after the date of the enactment of this Act and each subsequent year that describes the number of students served and the activities supported with funds provided under this Act.
The report shall include a description of the measures taken to comply with the accountability requirements of section 4(b).
In this Act: (1) The term ``gifted and talented'' has the meaning such term has under State law or as such term is defined by the State or local educational agency, or in the case of a State that does not have a law that defines the term and the State or local educational agency has not defined the term, the term has the meaning given such term under section 14101(16) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(16)).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
The term ``State educational agency'' has the same meaning given such term in section 14101(28) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(28)).
The term ``local educational agency'' has the same meaning given such term in section 14101(18) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act (20 United States Code 8801(18)).
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $160,000,000 to carry out this Act for each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, 2005, and 2006.
Trigger.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, if the amount appropriated under subsection (a) for a fiscal year is less than $50,000,000, the Secretary shall implement the grant program described in section 7.