SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Adjustment Assistance Improvement Act of 2005''.
Table of Contents.-- Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE Sec.
Calculation of separation tolled during litigation.
Establishment of Trade Adjustment Assistance Advisor.
Revision of eligibility criteria.
Funding for administrative costs.
TITLE II--DATA COLLECTION Sec.
Data collection; study; information to workers.
Determinations by the Secretary of Labor.
TITLE III--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR FARMERS Sec.
Clarification of marketing year and other provisions.
TITLE I--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE SEC.
CALCULATION OF SEPARATION TOLLED DURING LITIGATION.
Section 233 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2293) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Special Rule for Calculating Separation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, any period during which a judicial or administrative appeal is pending with respect to the denial by the Secretary of a petition under section 223 shall not be counted for purposes of calculating the period of separation under subsection (a)(2) and an adversely affected worker that would otherwise be entitled to a trade readjustment allowance shall not be denied such allowance because of such appeal.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE ADVISOR.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after section 221, the following new section: ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE ADVISOR.
In General.--There is established in the Department of Labor an office to be known as the `Office of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Advisor'.
The Office shall be headed by a Director, who shall be responsible for providing assistance and advice to any person or entity described in section 221(a)(1) desiring to file a petition for certification of eligibility under section 221.
Technical Assistance.--The Director shall coordinate with each agency responsible for providing adjustment assistance under this chapter or chapter 6 and shall provide technical and legal assistance and advice to enable persons or entities described in section 221(a)(1) to prepare and file petitions for certification under section 221.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of contents for title II of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 221, the following: ``Sec.
Establishment of Office of Trade Adjustment Assistance Advisor.''.
Section 223 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2273) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Certification of Submissions.--If an employer submits a petition on behalf of a group of workers pursuant to section 221(a)(1) or if the Secretary requests evidence or information from an employer in order to make a determination under this section, the accuracy and completeness of any evidence or information submitted by the employer shall be certified by the employer's legal counsel or by an officer of the employer.''.
REVISION OF ELIGIBILITY CRITERIA.
Shifts in Production.--Section 222(a)(2)(B) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 (United States Code 2272(a)(2)(B)) is amended to read as follows: ``(B) there has been a shift in production by such workers' firm or subdivision to a foreign country of articles like or directly competitive with articles which are produced by such firm or subdivision.''.
Wage Insurance.-- (1) In general.--Section 246(a)(3) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2318(a)(3)) is amended to read as follows: ``(3) Eligibility.--A worker in a group that the Secretary has certified as eligible to apply for adjustment assistance under section 223 may elect to receive benefits under the alternative trade adjustment assistance program if the worker-- ``(A) obtains reemployment not more than 26 weeks after the date of separation from the adversely affected employment; ``(B) is at least 40 years of age; ``(C) earns not more than $50,000 a year in wages from reemployment; ``(D) is employed on a full-time basis as defined by State law in the State in which the worker is employed; and ``(E) does not return to the employment from which the worker was separated.''.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 246(a)(2) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2318(a)(2)) are amended by striking ``paragraph (3)(B)'' and inserting ``paragraph (3)'' each place it appears.
Section 246(b)(2) of such Act is amended by striking ``subsection (a)(3)(B)'' and inserting ``subsection (a)(3)''.
Downstream Workers.--Section 222(c)(3) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 (United States Code 2272(c)(3)) is amended by striking ``, if the certification of eligibility'' and all that follows to the end period.
Modification of Enrollment Deadlines.--Section 231(a)(5)(A)(ii) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2291(a)(5)(A)(ii)) is amended-- (1) in subclause (I), by striking ``16th week'' and inserting ``26th week''; and (2) in subclause (II), by striking ``8th week'' and inserting ``20th week''.
Extension of Allowance to Accommodate Training.--Section 233 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2293) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Extension of Allowance.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a trade readjustment allowance may be paid to a worker for a number of additional weeks equal to the number of weeks the worker's enrollment in training was delayed beyond the deadline applicable under section 231(a)(5)(A)(ii) pursuant to a waiver granted under section 231(c)(1)(E).''.
Funding for Training.--Section 236(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2296(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``Upon such approval'' and all that follows to the end; and (2) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2)(A) Upon approval of a training program under paragraph (l), and subject to the limitations imposed by this section, an adversely affected worker covered by a certification issued under section 223 shall be eligible to have payment of the costs of that training, including any costs of an approved training program incurred by a worker before a certification was issued under section 223, made on behalf of the worker by the Secretary directly or through a voucher system.
Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Improvement Act of 2005, the Secretary shall develop and submit to Congress for approval a formula that provides workers with an individual entitlement for training costs to be administered pursuant to sections 239 and 240.
The formula shall take into account-- ``(i) the number of workers enrolled in trade adjustment assistance; ``(ii) the duration of the assistance; ``(iii) the anticipated training costs for workers; and ``(iv) any other factors the Secretary deems appropriate.
Until such time as Congress approves the formula, the total amount of payments that may be made under subparagraph (A) for any fiscal year shall not exceed fifty percent of the amount of trade readjustment allowances paid to workers during that fiscal year.''.
Approved Training Programs.-- (1) In general.--Section 236(a)(5) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2296(a)(5)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E); (B) by redesignating subparagraph (F) as subparagraph (H); and (C) by inserting after subparagraph (E) the following: ``(F) integrated workforce training; ``(G) entrepreneurial training; and''.
Definition.--Section 247 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2319) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(18) The term `integrated workforce training' means training that integrates occupational skills training with English language acquisition.''.
FUNDING FOR ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS.
Section 241 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2313) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Funds provided by the Secretary to a State to cover administrative costs associated with the performance of a State's responsibilities under section 239 shall be sufficient to cover all costs of the State associated with operating the trade adjustment assistance program, including case worker costs.''.
In General.--Section 245(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2317(a)) is amended by striking ``2007'' and inserting ``2012''.
Firms.--Section 256(b) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2346(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$16,000,000'' and inserting ``$32,000,000''; and (2) by striking ``2007'' and inserting ``2012''.
Farmers.--Section 298(a) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2401g(a)) is amended by striking ``2007'' and inserting ``2012''.
TITLE II--DATA COLLECTION SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Trade Adjustment Assistance Accountability Act''.
DATA COLLECTION; STUDY; INFORMATION TO WORKERS.
Data Collection; Evaluations.--Subchapter C of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after section 249, the following new section: ``SEC.
DATA COLLECTION; EVALUATIONS; REPORTS.
Data Collection.--The Secretary shall, pursuant to regulations prescribed by the Secretary, collect any data necessary to meet the requirements of this chapter.
Performance Evaluations.--The Secretary shall establish an effective performance measuring system to evaluate the following: ``(1) Program performance.--A comparison of the trade adjustment assistance program before and after the effective date of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 2002 with respect to-- ``(A) the number of workers certified and the number of workers actually participating in the trade adjustment assistance program; ``(B) the time for processing petitions; ``(C) the number of training waivers granted; ``(D) the coordination of programs under this chapter with programs under the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2801 et sequentes); ``(E) the effectiveness of individual training providers in providing appropriate information and training; ``(F) the extent to which States have designed and implemented health care coverage options under title II of the Trade Act of 2002, including any difficulties States have encountered in carrying out the provisions of title II; ``(G) how Federal, State, and local officials are implementing the trade adjustment assistance program to ensure that all eligible individuals receive benefits, including providing outreach, rapid response, and other activities; and ``(H) any other data necessary to evaluate how individual States are implementing the requirements of this chapter.
Program participation.--The effectiveness of the program relating to-- ``(A) the number of workers receiving benefits and the type of benefits being received both before and after the effective date of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 2002; ``(B) the number of workers enrolled in, and the duration of, training by major types of training both before and after the effective date of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Reform Act of 2002; ``(C) earnings history of workers that reflects wages before separation and wages in any job obtained after receiving benefits under this Act; ``(D) reemployment rates and sectors in which dislocated workers have been employed; ``(E) the cause of dislocation identified in each petition that resulted in a certification under this chapter; and ``(F) the number of petitions filed and workers certified in each congressional district of the United States.
State Participation.--The Secretary shall ensure, to the extent practicable, through oversight and effective internal control measures the following: ``(1) State participation.--Participation by each State in the performance measurement system established under subsection (b) and shall provide incentives for States to supplement employment and wage data obtained through the use of unemployment insurance wage records.
Monitoring.--Monitoring by each State of internal control measures with respect to performance measurement data collected by each State.
Response.--The quality and speed of the rapid response provided by each State under section 134(a)(2)(A) of the Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (29 United States Code 2864(a)(2)(A)).
Reports.-- ``(1) Reports by the secretary.-- ``(A) Initial report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of the Trade Adjustment Assistance Accountability Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives a report that-- ``(i) describes the performance measurement system established under subsection (b); ``(ii) includes analysis of data collected through the system established under subsection (b); and ``(iii) provides recommendations for program improvements.
Annual report.--Not later than 1 year after the date the report is submitted under subparagraph (A), and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and release to the public a report that includes the information collected under clause (ii) of subparagraph (A).
State reports.--Pursuant to regulations prescribed by the Secretary, each State shall submit to the Secretary a report that details its participation in the programs established under this chapter, and that contains the data necessary to allow the Secretary to submit the report required under paragraph (1).
Publication.--The Secretary shall make available to each State, to Congress, and to the public, the data gathered and evaluated through the performance measurement system established under subsection (b).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Coordination.--Section 281 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2392) is amended by striking ``Departments of Labor and Commerce'' and inserting ``Departments of Labor, Commerce, and Agriculture''.
Trade monitoring system.--Section 282 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2393) is amended by striking ``The Secretary of Commerce and the Secretary of Labor'' and inserting ``The Secretaries of Commerce, Labor, and Agriculture''.
Table of contents.--The table of contents for title II of the Trade Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 249, the following new item: ``Sec.
Data collection; evaluations; reports.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date that is 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
DETERMINATIONS BY THE SECRETARY OF LABOR.
Section 223(c) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2273(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Publication of Determinations.--Upon reaching a determination on a petition, the Secretary shall-- ``(1) promptly publish a summary of the determination in the Federal Register together with the Secretary's reasons for making such determination; and ``(2) make the full text of the determination available to the public on the Internet website of the Department of Labor with full-text searchability.''.
TITLE III--TRADE ADJUSTMENT ASSISTANCE FOR FARMERS SEC.
CLARIFICATION OF MARKETING YEAR AND OTHER PROVISIONS.
In General.--Section 291(5) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2401(5)) is amended by inserting before the end period the following: ``, or in the case of an agricultural commodity that has no officially designated marketing year, in a 12-month period for which the petitioner provides written request''.
Fishermen.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, for purposes of chapter 2 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2271 et sequentes) fishermen who harvest wild stock shall be eligible for adjustment assistance to the same extent and in the same manner as a group of workers under such chapter 2.
In General.--Section 292(c)(1) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2401a(c)(1)) is amended by striking ``80 percent'' and inserting ``90 percent''.
Net Farm Income.--Section 296(a)(1)(C) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2401e(a)(1)(C)) is amended by inserting before the end period the following: ``or the producer had no positive net farm income for the 2 most recent consecutive years in which no adjustment assistance was received by the producer under this chapter''.