This bill may be cited as the ``International Consumer Safety Information Act''.
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT FOR RECALLS OF AUTOS OR AUTO PARTS.
International Agreement.--The President shall attempt to achieve the goal of an international agreement governing the dissemination of information about recalls by manufacturers of motor vehicles and motor vehicle equipment with safety-related defects.
The President shall take the necessary steps to begin negotiations within the appropriate international fora not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Purpose.--The purpose of these negotiations shall be to establish an international agreement in which government officials agree to cooperate in furthering global transparency with respect to motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment recalls so as to promote consumer safety and to enhance consumer confidence.
Guidelines for Governments.--The President shall consider the following criteria in the negotiations referred to in (a): (1) Member states should designate a competent authority within their own national government as the responsible authority for disseminating, to the public and to other foreign authorities, information about recalls of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment.
Member states should cooperate at the international level through their designated authorities through information exchange, communication, and joint action.
Member states should make available, to the public and to other governments through the collective publication of an Internet site managed for the purpose of the international agreement negotiated pursuant to this title, information on the following, at a minimum: (A) The name, title, and contact information for the competent authority in each member state regarding motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment recalls.
The names of companies that have issued recalls, the companies' contact information, and the specific products that are being recalled.
The countries in which the recalls are effective, and the date of the recall.
Member states, in the interest of getting all relevant information to their competent authorities and having those authorities share it with other countries, should disseminate widely the final guidelines negotiated to all relevant government departments, agencies, and branches of government.
Developed Member states should seek to assist developing states in implementing this agreement, and to aid efforts by developing states to ensure compliance with the agreement.
Member states should establish a framework to conduct regular oversight and review to assess the operation and effectiveness of the agreement and to create a forum in which member states can share with other states the domestic laws and regulations they have adopted to implement the agreement.
Guidelines for Enterprises Engaged in Trade.--The President shall seek to include in the international agreement guidelines on recalls for enterprises engaged in exporting motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment or manufacturing motor vehicle equipment for inclusion in vehicles to be exported.
The President shall consider the following criteria when conducting the negotiations: (1) Transparency and disclosure.--Enterprises that export autos or auto parts into the global market or enterprises that manufacture component parts for autos that are sold into the global market should disclose all relevant information regarding a recall it undertakes to the competent authority in the country it initiates the recall and to the competent authority in the country in which it is incorporated.
The information should be extensive enough to facilitate the listing referred to in (C)(3).
Consumer interests.--Enterprises should be cognizant of the fact that consumers transverse international borders and often take their vehicles with them; therefore, the enterprises should, to the greatest extent practical, make all consumers aware of recalls of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment, particularly in countries that border or are in proximity to a country in which the recall was initiated.
Cooperation with regulatory authorities.--Enterprises should cooperate promptly with the national authorities in any country that is requesting information about motor vehicle or motor vehicle equipment recall in an effort to safeguard consumer safety.
UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT COORDINATION OF INFORMATION ON FOREIGN RECALLS OF MOTOR VEHICLES OR MOTOR VEHICLE EQUIPMENT.
Development of Expertise in Recalls of Motor Vehicles or Motor Vehicle Equipment.--The President should designate the Secretary of Transportation as the competent authority in the United States Government: (1) The Secretary of Transportation should advise the President in negotiations referenced by section 2.
The Secretary of Transportation shall coordinate with and draw on the expertise of the appropriate officials in the Department of State, the Office of the United States Trade Representative, and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
Until such time that the President concludes the negotiations referenced in section 2 and until there is an international Internet database that compiles the information in section 2(C)(3), the Secretary of Transportation shall post an official Internet site detailing the information to the greatest extent possible, in section 2(C)(3) in addition to information provided to the Secretary of Transportation by United States Reports embassies abroad about recalls of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment in foreign countries.
Coordinated Federal Strategy.--The Department of State shall establish procedures by which United States embassies abroad will inform the Secretary of Transportation immediately when the Ambassador or commercial attache receives information about an impending or announced recall of motor vehicles or motor vehicle equipment.
Immediately thereafter, the Secretary of Transportation shall notify the Senate Commerce Committee and the House Commerce Committee.