This Act may be cited as the ``Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System Act of 1996''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) there are insufficient water supplies available to residents of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation in Montana, and the water systems that are available do not meet minimum health and safety standards, posing a threat to public health and safety; (2) the United States has a trust responsibility to ensure that adequate and safe water supplies are available to meet the economic, environmental, water supply, and public health needs of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation; and (3) the best available, reliable, and safe rural and municipal water supply to serve the needs of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation is the Missouri River.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to ensure a safe and adequate municipal, rural, and industrial water supply for the residents of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation in Montana.
In this Act: (1) Fort peck tribe.--The term ``Fort Peck tribe'' means the Assiniboine Indian Tribe and the Sioux Indian Tribe within the Fort Peck Indian Reservation.
Pick-sloan.--The term ``Pick-Sloan'' means the Pick- Sloan Missouri Basin Program authorized by section 9 of the Act of December 22, 1944 (58 United States Statutes at Large 891, chapter 665) (commonly known as the ``Flood Control Act of 1944'').
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Water system.--The term ``Water System'' means the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System authorized by section 4.
FORT PECK RESERVATION RURAL WATER SYSTEM.
Authorization.--The Secretary shall plan, design, construct (including replacement of structures and equipment in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, as necessary), operate, and maintain a municipal, rural, and industrial water system, to be known as the ``Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System'', as generally depicted in the report entitled ``Technical Report for the Fort Peck Reservation Rural Water System'' and dated July 1995.
Components.--The Water System shall consist of-- (1) pumping and treatment facilities located along the Missouri River near Poplar, Montana; (2) pipelines extending from the Missouri River near Poplar, Montana, throughout the Fort Peck Indian Reservation; (3) facilities to allow for future interconnections to areas outside the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, including the communities of Plentywood, Scobey, Flaxville, and Culbertson, Montana; (4) distribution and treatment facilities to serve the needs of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, including the purchase, improvement, and repair of water systems in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, including systems owned by individual tribal members and other residents of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation; (5) appurtenant buildings and access roads; (6) all property and property rights associated with the facilities described in paragraphs (1) through (5); (7) electrical power transmission and distribution facilities necessary for services to Water System facilities; and (8) such other pipelines, pumping plants, and facilities as the Secretary considers necessary or appropriate to meet the water supply, economic, public health, and environmental needs of the reservation, including water storage tanks, water lines, and other facilities for the Fort Peck tribes and reservation villages, towns, and municipalities.
Agreement.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Secretary shall enter into a cooperative agreement with the Fort Peck Tribal Executive Board for planning, designing, constructing (including necessary replacement), operating, and maintaining the Water System.
Mandatory provisions.--The cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) shall describe, in a manner that is acceptable to the Secretary and the Fort Peck Tribal Executive Board-- (A) the responsibilities of the parties for-- (i) needs assessment, feasibility, and environmental studies; (ii) engineering and design; (iii) construction; (iv) water conservation measures; and (v) administration of contracts relating to performance of the activities described in clauses (i) through (iv); (B) the procedures and requirements for approval and acceptance of the design and construction; and (C) the rights, responsibilities, and liabilities of each party to the agreement.
Optional provisions.--The cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) may include provisions relating to the purchase, improvement, and repair of water systems in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, including systems owned by individual tribal members and other residents of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation.
Termination.--The Secretary may terminate a cooperative agreement under paragraph (1) if the Secretary determines that-- (A) the quality of construction does not meet all standards established for similar facilities constructed by the Secretary; or (B) the operation and maintenance of the Water System does not meet conditions acceptable to the Secretary that are adequate to fulfill the obligations of the United States to the Fort Peck tribes.
Transfer.--On execution of a cooperative agreement under paragraph (1), in accordance with the terms of the cooperative agreement, the Secretary may transfer to the Fort Peck tribes, on a nonreimbursable basis, funds appropriated for the Water System under section 8.
Service Area.--The service area of the Water System shall be the area within the boundaries of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation.
Construction Requirements.--The pumping plants, pipelines, treatment facilities, and other appurtenant facilities for the Water System shall be planned and constructed to a size sufficient to meet the municipal, rural, and industrial water supply requirements of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation and the rural areas north of the reservation, taking into account the effects of the water conservation plan under section 5.
Title to Water System.--Title to the Water System shall be held in trust by the United States for the Fort Peck tribes and shall not be transferred unless a transfer is authorized by an Act of Congress enacted after the date of enactment of this Act.
Limitation on Availability of Construction Funds.--The Secretary shall not obligate funds for the construction of the Water System until-- (1) the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) have been met with respect to the Water System; (2) a final engineering report for the Water System has been approved by the Secretary; and (3) the Secretary publishes a written finding that the water conservation plan under section 5 includes prudent and responsible water conservation measures for the operation of the Water System that have been shown to be economically and financially feasible.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary shall provide such technical assistance as may be necessary to enable the Fort Peck tribes to plan, develop, construct (including necessary replacement), operate, and maintain the Water System, including operation and management training.
Application of Indian Self-Determination Act.--Planning, design, construction (including necessary replacement), and operation of the Water System shall be subject to the Indian Self-Determination Act (25 United States Code 450f et sequentes).
In General.--The Fort Peck tribes shall develop a water conservation plan containing definite goals, appropriate water conservation measures, and a time schedule for meeting the water conservation objectives.
Purpose.--The water conservation plan under subsection (a) shall be designed to ensure that users of water from the Water System will use the best practicable technology and management techniques to conserve water.
Application of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982.--Section 210(c) of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (43 United States Code 390jj(c)) shall apply to the Water System.
USE OF PICK-SLOAN POWER.
Power.--The Water System shall use power from Pick-Sloan for operation.
The use of the power shall be considered to be a project use pumping requirement of Pick-Sloan.
Power To Be Used.--Power identified for future project use pumping shall be reserved for and made available for the purpose authorized by subsection (a).
Rate.--The rate for project use power made available under subsection (b) shall be the wholesale firm power rate for Pick-Sloan (Eastern Division) in effect at the time at which the power is sold.
Additional Power.-- (1) In general.--If power in addition to that made available under subsection (b) is required to meet the pumping requirements of the Water System, the Administrator of the Western Area Power Administration may purchase the necessary additional power under such terms and conditions as the Administrator considers appropriate.
Recovery of expenses.--Expenses associated with power purchases under paragraph (1) shall be recovered through a separate power charge, sufficient to recover the expenses, applied to the Water System.
This Act does not-- (1) impair the validity of or preempt any provision of State water law, or of any interstate compact governing water; (2) alter the rights of any State to any appropriated share of the waters of any body or surface or ground water, whether determined by past or future interstate compacts, or by past or future legislative or final judicial allocations; (3) preempt or modify any Federal or State law or interstate compact dealing with water quality or disposal; (4) confer on any non-Federal entity the ability to exercise any Federal right to the waters of any stream or to any groundwater resources; (5) affect any water rights of the Fort Peck tribes, located within or without the external boundaries of the Fort Peck Indian Reservation, based on a treaty, compact, executive order, agreement, Act of Congress, aboriginal title, the decision in Winters v. United States, 207 United States Reports 564 (1908) (commonly known as the ``Winters Doctrine''), or otherwise; or (6) validate or invalidate any assertion of the existence, nonexistence, or extinguishment of any water rights held by the Fort Peck tribes or any other Indian Tribe or individual Indian under Federal or State law.
Planning, Design, and Construction.-- (1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated, over a period of 5 fiscal years, $114,734,300 for the planning, design, and construction of the Water System.
Adjustment.--The funds authorized to be appropriated by paragraph (1), less any amounts previously obligated for the Water System, are increased or decreased by such amounts as are justified by reason of ordinary fluctuations in development costs incurred after January 1, 1996, as indicated by engineering cost indices applicable for the type of construction involved.
Operation and Maintenance.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary for the operation and maintenance of the Water System.