This Act may be cited as the ``Trade Injury Compensation Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) United States goods and services compete in global markets and it is necessary for trade agreements to promote such competition.
The current dispute resolution mechanism of the World Trade Organization is designed to resolve disputes in a manner that brings stability and predictability to world trade.
When foreign countries refuse to comply with a panel or Appellate Body report of the World Trade Organization and violate any of the Uruguay Round Agreements, it has a deleterious effect on the United States economy.
A WTO member can retaliate against a country that refuses to implement a panel or Appellate Body report by imposing additional duties of up to 100 percent on goods imported from the noncomplying country.
In cases where additional duties are imposed on imported goods, the duties should be used to provide relief to the industry that is injured by the noncompliance.
In this Act: (1) Agricultural commodity.--The term ``agricultural commodity'' has the meaning given the term by section 102 (1) of the Agricultural Trade Act of 1978 (7 United States Code 5602(1)).
Injured agricultural commodity producer.--The term ``injured agricultural commodity producer'' means a domestic producer of an agricultural commodity with respect to which a dispute resolution proceeding has been brought before the World Trade Organization, if the dispute resolution is resolved in favor of the agricultural commodity producer, and the foreign country against which the proceeding has been brought has failed to comply with the report of the panel or Appellate Body of the WTO.
Injured producer.--The term ``injured producer'' means a domestic producer of a product (other than an agricultural product) with respect to which a dispute resolution proceeding has been brought before the World Trade Organization, if the dispute resolution is resolved in favor of the producer, and the foreign country against which the proceeding has been brought has failed to comply with the report of the panel or Appellate Body of the WTO.
Retaliation list.--The term ``retaliation list'' means the list of products of a foreign country that has failed to comply with the report of the panel or Appellate Body of the WTO and with respect to which the United States Trade Representative is imposing duties above the level that would otherwise be imposed under the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
Uruguay round agreements.--The term ``Uruguay Round Agreements'' has the meaning given such term in section 2(7) of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (19 United States Code 3501(7)).
World trade organization.--The term ``World Trade Organization'' means the organization established pursuant to the WTO Agreement.
WTO agreement.--The term ``WTO Agreement'' means the Agreement Establishing The World Trade Organization entered into on April 15, 1994.
WTO and wto member.--The terms ``WTO'' and ``WTO member'' have the meanings given those terms in section 2 of the Uruguay Round Agreements Act (19 United States Code 3501).
TRADE INJURY COMPENSATION TRUST FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a fund to be known as the ``Trade Injury Compensation Trust Fund'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Fund'') consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated to the Fund under subsection (b) and any amounts credited to the Fund under subsection (c)(2).
Transfer of Amounts Equivalent to Certain Duties.-- (1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated and transferred to the Fund an amount equal to the amount received in the Treasury as a result of the imposition of additional duties imposed on the products on a retaliation list.
Transfers based on estimates.--The amounts required to be transferred under paragraph (1) shall be transferred at least quarterly from the general fund of the Treasury to the Fund on the basis of estimates made by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Proper adjustment shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or less than the amounts required to be transferred.
Investment of Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the Secretary's judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
Credits to fund.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
Distributions From Fund.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available as provided in appropriations Acts, for making distributions in accordance with subsections (e) and (f).
Criteria for Determining Injured Producers and Amount To Be Paid.--Not later than 30 days after the implementation of a retaliation list, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretaries of Agriculture and Commerce, shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
The regulations shall include the following: (1) Procedures for identifying injured producers and injured producers of agricultural commodities.
Standards for determining the eligibility of injured producers and injured producers of agricultural commodities to participate in the distribution of any money from the Fund.
Procedures for determining the amount of the distribution each injured producer and injured producers of agricultural commodities should be paid.
Procedures for establishing separate accounts for duties collected with respect to each retaliation list and for making distributions to the group of injured producers and injured producers of agricultural commodities with respect to each such retaliation list.
Distribution to Injured Producers.-- (1) Distribution to agricultural producers.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary of Agriculture such sums as may be transferred or credited to the Fund as the result of items on a retaliation list because of injury to producers of agricultural commodities.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall distribute to each injured producer of an agricultural commodity that the Secretary determines is eligible a portion of the amount so transferred.
The distribution shall be made in accordance with the subsection (e) and shall be used by the producers for the promotion and development of products of the injured producers.
Distribution to other injured producers.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Secretary of Commerce such sums as may be transferred or credited to the Fund as the result of items on a retaliation list because of injury to producers (other than producers of agricultural commodities).
The Secretary of Commerce shall distribute to each injured producer (other than a producer described in paragraph (1)) that the Secretary determines is eligible a portion of the amount so transferred.
The distribution shall be made in accordance with subsection (e) and in accordance with the procedures applicable to the provision of assistance under chapter 3 of title II of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2341 et sequentes).
Report to Congress.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, after consultation with the Secretaries of Agriculture and Commerce, submit a report to the Congress each year on-- (1) the financial condition and the results of the operations of the Fund during the preceding fiscal year; and (2) the expected condition and operations of the Fund during the fiscal year following the fiscal year that is the subject of the report.
PROHIBITION ON REDUCING SERVICES OR FUNDS.
No payment made to an injured producer or an injured agricultural commodity producer under this Act shall result in the reduction or denial of any service or assistance with respect to which the injured producer or injured agricultural commodity producer would otherwise be entitled.