REVISION OF TAX TREATMENT OF DERIVATIVE TRANSACTIONS ENTERED INTO BY A CORPORATION WITH RESPECT TO ITS STOCK.
In General.--Section 1032 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exchange of stock for property) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
TRANSACTIONS BY A CORPORATION WITH RESPECT TO ITS STOCK.
Nonrecognition of Gain or Loss.--No gain or loss shall be recognized to a corporation on the receipt of property (including money) or services in exchange for stock of such corporation.
Treatment of Derivative Transactions.-- ``(1) Nonrecognition treatment.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), section 1032 derivative items of a corporation shall not be taken into account in determining such corporation's liability for tax under this subtitle.
Section 1032 derivative items.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `section 1032 derivative item' means any item of income, gain, loss, or deduction if-- ``(i) such item arises out of the rights or obligations under any option or forward or futures contract to the extent such option or contract relates to the corporation's stock (or is attributable to any transfer or extinguishment of any such right or obligation), or ``(ii) such item arises under any other contract or position but only to the extent that such item reflects (or is determined by reference to) changes in the value of such stock or distributions thereon.
Such term shall not include any deduction allowable under section 83 and shall not include any deduction for any item which is in the nature of compensation for services rendered.
For purposes of this subparagraph, de minimis relationships shall be disregarded.
Income recognition on certain forward contracts.-- ``(A) In general.--If-- ``(i) a corporation acquires its stock, and ``(ii) such acquisition is part of a plan (or series of related transactions) pursuant to which the corporation enters into a forward contract with respect to its stock, such corporation shall include amounts in income as if the excess of the amount to be received under the forward contract over the fair market value of the stock as of the date the corporation entered into the forward contract were original issue discount on a debt instrument acquired on such date.
The preceding sentence shall apply only to the extent that the amount of stock involved in the forward contract does not exceed the amount acquired as described in clause (i).
Plan presumed to exist.--If a corporation enters into a forward contract with respect to its stock within the 60-day period beginning on the date which is 30 days before the date that the corporation acquires its stock, such acquisition shall be treated as pursuant to a plan described in subparagraph (A)(ii) unless it is established that entering into such contract and such acquisition are not pursuant to a plan or series of related transactions.
Forward contract.--The term `forward contract' has the meaning given to such term by section 1259(d)(1); except that such term shall include any transactions or series of related transactions having the same effect as a forward contract (as so defined).
Treasury Stock Treated as Stock.--Any reference in this section to stock shall be treated as including a reference to treasury stock.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations which treat the portion of an instrument which is described in subsection (b) separately from the portion of such instrument which is not so described.
Basis.--For basis of property acquired by a corporation in certain exchanges for its stock, see section 362.''
Clerical Amendment.--The item relating to section 1032 in the table of sections for part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Transactions by a corporation with respect to its stock.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to transactions entered into after the date of the enactment of this Act.