This Act may be cited as the ``Ballona Wetlands Restoration Act of 1993''.
Findings.--Congress finds and declares the following: (1) Wetlands perform a number of valuable functions which are important to the ecological and economic well-being of the Nation, including-- (A) providing contributions to food and water supplies, flood control, and wildlife resources; (B) maintaining biological diversity; and (C) providing natural habitats for many migratory and resident fish and wildlife species, including migratory birds, endangered species, and fish species in commercial and recreational fisheries.
Over two-thirds of the wetlands that once existed in the State of California have been severely degraded or no longer exist.
Over nine-tenths of the wetlands that once existed in the city of Los Angeles, California, have been severely degraded or no longer exist.
The Ballona Wetlands constitute the last remaining wetlands ecosystem of significant proportion located in the city of Los Angeles.
The Ballona Wetlands, though significantly degraded, support 185 species of birds along the Pacific Flyway.
The Ballona Wetlands are in imminent danger of an ecosystem collapse.
If fully restored, the Ballona Wetlands could-- (A) provide a major fish nursery habitat for the adjoining Santa Monica Bay; (B) improve the water quality of Santa Monica Bay by acting as a natural filtration system; (C) provide increased habitat for endangered species and migratory birds; and (D) provide significant educational opportunities regarding wetlands functions for persons in surrounding urban areas.
It should be a high priority of the Federal Government to encourage the full restoration of degraded wetlands.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish a demonstration program to encourage the full tidal restoration of the Ballona Wetlands.
DISCHARGE OF DREDGED OR FILL MATERIAL AT BALLONA WETLANDS.
Expedited Permitting.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Army shall issue regulations to provide for expedited consideration of permit applications submitted under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act for the discharge of dredged or fill material into navigable waters at the Ballona Wetlands, Los Angeles, California.
Public Hearings.--Regulations issued under subsection (a) shall provide for notice and opportunity for public hearings in accordance with section 404(a) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
BALLONA WETLANDS DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in consultation with the Secretary of the Army and the heads of other Federal departments and agencies, shall establish, in accordance with the requirements of this section, a demonstration program to encourage the full restoration of the Ballona Wetlands, Los Angeles, California.
Mitigation Credits.-- (1) Award.--Under the demonstration program to be established under subsection (a), the Administrator shall award mitigation credits to persons who conduct activities for the restoration of the Ballona Wetlands.
Use.--Mitigation credits awarded under the demonstration program may be used in obtaining permits under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act for activities to be conducted between Point Conception, California, and the Mexican Border.
Banking.--The Administrator shall establish a mitigation banking system in order to keep an accounting of mitigation credits awarded under the demonstration program.
Sale.--Mitigation credits awarded under the demonstration program may be sold to third parties with the approval of the Administrator.
The Administrator shall give priority to third parties who are engaged in water dependent development in San Pedro Bay and who are located in the county of Los Angeles in approving the sale of mitigation credits under this paragraph.
Regulations.-- (1) Deadline.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall issue regulations to carry out the demonstration program to be established under subsection (a).
Contents.--Regulations to be issued under this subsection shall contain the following: (A) Scale for awarding of credits.--A scale for awarding mitigation credits under the demonstration program.
Such scale shall take into account the degree to which an activity will contribute to the full restoration of the Ballona Wetlands and the availability of other mitigation options.
Guidelines for use of credits.--Guidelines for determining how mitigation credits awarded under the demonstration program may be used in obtaining permits under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act.
Such guidelines shall take into account the relation between the ecological and economic benefits of an activity for which mitigation credits are to be awarded under the demonstration program and the loss of habitat associated with the issuance of a permit for an activity on the basis of such mitigation credits.
Limitation.--The award of mitigation credits under the demonstration program to be established under subsection (a) shall not be construed to constitute prior approval by any Federal or State agency of any application for a permit for which such credits may ultimately be used.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for 5 years, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in consultation with the Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Interior, shall transmit to Congress a report on the results of the demonstration program to be established under section 4.
Contents.--Each report to be transmitted to Congress under subsection (a) shall at a minimum contain the following: (1) An estimate of the total number of acres of wetlands which have been restored under the demonstration program to be established under section 4.
An assessment of the effectiveness of the demonstration program in achieving the policy set forth in section 2(a)(7).
An assessment of the functions of the wetlands which have been restored under the demonstration program.
An assessment of whether or not establishment of the demonstration program has resulted in more timely completion of mitigation activities under section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act or in greater ease of administration of permitting programs under such section.
A description of the costs associated with administering the demonstration program.