This Act may be cited as the ``Code Adam Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) ``Code Adam'' is a protocol used as a preventive tool against child abductions and lost children in certain public buildings and commercial establishments across the Nation.
``Code Adam'' was created and promoted by the Wal-Mart retail stores, which developed this protocol as a child-safety program to find a child who has been kidnapped or is merely lost in a public place.
This protocol was named in memory of 6-year-old Adam Walsh, who was murdered after being kidnapped from a Florida shopping mall in 1981, an event that brought the horror of child abduction to national attention.
``Code Adam'' has proven extremely successful in thwarting many attempted abductions through the issuance of a ``Code Adam'' alert in commercial establishments, and it continues to be implemented in stores across the country with the help of the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
The Commonwealth of Puerto Rico is the only jurisdiction that has approved an Act to adopt the ``Code Adam'' in government buildings.
PROCEDURES IN FEDERAL BUILDINGS REGARDING A MISSING OR LOST CHILD.
In General.--On and after the 180th day after the date of the enactment of this Act, each Federal building that is open to the public shall have in place procedures described in subsection (b) for locating a child who is missing in a Federal building.
Notification and Search Procedures.--The head, Director, Commission, and Committee referred to in subsection (c), respectively, shall direct employees to assist any parent, guardian, or teacher whose child is missing in a Federal building by instituting and enforcing procedures that include the following: (1) Obtaining a detailed description of the child.--When a parent, tutor, or guardian notifies any employee of a Federal building that his/her child is lost, such employee shall obtain from the parent, tutor, or guardian, a detailed description of the child, including the name, age, color of eyes and hair, height, weight, and clothing description, particularly the shoes the child was wearing.
Such employee shall-- (A) alert designated employees via a fast and effective means of communication that ``Code Adam'' has been activated; (B) furnish a detailed description of the child according to the information provided by the parent, tutor, or guardian; and (C) provide the telephone number or extension from which the alert is made.
Identification of child.--The employee shall escort the parent, tutor, or guardian to the main door of the Federal building to help in identifying the child, while designated employees stop their normal work to search for the child.
Monitoring exits.--Employees designated by the head, Director, Commission, and Committee referred to in subsection (c), respectively, shall monitor all building exits to ascertain that the child does not leave the building without the parent, tutor, or guardian.
Building Egress.--Any person leaving through any of the Federal building exits accompanied by a child shall be asked to go through the main exit previously designated by the head, Director, Commission, and Committee referred to in subsection (c), respectively.
If once there, the person insists on leaving the Federal building, the person shall be allowed to do so once it has been determined that the child who is leaving is not the one being searched for and such person presumed to be the parent, tutor, or guardian, presents a government issued photo identification.
Local law enforcement.--Contacting local law enforcement agencies if a child is not found during the search.
After the activation of ``Code Adam'' has been announced, designated employees shall search throughout the entire Federal building, and 2 or more of them, as may be considered necessary, shall be assigned to each floor to certify that the child is not there.
The search shall include any parking lots used for such building.
No other employees shall be compelled to participate in the search.
Broad notification.--If the child is not found within a 10-minute period, a designated employee shall call the 9-1-1 emergency phone number and report the situation so that state or local security or emergency personnel may be immediately deployed to the site.
A designated employee shall also notify the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children.
Report.--Upon completion of the protocol, designated employees shall inform the head, Director, Commission, and Committee referred to in subsection (c), and other designated employees that the ``Code Adam'' has ended.
The head, Director, Commission, and Committee referred to in subsection (c), respectively, shall prepare a report of the incident, which shall be kept in the administrative files for a term of not less than 3 years.
Enforcement.-- (1) Executive branch buildings.--The head of each Executive agency shall issue regulations, and take such other actions as may be necessary, to institute and enforce the procedures contained in subsection (b) as such procedures apply to Federal buildings owned or leased for use by the Executive Agency.
Judicial branch buildings.--The Director of the Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall take such actions as may be necessary to institute and enforce the procedures contained in subsection (b) as such procedures apply to Federal buildings owned or leased for use by an establishment in the judicial branch of the Government.
Legislative branch buildings.-- (A) House of representatives.--The House Office Building Commission shall take such actions as may be necessary to institute and enforce the procedures contained in subsection (b) as such procedures apply to Federal buildings owned or leased for use by the House of Representatives.
Senate.--The Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate shall take such actions as may be necessary to institute and enforce the procedures contained in subsection (b) as such procedures apply to Federal buildings owned or leased for use by the Senate.
Other establishments.--The head of each establishment in the legislative branch of the Government (other than the House of Representatives and the Senate) shall take such actions as may be necessary to institute and enforce the procedures contained in subsection (b) as such procedures apply to Federal buildings owned or leased for use by the establishment.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Executive agency.--The term ``Executive agency'' has the same meaning such term has under section 105 of title 5, United States Code.
Federal agency.--The term ``Federal agency'' means any Executive agency and any establishment in the legislative or judicial branches of the Government.
Federal building.--The term ``Federal building'' means any building or other structure (or portion thereof) owned or leased for use by a Federal agency; except that such term does not include any building or other structure on a military installation or any area of a building that is used primarily as living quarters.
Child.--The term ``child'' means an individual who is 17 years of age or younger.