This Act may be cited as the ``Alaska Federal Lands Management Demonstration Project''.
Findings.--Congress finds and declares the following: (1) The Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 3101 et sequentes) established new and expanded units of the National Park System and the National Wildlife System in many areas of Alaska.
The purposes of these conservation system units were, among other purposes, to protect habitat for fish and wildlife, to conserve fish and wildlife populations in their natural state, to provide continued opportunity for subsistence uses by local residents, and to protect archaeological sites associated with Native cultures.
Many rural Alaskan communities are in close proximity to conservation system lands, and the purposes of these units are uniquely relevant to the culture and ways of Native Alaskans and other residents of rural Alaskan communities.
Congress recognized this close relationship in sections 1306, 1307 and 1308 of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act, which directed the Secretary of Interior to establish programs whereby Native lands were given preference for the siting of conservation service unit facilities, Native corporations and local residents were given preference for the provision of visitor services, and local residents were given preferences for employment.
Despite these provisions, little progress has been made in increasing related employment opportunities for Native Alaskan and other local residents.
In much of rural Alaska, Indian tribes and tribal organizations have a long history of contracting to operate Federal programs and provide Federal services to resident Alaskan Natives and have demonstrated the capacity to provide other kinds of Federal programs and services.
Purposes.--The purposes of this demonstration project are to design innovative management strategies that will lead to greater efficiency in conservation system unit management, expand Native contracting opportunities, increase local employment, and further the unique purposes of these units as they relate to subsistence practices, Alaska Native cultures, and the preservation of fish and wildlife habitat and populations.
AUTHORIZATION OF DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
The Secretary of the Interior shall, for a period not to exceed 5 years following the date of the enactment of this Act, conduct an Alaska Federal Lands Management Demonstration Project.
ALASKA FEDERAL LANDS MANAGEMENT DEMONSTRATION PROJECT.
Participation.--The Secretary shall select, upon request and in a manner to achieve geographic representation, not less than 6 eligible Alaska Native tribes or tribal organizations per year to participate in the Demonstration Project in fiscal years 2000 and 2001.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to participate in the Demonstration Project, each Indian tribe or tribal organization shall-- (1) request participation by resolution or other official action of the governing body of the tribal organization; (2) demonstrate financial and management stability and capability; (3) demonstrate significant use of or dependency upon the relevant conservation system unit or other public land unit for which programs, functions, services, and activities are requested to be placed under contract; (4) where the Secretary receives a request to contract specific conservation system unit programs, services, functions, and activities, or portions thereof, from more than 1 Indian tribe or tribal organization meeting the criteria set forth in paragraphs (1) through (3), the Secretary shall apply the priority selection criteria applied by the Juneau Area Bureau of Indian Affairs for contracting pursuant to the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.
If, after applying such criteria, there remains more than one eligible participant and such participants have overlapping requests to negotiate and contract for the same programs, services, functions, and activities, or portions thereof, the Secretary may require such Indian tribes or organizations to agree which entity shall have the ability to contract, or to submit a joint request prior to entering into negotiations.
Contracts.-- (1) In general.--Upon request, the Secretary shall negotiate and enter into a contract with each participating Indian tribe or tribal organization to plan, conduct and administer requested programs, services, functions and activities, or portions thereof, related to the administration of a conservation system unit or other public land unit that is substantially located within the geographic region of the respective Indian tribe or tribal organization.
Technical support.--Contracts authorized by this Act shall include, at the request of the Indian tribe or tribal organization, the operation and support of the regional advisory councils, biological research, harvest monitoring, and other technical research related to conservation and allocation actions by the regional councils, and such other programs, functions, services, and activities reasonably necessary to carry out title VIII of the Alaska National Interests Lands Conservation Act.
Time limitation for negotiation of contracts.--Not later than 90 days after selection by the Secretary of participating Indian tribes or tribal organizations, the Secretary shall initiate and conclude negotiations, unless an alternative negotiation and implementation schedule is otherwise mutually agreed to by the parties.
The declination and appeals provisions of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, including section 110 of such Act, shall apply to contracts and agreements requested and negotiated under this Act.
Contract Administration.-- (1) Inclusion of certain terms.--At the request of the contracting Indian tribe or tribal organization, the benefits, privileges, terms, and conditions of agreements entered into pursuant to titles I and IV of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act shall be available for inclusion in a contract entered into under this Act.
If any provisions of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act are incorporated they shall have the same force and effect as if set out in full in this Act and shall apply notwithstanding any other provision of law.
The parties may include such other terms and conditions as are mutually agreed to and not otherwise contrary to law.
Audit.--Contracts entered into under this Act shall provide for a single-agency audit report to be filed as required by chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code.
Transfer of employees.--Any career Federal employee employed at the time of the transfer of an operation or program to an Indian tribe or tribal organization shall not be separated from Federal service by such transfer.
Intergovernmental Personnel Actions may be used to transfer supervision of such employees to the contracting Indian tribe or tribal organization.
Such transferred employees shall be given priority placement for any available position within their respective agency, notwithstanding any priority reemployment lists, directives, rules, regulations or other orders from the Department of the Interior, the Office of Management and Budget, or other Federal agencies.
Available Funding; Payment.--Under the terms of a contract negotiated pursuant to subsection (a), the Secretary shall provide each Indian tribe or tribal organization funds in an amount not less than the Secretary would have otherwise provided for the operation of the requested programs, services, functions, and activities.
Contracts entered into under this Act shall provide for advance payments to the tribal organizations in the form of annual or semiannual installments.
Timing.--Indian tribes and tribal organizations selected to participate shall be entitled to begin implementation of any requested contracts no later than the first fiscal year following the year in which the Indian tribe or tribal organization is selected for participation, unless the Indian tribe or tribal organization and the Secretary, by mutual agreement, shall agree to an alternate implementation schedule.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the close of fiscal years 2000 and 2001 and the end of this Demonstration Project, the Secretary shall present to the Congress detailed reports, including a narrative, findings, and conclusions on the costs and benefits of the Demonstration Project.
The reports shall identify remaining institutional and legal barriers to the contracting of conservation system unit management to Alaska Native entities and shall contain suggestions for improving, continuing, and expanding the Demonstration Project.
The reports shall be authored jointly with, and shall include the separate views of, all participating Alaska Native tribes and tribal organizations.
Limitations.-- (1) Revenue producing visitor services.--Contracts authorized under this Act shall not include revenue producing visitor services unless an agreement is reached with the most directly affected Alaskan Native corporations to allow such services to be included in the contract.
Such contracts shall not otherwise repeal, alter, or otherwise modify the any other existing provision of sections 1307 and 1308 of the Alaska National Interests Lands Conservation Act.
Denali national park.--The Denali National Park shall not be subject to any of the provisions of this Act.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--Upon application, the Secretary shall award a planning grant in the amount of $100,000 to any participating Alaska Native tribe or tribal organization to plan for the contracting of programs, functions, services, and activities authorized under this Act.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $600,000 in each of the 2 fiscal years immediately following the date of the enactment of this Act to fund planning grants authorized under this subsection.
ANILCA SECTION 1307 AND 1308 IMPLEMENTATION PROGRESS REPORT.
Report Required.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representatives a report detailing the progress that the Department of the Interior has made in the implementation of the provisions of sections 1307 and 1308 of the Alaska National Interests Lands Conservation Act.
The report shall-- (1) include a detailed action plan on the future implementation of the provisions of sections 1307 and 1308 of that Act; (2) describe in detail the measures and actions that will be taken to implement such sections, along with a description of the anticipated results to be achieved during the 3 fiscal years following the submission of the report; (3) address any laws, rules, regulations, and policies which limit or deter the goal of Alaska Native hiring or contracting to perform and conduct activities and programs of Department agencies and bureaus other than those currently available through the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
Funding.--The report required under subsection (a) shall be completed within existing appropriations.
DEFINITIONS.-- For the purposes of this Act: (1) Conservation system unit.--The term ``conservation system unit'' shall have the meaning given that term in section 102(4) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act.
Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' shall have the meaning given that term in subsection 4(e) of the Indian Self- Determination and Education Assistance Act.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tribal organization.--The term ``tribal organization'' shall have the meaning given that term in subsection 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act.