This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Accountability and Institutional Reform in Education Act of 1995''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the Federal Government is reducing spending in all areas, including postsecondary education; (2) reductions in postsecondary education spending fall on students, schools, State loan guaranty agencies and lenders; (3) the administration of postsecondary education is the responsibility of the Department of Education; and (4) reforms should be made to postsecondary education programs to provide greater accountability from the Department, educational institutions, lenders, and guarantee agencies and to enhance institutional compliance with Department policies.
STUDENT LOAN COHORT DEFAULT MANAGEMENT REFORMS.
Administrative and Fiscal Procedures.--Section 428(c)(2)(A) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by striking ``proof that reasonable attempts were made'' and inserting ``proof that the institution was contacted and other reasonable attempts were made'' (b) Reimbursement.--Section 428(c)(2)(G) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by striking ``certifies to the Secretary that diligent attempts have been made'' and inserting ``demonstrates to the Secretary that diligent attempts, including direct contact with the institution have been made.''.
Limitation.--Section 428 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(o) Limitation.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, the Secretary shall not reimburse or permit any eligible lender, servicer, or guaranty agency (or its affiliates) who previously filed a claim for reimbursement on a loan to retain any proceeds from rehabilitation of a defaulted loan to the extent that such funds, when added to the amount of prior reimbursement under this section, exceed 100 percent of the original principal of the loan.''.
Notice to Secretary and Payment of Loss.--Section 430(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (1) by inserting ``all'' after ``required to meet''; and (2) by inserting ``the institution was contacted and other'' after ``submit proof that''.
Annual Report.--Section 430 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Annual Report.--The Secretary shall report annually to Congress that lenders, servicers and guaranty agencies have attested to their compliance with servicing and due diligence requirements, under both statute and regulation.
The Secretary shall also provide information on the successful practices of low-default lenders, servicers and guaranty agencies to other financial, servicing and guaranty institutions participating in this title to encourage duplication of successful servicing and collection programs.''.
Circumstances.--Section 435(a)(2) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) The circumstances referred to in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be uniformly applied to all eligible institutions and shall require that such an institution meet the following criteria: ``(i) Not less than 50 percent of the students enrolled in eligible programs qualify for an award under subpart 1 of part A of title IV.
The institution's student completion rate, as calculated under the Student Right to Know provisions of this title, is 60 percent or greater.
The initial job placement rate of program graduates is 60 percent or greater.''.
Cohort Default Rate.--Section 435(m)(1)(B) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by striking ``paid claims'' and inserting ``properly paid claims as required in section 430 of this Act''.
Section 481 (b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended-- (1) by inserting before the period at the end of the first sentence the following: ``on the basis of a review by the institution's independent auditor using generally accepted accounting principles''; and (2) by inserting before the second sentence the following: ``For the purposes of paragraph (6), revenues from sources that are not derived from funds under this title include revenues from programs of education or training that do not meet the definition of an eligible program in subsection (e), but are provided on a contractual basis under Federal, State or local training programs, to business and industry, or to other eligible applicants.
For the purposes of determining whether an institution meets the requirements of paragraph (6), the Secretary shall not consider the financial information of any institution for a fiscal year that began on or before April 30, 1994.''.
ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES FOR INSTITUTIONAL PROGRAM PARTICIPATION.
Section 498(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting ``, based on an audited financial statement using any generally accepted accounting principles'' after ``is able''.