CHIEF VETERINARY OFFICER OF DEPARTMENT OF HOMELAND SECURITY.
In General.--Title III of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 181 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--There is in the Department a Chief Veterinary Officer, who shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The Chief Veterinary Officer shall report directly to the Chief Medical Officer, unless an individual other than the Assistant Secretary for Health Affairs is serving as the Chief Medical Officer, in which case the Chief Veterinary Officer shall report directly to the Assistant Secretary for Health Affairs.
Qualifications.--The individual appointed as Chief Veterinary Officer shall be a veterinarian who possesses a demonstrated ability in and knowledge of veterinary public health and emergency preparedness, and other professional experience as determined by the Secretary, such as in agriculture, food defense, and disaster medicine.
Responsibilities.--The Chief Veterinary Officer shall be the head of the division of the Department with primary responsibility for veterinary issues, food defense, and agriculture security, and shall have primary responsibility within the Department for responsibilities relating to veterinary medicine and veterinary public health, including each of the following: ``(1) Serving as the principal authority in the Department responsible for advising the Secretary, in coordination with the Assistant Secretary for Health Affairs, on veterinary public health, food defense, and agricultural security issues.
Providing guidance for the health and welfare of the Department's working animals, including those used to enhance transportation, border, and maritime security, and for other purposes.
Leading the Department's policy initiatives relating to food, animal, and agricultural incidents, and the impact of such incidents on animal and public health.
Leading the Department's policy initiatives relating to overall domestic preparedness for and collective response to agricultural terrorism.
Serving as the principal point of contact in the Office of Health Affairs for all veterinary preparedness and response research and development.
Serving as the principal point of contact in the Office of Health Affairs for sharing homeland security veterinary medical information with Department officials, including all components with veterinary, food, or agricultural interests.
Serving as the principal point of contact within the Department with respect to veterinary homeland security issues for the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Defense, the Department of Health and Human Services, and other Federal departments and agencies.
Serving as the principal point of contact within the Department with respect to veterinary homeland security issues for State, local, and tribal governments, the veterinary community, and other entities within and outside the Department.
Performing such other duties relating to such responsibilities as the Secretary may require.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 30 days after the last day of each fiscal year, the Chief Veterinary Officer shall submit to Congress a report on the state of the Department's working animals during that fiscal year.
Each such report shall include-- ``(1) the number of animals in service to the Department during the fiscal year, including the component and mission of each such animal and the homeland security activities conducted by such animal; ``(2) an assessment of the overall health and welfare of the Department's working animals during the fiscal year; and ``(3) a description of the activities of the Office during the fiscal year, including a description of any animal initiative or program conducted during such fiscal year, and for each such initiative or program-- ``(A) the objectives of the initiative or program; ``(B) the species or genus of animals that are subject of the initiative or program; ``(C) the amount of resources used (including capital and human resources) for such initiative or program; ``(D) when the initiative or program will conclude or terminate; and ``(E) the degree of completion of the initiative or program.
Advance Notice of Reorganization Required.--Not later than 180 days before carrying out any reorganization within the Department that would affect any responsibility of the Chief Veterinary Officer, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the proposed reorganization.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1(b) of such Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to title III the following new item: ``Sec.