This Act may be cited as the ``Community Security Act of 1993''.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE PROGRAM TO ASSIST DISCHARGED MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES TO OBTAIN TRAINING AND EMPLOYMENT AS LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
Training and Placement Program.--Chapter 58 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Training and placement of involuntarily separated members as law enforcement officers ``(a) Training and Placement of Involuntarily Separated Members.-- The Secretary of Defense shall establish a program to assist members of the armed forces who are involuntarily separated from active duty after six or more years of continuous active duty immediately before the separation to obtain training and employment as law enforcement officers with a unit of local government described in subsection (b).
Limitation on Eligibility.--If a member of the armed forces described in subsection (a) is not accepted by a unit of local government for training and employment as a law enforcement officer within one year after the date of the separation of the member, the member shall not be eligible for a stipend under subsection (h), and a unit of local government providing the training or employment shall not receive assistance under this section for such member.
Agreements With Units of Local Government.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall offer to enter into agreements under this subsection with any unit of local government providing law enforcement functions in a high crime area if the unit of local government agrees-- ``(A) to select a member of the armed forces described in subsection (a) to receive training as a law enforcement officer; ``(B) to offer the member full-time employment with the unit of local government as a law enforcement officer for a period of at least two years; and ``(C) to treat the member so employed in the same manner as any other law enforcement officer employed by the unit of local government for purposes of determining seniority, duty assignments, or eligibility for benefits.
If a State does not have any high crime areas, the Secretary shall enter into agreements under this subsection with units of local governments that provide law enforcement functions in areas in the State with the highest rates of crime.
The actual selection of a member by a unit of local government pursuant to the agreement shall be subject to the certification of the Secretary of Defense that the member meets the eligibility requirements described in subsection (a).
Under an agreement referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary of Defense shall agree to pay to the unit of local government an amount based upon the basic salary paid by the unit of local government to the selected member as a law enforcement officer.
The rate of payment by the Secretary shall be as follows: ``(A) For the first year of employment, 100 percent of the basic salary.
For the second year of employment, 80 percent of the basic salary.
For the third year of employment if continued under the agreement, 60 percent of the basic salary.
For the fourth year of employment if continued under the agreement, 40 percent of the basic salary.
For the fifth year of employment if continued under the agreement, 20 percent of the basic salary.
Payments required under paragraph (4) may be made by the Secretary of Defense in such installments as the Secretary may determine.
If the Secretary makes payments in advance and the member leaves the employment of the unit of local government before the end of the period covered by the advance payment, the unit of local government shall reimburse the Secretary of Defense for any portion of the advance payment that remains unpaid to the member.
The Secretary of Defense may not enter into an agreement under this subsection with a unit of local government if the Secretary determines that the agency terminated the employment of another law enforcement officer in order to fill the vacancy so created with a member described in subsection (a).
Priority Given to Violent Crime Areas.--In entering into agreements with units of local government under subsection (c), the Secretary of Defense shall give priority to those units of local government performing law enforcement functions in areas with an especially high rate of violent crimes, as identified by the Attorney General.
Assistance Subject to Availability of Appropriations.--Each agreement under subsection (c) shall contain a condition that the provision of assistance, including stipends, under the agreement is subject to the certification of the Secretary of Defense that, at the time the member described in subsection (a) is selected to receive training and employment as a law enforcement officer, the Secretary has sufficient appropriations to carry out this section available to satisfy the obligations to be incurred by the United States with respect to the training and employment of that member.
Number of Participants per State.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), for each fiscal year, the number of members of the armed forces who are selected to receive assisted training and employment under this section as law enforcement officers in a particular State may not exceed the number that bears the same ratio to 75 percent of the total number of participants to be selected in that fiscal year as the population of that State bears to the total population of all the States.
Of the total number of members to be selected to receive assisted training and employment under this section for a fiscal year, 25 percent of such participants shall be selected pursuant to agreements entered into under subsection (c) on a competitive basis without regard to the limitation on the number of participants per State specified in paragraph (1).
Participant Agreement.--A member of the armed forces described in subsection (a) who is selected by a unit of local government to receive assisted training and employment as a law enforcement officer pursuant to an agreement under subsection (c) shall be required to enter into an agreement with the unit of local government and the Secretary of Defense in which the member agrees-- ``(1) to obtain, within such time as the unit of local government may require, the training required by the unit of local government to become a law enforcement officer; and ``(2) to accept employment with the unit of local government as a law enforcement officer for at least two years, to begin within six months after completing the training under paragraph (1).
Training Stipend.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Secretary of Defense shall pay to each member of the armed forces who is selected to receive assisted training and employment as a law enforcement officer pursuant to an agreement under subsection (c) a stipend in an amount equal to not more than $5,000 to cover costs incurred by the member while training to become a law enforcement officer.
A member who is employed by the unit of local government or receives a living allowance from the unit of local government while receiving training as a law enforcement officer shall not be paid a stipend under paragraph (1).
Reimbursement Under Certain Circumstances.--(1) If a member of the armed forces who receives assisted training and employment as a law enforcement officer under this section fails to successfully complete the training required to become a law enforcement officer or voluntarily leaves, or is terminated for cause, from the employment during the one year of required employment, the member shall be required to reimburse the Secretary of Defense for any stipend paid to the person under subsection (h)(1) in an amount that bears the same ratio to the amount of the stipend as the unserved portion of required service bears to the one year of required service.
The obligation to reimburse the Secretary under this subsection is, for all purposes, a debt owing the United States.
A discharge in bankruptcy under title 11 shall not release a member described in subsection (a) from the obligation to reimburse the Secretary.
Any amount owed by a person under paragraph (1) shall bear interest at the rate equal to the highest rate being paid by the United States on the day on which the reimbursement is determined to be due for securities having maturities of ninety days or less and shall accrue from the day on which the person is first notified of the amount due.
The Secretary may enter into an agreement with the Secretary of the Treasury to arrange for the collection of amounts owed by a person under paragraph (1) through the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Exceptions to Reimbursement Provisions.--(1) A member of the armed forces described in subsection (a) shall not be considered to be in violation of an agreement entered into under subsection (g) during any period in which the member-- ``(A) is pursuing a full-time course of study, approved by the unit of local government involved, related to the field of law enforcement at an educational or vocational institution; ``(B) is serving on active duty as a member of the Armed Forces; ``(C) is employed by any unit of local government and serves as a law enforcement officer in a high crime area; ``(D) is temporarily totally disabled for a period of time not to exceed three years as established by sworn affidavit of a qualified physician; ``(E) is unable to secure employment for a period not to exceed 12 months by reason of the care required by a spouse who is disabled; or ``(F) satisfies the provisions of such additional reimbursement exceptions as may be prescribed by the Secretary of Defense.
A person shall be excused from reimbursement under subsection (i) if the person becomes permanently totally disabled as established by sworn affidavit of a qualified physician.
The Secretary may also waive reimbursement in cases of extreme hardship to the person, as determined by the Secretary.
Information Regarding Placement Program.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide information regarding the training and placement opportunities available under this section to members of the armed forces as part of preseparation counseling provided under section 1142 of this title.
The information provided shall include a list of all units of local government with which the Secretary has entered into an agreement under subsection (c) and the name, address, and telephone number of the representative of each unit of local government administering the agreement on behalf of the unit of local government.
Special Eligibility of Certain Persons Already Separated or Terminated.--A member of the armed forces described in subsection (a) who was involuntarily separated during the period beginning on October 1, 1990, and ending on October 1, 1993, may receive assisted training and employment under this section if the member is accepted by a unit of local government for training and employment as a law enforcement officer by October 1, 1994.
Expansion of Program.--(1) If the Secretary of Defense determines for a fiscal year that the number of eligible members likely to be selected to participate in the training and placement program under this section the Secretary may authorize local governments entering into an agreement under subsection (c) to select-- ``(A) civilian employees of the Department of Defense who are terminated from employment with the Department as a result of reductions in defense spending or the closure or realignment of a military installation; and ``(B) employees of private defense contractors who were employed for not less than five years with a private defense contractor and are terminated or laid off (or receive a notice of termination or lay off) as a result of the completion or termination of a defense contract or program or reductions in defense spending.
A civilian employee of the Department of Defense or the Department of Energy or an employee of a private defense contractor who is terminated for cause shall not be eligible for a stipend under subsection (h), and a unit of local government providing training or employment to such an employee shall not receive assistance under this section for such employee.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, American Samoa, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Palau, and the Virgin Islands.
The term `unit of local government' means-- ``(A) any city, county, township, town, borough, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a State; ``(B) an Indian tribe which performs law enforcement functions as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or ``(C) any agency of the District of Columbia government or the United States Government performing law enforcement functions in and for the District of Columbia.
The term `law enforcement officer' means an individual involved in crime and juvenile delinquency control or reduction, or enforcement of the laws, including police, corrections, probation, parole, and judicial officers.
The term `high crime area' shall have such meaning as may be given the term by the Attorney General.
The term `private defense contractor' means a person that provides services, supplies, or both (including construction) to the Department of Defense under a contract directly with the Department.
Termination.--Members of the armed forces described in subsection (a) may not be selected to receive assisted training and employment as law enforcement officers pursuant to an agreement under subsection (c) after September 30, 1999.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``1152.
Training and placement of involuntarily separated members as law enforcement officers.''.
Effective Date.--Section 1152 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall take effect on October 1, 1993.