The Congress consents to the SMART Research and Development Compact if that compact is entered into by the State of Delaware, the State of Maryland, the State of New Jersey, and the State of Pennsylvania.
The compact reads substantially as follows: ``SMART RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT COMPACT ``ARTICLE I.
``The purpose of this compact is to promote the contribution of the Mid-Atlantic region to the Nation's research and development in science and technology, and to create an organization for Strengthening the Mid-Atlantic Region for Tomorrow (hereinafter in this compact referred to as the `Organization').
The purpose of the Organization is to oversee and help facilitate the acquisition of research and development funding, and to enhance the cooperation, formation of partnerships, and sharing of information among businesses, academic institutions, laboratories, and nonprofit entities, within Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania.
``This compact takes effect upon ratification by the States of Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania, pursuant to the consent of Congress.
``The States, which are parties to this compact (hereinafter referred to as `party States') do hereby establish and create the Organization as a joint organization which shall be known as the SMART Organization.
The leadership of the Organization shall consist of a representative from each party State, appointed as provided by the law of that State.
The leadership shall appoint a Blue Ribbon Commission comprised of a representative from each party State from each technological class described in article IV to advise the leadership.
The participants in the organization may include any business, academic institution, nonprofit agency or laboratory.
``The leadership of the Organization shall oversee and direct the projects, administration, and policies of the SMART Organization.
The Blue Ribbon Commission shall identify goals and new technological developments for the region to pursue and facilitate cooperation among participants.
The leadership, Blue Ribbon Commission, and participants in the Organization shall serve without compensation or reimbursement of expenses.
The leadership of the Organization shall hold regular quarterly meetings and such special meetings as its business may require.
``The Organization shall adopt such rules and regulations as may be needed.
The Organization may hold hearings and conduct studies and surveys to carry out its purpose.
The Organization may acquire by gift or otherwise and hold and dispose of such money and property as may be provided for the proper performance of its functions, may cooperate with other public or private groups, whether local, State, regional or national, having an interest in economic development, and may exercise such other powers as may be appropriate to accomplish its functions and duties in connection with the development of the Organization and to carry out the purpose of this compact.
``The Organization participants may, and the Blue Ribbon Commission shall, represent and originate from the following technological classes: information technology, sensors, rotorcraft technology, manufacturing technology, nanotechnology, electronics, telecommunications, chemical and biological, biomedical, opto-electric, Materials/Aerospace, and defense systems including directed energy, missile defense, future combat systems, and unmanned aerial vehicles.
The SMART Organization may at any time, upon approval by the Organization leadership, designate and assign new representatives for additional technological classes and may at any time remove an existing class from the Organization's activities.
``ARTICLE V. ``The leadership of the Organization shall appoint a full-time paid executive director, who shall be a person familiar with the nature of the procedures and the significance of scientific funding, research and development, economic development, and the informational, educational, and publicity methods of stimulating general interest in such developments.
The executive director may appoint the other employees of the Organization and shall be the administrative head of the Organization.
The executive director's term of office shall be at the pleasure of the leadership of the Organization.
``This compact shall continue in force and remain binding upon each party State until 6 months after the party State gives notice of its intent to withdraw to the other party States.''.
RIGHT TO ALTER, AMEND, OR REPEAL.
The Congress expressly reserves the right to alter, amend, or repeal this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the SMART Organization such sums as may be necessary to assist the Organization in carrying out its activities, including the funding by the Organization of programs and projects consistent with the purposes of the Organization.