This Act may be cited as the ``Land Recycling Act of 1997''.
CLEANUPS PURSUANT TO STATE VOLUNTARY RESPONSE PROGRAM.
Prohibition on Enforcement.--Subject to subsection (c), neither the President nor any other person (other than a State) may use any authority of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes) or of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et sequentes) to commence an administrative or judicial action under either of those Acts with respect to any release or threatened release at a facility that is, or has been, the subject of a voluntary response plan in a State that meets the requirements of subsection (b).
State Requirements.--The prohibition in subsection (a) applies with respect to a facility in a State only if the State-- (1) submits to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency a certification that the State has enacted into law a voluntary response program and that the State has committed the financial and personnel resources necessary to carry out such program; and (2) notifies the Administrator that a voluntary response plan is being implemented at the facility under that State program after such implementation begins.
Limitation on Prohibition.--The prohibition in subsection (a) and the exemption under subsection (f) shall not apply with respect to a facility in a State if-- (1) the facility is listed on the National Priorities List; (2) the facility is proposed for listing on the National Priorities List, based on a determination by the Administrator that the facility qualifies for listing pursuant to section 105 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9605); (3) the facility is owned or operated by a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States; or (4) an administrative order on consent or judicial consent decree requiring response action has been entered into by the United States with respect to the facility under any of the following laws: (A) The Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
The Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et seq.).
The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes).
The Toxic Substances Control Act (15 United States Code 2601 et sequentes).
Title XIV of the Public Health Service Act (commonly known as the Safe Drinking Water Act) (42 United States Code 300f et sequentes) (d) Authority To Gather Information.--The Administrator may carry out investigations, monitoring, surveys, testing, or other information gathering authorized under section 104(b) of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9604(b)) with respect to facilities that are subject to a State voluntary response program, but only for purposes of determining whether the facility qualifies for listing on the National Priorities List pursuant to section 105 of that Act.
Prior Actions.--Nothing in this section shall affect administrative or judicial action commenced prior to the date of enactment of this section.
Permits and Other Requirements.--No Federal permit or permit revision shall be required for remediation activities undertaken on a site subject to, or being addressed pursuant to, a voluntary response plan under a State voluntary response program if the plan and State program are in compliance with this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Voluntary response program.--The term ``voluntary response program'' means a program established by a State specifically to allow a person to respond voluntarily to the release or threatened release of hazardous substances at facilities in the State.
Voluntary response plan.--The term ``voluntary response plan'' means a plan for responding to the release or threatened release of hazardous substances at a particular facility under a State voluntary response program.
Section 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9607) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(n) Innocent Landowners.-- ``(1) Conduct of environmental assessment.-- A person who has acquired real property shall have made all appropriate inquiry within the meaning of subparagraph (B) of section 101(35) if he establishes that, within 180 days prior to the time of acquisition, an environmental site assessment of the real property was conducted which meets the requirements of this subsection.
Definition of environmental site assessment.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `environmental site assessment' means an assessment conducted in accordance with the standards set forth in the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) Standard E1527-94, titled `Standard Practice for Environmental Site Assessments: Phase I Environmental Site Assessment Process' or with alternative standards issued by rule by the Administrator or promulgated or developed by others and designated by rule by the Administrator.
Before issuing or designating alternative standards, the Administrator shall first conduct a study of commercial and industrial practices concerning environmental site assessments in the transfer of real property in the United States.
Any such standards issued or designated by the Administrator shall also be deemed to constitute commercially reasonable and generally accepted standards and practices for purposes of this paragraph.
In issuing or designating any such standards, the Administrator shall consider requirements governing each of the following: ``(A) Interviews of owners, operators, and occupants of the property to determine information regarding the potential for contamination.
Review of historical sources as necessary to determine previous uses and occupancies of the property since the property was first developed.
For purposes of this subclause, the term `historical sources' means any of the following, if they are reasonably ascertainable: recorded chain of title documents regarding the real property, including all deeds, easements, leases, restrictions, and covenants, aerial photographs, fire insurance maps, property tax files, USGS 7.5 minutes topographic maps, local street directories, building department records, zoning/land use records, and any other sources that identify past uses and occupancies of the property.
Determination of the existence of recorded environmental cleanup liens against the real property which have arisen pursuant to Federal, State, or local statutes.
Review of reasonably ascertainable Federal, State, and local government records of sites or facilities that are likely to cause or contribute to contamination at the real property, including, as appropriate, investigation reports for such sites or facilities; records of activities likely to cause or contribute to contamination at the real property, including landfill and other disposal location records, underground storage tank records, hazardous waste handler and generator records and spill reporting records; and such other reasonably ascertainable Federal, State, and local government environmental records which could reflect incidents or activities which are likely to cause or contribute to contamination at the real property.
A visual site inspection of the real property and all facilities and improvements on the real property and a visual inspection of immediately adjacent properties, including an investigation of any hazardous substance use, storage, treatment, and disposal practices on the property.
Any specialized knowledge or experience on the part of the defendant.
The relationship of the purchase price to the value of the property if uncontaminated.
Commonly known or reasonably ascertainable information about the property.
The obviousness of the presence or likely presence of contamination at the property, and the ability to detect such contamination by appropriate investigation.
A record shall be considered to be `reasonably ascertainable' for purposes of this paragraph if a copy or reasonable facsimile of the record is publicly available by request (within reasonable time and cost constraints) and the record is practically reviewable.
Maintenance of information.--No presumption shall arise under paragraph (1) unless the defendant has maintained a compilation of the information reviewed and gathered in the course of the environmental site assessment.
Definition of contamination.--For the purposes of this subsection and section 101(35), the term `contamination' means an existing release, a past release, or the material threat of a release of a hazardous substance, other than de minimis conditions that generally do not present a material risk of harm to public health or welfare or the environment.''.
Cross Reference.--Section 101(35)(B) (42 United States Code 9601(35)(B)) is amended by inserting after ``all appropriate inquiry'' the following: ``(as specified in section 107(n))''.
BONA FIDE PROSPECTIVE PURCHASER LIABILITY.
Liability.--Section 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9607) is amended by after subsection (n) the following new subsections: ``(o) Bona fide prospective purchaser.--(1) Notwithstanding paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a), a person who does not impede the performance of a response action or natural resource restoration at a facility shall not be liable to the extent liability at such facility is based solely on paragraph (1) of subsection (a) for a release or threat of release from the facility, and the person is a bona fide prospective purchaser of the facility.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `bona fide prospective purchaser' means a person who acquires ownership of a facility after the date of enactment of this subsection, or a tenant of such a person, who can establish each of the following by a preponderance of the evidence: ``(A) All active disposal of hazardous substances at the facility occurred before that person acquired the facility.
The person made all appropriate inquiry into the previous ownership and uses of the facility and its real property in accordance with generally accepted commercial and customary standards and practices.
Standards described in section 107(n)(2) (relating to innocent landowners) shall satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
In the case of property for residential or other similar use, purchased by a nongovernmental or noncommercial entity, a site inspection and title search that reveal no basis for further investigation satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph.
The person provided all legally required notices with respect to the discovery or release of any hazardous substances at the facility.
The person exercised appropriate care with respect to hazardous substances found at the facility by taking reasonable steps to stop on-going releases, prevent threatened future releases of hazardous substances, and prevent or limit human or natural resource exposure to hazardous substances previously released into the environment.
The person provides full cooperation, assistance, and facility access to persons authorized to conduct response actions at the facility, including the cooperation and access necessary for the installation, integrity, operation, and maintenance of any complete or partial response action at the facility.
The person is not affiliated with any other person liable for response costs at the facility, through any direct or indirect familial relationship, or any contractual, corporate, or financial relationship other than that created by the instruments by which title to the facility is conveyed or financed.''.
Prospective Purchaser and Windfall Lien.--(1) In any case in which there are unrecovered response costs at a facility for which an owner of the facility is not liable by reason of section 107(o), and the conditions described in paragraph (2) are met, the United States shall have a lien upon such facility for such unrecovered costs.
Such lien-- ``(A) shall not exceed the increase in fair market value of the property attributable to the response action at the time of a subsequent sale or other disposition of property; ``(B) shall arise at the time costs are first incurred by the United States with respect to a response action at the facility; ``(C) shall be subject to the requirements for notice and validity established in paragraph (3) of subsection (l); and ``(D) shall continue until the earlier of satisfaction of the lien or recovery of all response costs incurred at the facility.
The conditions referred to in paragraph (1) are the following: ``(A) A response action for which there are unrecovered costs is carried out at the facility.
Such response action increases the fair market value of the facility above the fair market value of the facility that existed within 6 months before the response action was taken.
No lien under this section shall arise-- ``(A) with respect to property for which the property owner preceding the first bona fide prospective purchaser is not a liable party or has resolved its liability under this Act, or ``(B) where an environmental assessment gives the bona fide prospective purchaser no knowledge or reason to know of the release of hazardous substances.