DEMONSTRATION PROJECT FOR MEDICARE REIMBURSEMENT OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS FOR HEALTH CARE PROVIDED TO CERTAIN MEDICARE-ELIGIBLE VETERANS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law and subject to subsection (b), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall enter into an agreement in order to carry out a demonstration project under which the Secretary of Health and Human Services reimburses the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, on a capitated basis, from the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) for health care services provided by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to covered veterans.
Project Requirements.--(1)(A) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry out the demonstration project in not less than two or more than four Veterans Integrated Service Networks.
For purposes of the demonstration project, the health care facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs in each Veterans Integrated Service Network in which the Secretary carries out the demonstration project shall be deemed to meet such standards as are applicable to providers of services under the Medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
(A) The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall budget for and expend on health care services in each Veterans Integrated Service Network in which the demonstration project is carried out an amount equal to the amount that the Secretary would otherwise budget for and expend on such services in the absence of the project.
The Secretary may not be reimbursed under the project for health care services provided to covered veterans in a Veterans Integrated Service Network until the amount expended by the Secretary to provide health care services in that network exceeds the amount budgeted for health care services with respect to that network under subparagraph (A).
The agreement between the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall provide that the cost to the Medicare program of providing services under the project does not exceed the cost that the Medicare program would otherwise incur in providing such services.
The authority of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs to carry out the project shall expire 3 years after the date of the commencement of the project.
Reports.--Not later than 14 months after the commencement of the demonstration project under subsection (a), and annually thereafter until the year following the year in which the project is terminated, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall jointly submit to Congress a report on the demonstration project.
The report shall include the following: (1) The number of covered veterans provided health care services under the project during the previous year.
An assessment of the benefits to such veterans of receiving health care services under the project.
A description of the cost shifting, if any, among medical care programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs that results from the project.
A description of the cost shifting, if any, from the Department to the Medicare program that results from the project.
An analysis of the effect of the project on the following: (A) Access to the health care facilities of the Department.
The availability of space and facilities and the capabilities of medical staff to provide fee-for- service medical care.
Established priorities for treatment of veterans under chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code.
The cost to the Department of providing prescription drugs to veterans.
The quality of health care provided by the Department.
Health care providers and covered veterans in the communities in which the project is carried out.
An assessment of the effects of continuing the project on-- (A) the overall budget of the Department for health care; and (B) the budget of each Veterans Integrated Service Network covered by the project.
An assessment of the effects of continuing the project on expenditures from the Medicare trust funds under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
An analysis of the lessons learned by the Department as a result of the project.
Any other information that the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Health and Human Services jointly consider appropriate.
Review by Comptroller General.--Not later than December 31 of each year in which the demonstration project is carried out under this section, the Comptroller General shall determine and submit to Congress a report on the extent, if any, to which the costs of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs under title 38, United States Code, and the costs of the Secretary of Health and Human Services under the Medicare program have increased as a result of the project.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``covered veterans'' means any veteran entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act who is eligible for health care under chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, for a reason other than a service- connected disability.