There is established in the Congress an office to be known as the ``Congressional Office for Public Opinion Research and Assessment'', hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Office''.
OFFICE AND GOVERNING BOARD.
The Office will consist of a nonvoting Director and a Board comprised of-- (1) 3 Members of the House of Representatives designated by the majority leader of the House of Representatives; (2) 3 Members of the House of Representatives designated by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (3) 3 Senators designated by the majority leader of the Senate; and (4) 3 Senators designated by the minority leader of the Senate.
Terms of Board members, methods of appointment, rotation, filling vacancies, selection of a chairman or vice-chairman, and authorizing meetings, documents, and expenditures shall be similar to that of the Office of Technology Assessment.
The Board is required to set out research priorities and methods for choosing research topics.
Members may request the Office to perform research and evaluations subject to rules set by the Board.
DIRECTOR AND DEPUTY DIRECTOR.
Director.--The Director of the Office shall be appointed by the Board and shall serve for a term of 6 years unless sooner removed by the Board.
The Director shall receive basic pay at the rate provided for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
In addition to the powers and duties vested in the Director by this Act, the Director shall exercise such powers and duties as may be delegated by the Board.
Deputy Director.--The Director may appoint with the approval of the Board, a Deputy Director who shall perform such functions as the Director may prescribe and who shall be Acting Director during the absence or incapacity of the Director or in the event of a vacancy in the office of Director.
The Deputy Director shall receive basic pay at the rate provided for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Limitation.--Neither the Director nor the Deputy Director shall engage in any other business, vocation, or employment than that of serving as such Director or Deputy Director, as the case may be; nor shall the Director or Deputy Director, except with the approval of the Board, hold any office in, or act in any capacity for, any organization, agency, or institution with which the Office makes any contract or other arrangement under this Act.
In General.--The Office shall have the authority, within the limits of available appropriations, to do all things necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act, including but without being limited to the authority to-- (1) make full use of competent personnel and organizations outside the Office, public or private, and form special ad hoc task forces or make other arrangements when appropriate; and (2) enter into contracts or other arrangements as may be necessary for the conduct of the work of the Office with any agency or instrumentality of the United States, with any State, territory, or possession or any political subdivision thereof, or with any person, firm or association, corporation, or educational institution, accept and utilize the services of voluntary and uncompensated personnel, acquire property of all kinds necessary for or resulting from the exercise of authority of this Act, and provide such rules and regulations as it deems necessary governing its operation and organization.
Personnel.--The Director shall, in accordance with such policies as the Board shall prescribe, appoint and fix the compensation of such personnel as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
An Advisory Council will be established by the Board consisting of individuals who are most knowledgeable of the state-of-the-art of processes, methods, and needs for informing Congress of the opinions and values of the public.
Membership, duties, provisions for chairman and vice-chairman, terms, expense allowances and compensation shall be similar to that of the Technology Assessment Advisory Council of the Office of Technology Assessment.
The Council will advise the Board on research priorities and methods which are the most promising and cost effective to pursue and keep itself informed on the state-of-the-art of opinion research, including such developments as interactive TV, electronic fora and town meetings, computer network conferencing, and all methods for enhancing democracy in this and other countries.
An expert, ad hoc panel will be set up by the Director for each survey to assist in the design and analysis.
Members of these panels will be experts in the issues of the survey and represent a full range of scientific expertise, approaches, and viewpoints on alternative courses for dealing with the issue in its various aspects and including all major policy alternatives.
A report will be prepared in a timely fashion at the conclusion of each survey including a master questionnaire, containing the questions as asked with frequencies or percentage responses, and an analysis prepared by the advisory panel with the assistance of in-house or contractor personnel.
The survey report and all other survey data (including the methodology used and an analysis of the probable accuracy and estimates of the probable errors both because of sampling error and all other causes) will be made public in a timely manner to the news media and to organizations and individuals specializing in public policy or public opinion.
The other survey data will be available in written form as a data book and in electronic form as complete data discs readable by personal computers suitable for statistical analysis in standard fashion and will be provided on request to anyone at a reasonable cost adequate to cover the full marginal cost of production and distribution.
The surveys will test the degree of public support for alternative policy proposals when the survey respondents are informed in a fair, balanced, and accurate manner with relevant facts.
The surveys will not only test support for various policy proposals, but also seek to determine how important various pieces of information, including balanced sets of arguments for and against the proposal, turn out to be in determining that support.
Depending on available funds to pay for the interviewing and analyzing of statistically adequate oversamples, some surveys will also endeavor to determine statistically significant differences between the national sample and State or district samples, particularly in those issue areas where particular regions, States, or districts are expected to have different opinions because of the nature of the issue.
In General.--The surveys will experiment with innovative technology, hardware, and software, including electronic media, digital and fiber optics networks, both with independent telephone interviewing and supplemented by and in conjunction with face-to-face interviewing and television programming that attempts to create the group interactivity, issue-defining, agenda-setting and consensus-building of what has come to be called the electronic town meeting, as any of these techniques and methodologies show promise of improving the ability of the Office to accomplish its purposes.
The surveys will be designed not only to obtain the policy views of the public but also-- (1) to test various concepts about how best to design, formulate, word, and include in the survey as it is spoken, shown, or read by interviewers, whether from CATI (Computer Assisted Telephone Interviewing) screens or by other means, the required factual information and pro and con arguments; and (2) to determine the direction and degree to which doing this in different ways affects the results of the surveys.
Sensitivity Analysis Research.--Sensitivity analysis research will also be performed which will determine the degree to which imbalance in the amount and quality of factual information and in the bias created by cuing and permission language affects survey data.
Such research shall be designed to lead to a better understanding of the affects of question design, menu choices, and implicit or unstated assumptions or survey researchers.
Interaction Testing.--Surveys will also test the degree of interaction that works best--i.e., is most informative of the public position--at different stages in the designers' understanding of the public view in the issue.
APPROPRIATION FOR THE OFFICE AND PARTIAL RESCISSION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR SENATE AND HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES MAIL COSTS.
Appropriation.--There is appropriated, out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, $10,000,000 for the Congressional Office for Public Opinion Research and Assessment for fiscal year 1994.
Rescissions.--Of the funds appropriated in the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1994, for the Senate under the heading ``official mail costs'', there is rescinded the sum of $5,000,000.
Of the funds appropriated in the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1994, for the House of Representatives under the headings ``Salaries and Expenses'' and ``official mail costs'', there is rescinded the sum of $5,000,000.