This Act may be cited as the ``Paul E. Tsongas Fellowship Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to encourage individuals of exceptional achievement and promise, especially members of traditionally underrepresented groups, to pursue careers in fields that confront the global energy and environmental challenges of the 21st century.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary of Energy is authorized to award doctoral fellowships, to be known as Paul E. Tsongas Doctoral Fellowships, in accordance with the provisions of this Act for study and research in fields of science or engineering that relate to energy or the environment such as physics, mathematics, chemistry, biology, computer science, materials science, environmental science, behavioral science, and social sciences at institutions proposed by applicants for such fellowships.
Period of Award.--A fellowship under this section shall be awarded for a period of three succeeding academic years, beginning with the commencement of a program of doctoral study.
Fellowship Portability.--Each Fellow shall be entitled to use the fellowship in a graduate program at any accredited institution of higher education in which the recipient may decide to enroll.
Number of Fellowships.--As many fellowships as may be fully funded according to this Act shall be awarded each year.
Designation of Fellows.--Each individual awarded a fellowship under this Act shall be known as a ``Paul E. Tsongas Fellow'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as a ``Fellow'').
ELIGIBILITY AND SELECTION OF FELLOWS.
Eligibility.--Only United States citizens are eligible to receive awards under this Act.
Fellowship Board.-- (1) Appointment.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the National Science Foundation, shall appoint a Paul E. Tsongas Fellowship Board (hereinafter in this part referred to as the ``Board'') consisting of 5 representatives of the academic science and engineering communities who are especially qualified to serve on the Board.
The Secretary shall assure that individuals appointed to the Board are broadly knowledgeable about and have experience in graduate education in relevant fields.
Duties.--The Board shall-- (A) establish general policies for the program established by this part and oversee its operation; (B) establish general criteria for awarding fellowships; (C) award fellowships; and (D) prepare and submit to the Congress at least once in every 3-year period a report on any modifications in the program that the Board determines are appropriate.
Term.--The term of office of each member of the Board shall be 3 years, except that any member appointed to fill a vacancy shall serve for the remainder of the term for which the predecessor of the member was appointed.
No member may serve for a period in excess of 6 years.
Initial meeting; vacancy.--The Secretary shall call the first meeting of the Board, at which the first order of business shall be the election of a Chairperson and a Vice Chairperson, who shall serve until 1 year after the date of their appointment.
Thereafter each officer shall be elected for a term of 2 years.
In case a vacancy occurs in either office, the Board shall elect an individual from among the members of the Board to fill such vacancy.
Quorum; additional meetings.--(A) A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum.
The Board shall meet at least once a year or more frequently, as may be necessary, to carry out its responsibilities.
Compensation.--Members of the Board, while serving on the business of the Board, shall be entitled to receive compensation at rates fixed by the Secretary, but not exceeding the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule, including traveltime, and while so serving away from their homes or regular places of business, they may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized by section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons in Government service employed intermittently.
Underrepresented Groups.--In designing selection criteria and awarding fellowships, the Board shall-- (1) consider the need to prepare a larger number of women and individuals from minority groups, especially from among such groups that have been traditionally underrepresented in the professional and academic fields referred to in section 2, but nothing contained in this or any other provision of this Act shall be interpreted to require the Secretary to grant any preference or disparate treatment to the members of any underrepresented group; and (2) take into account the need to expand access by women and minority groups to careers heretofore lacking adequate representation of women and minority groups.
PAYMENTS, STIPENDS, TUITION, AND EDUCATION AWARDS.
Amount of Award.-- (1) Stipends.--The Secretary shall pay to each individual awarded a fellowship under this Act a stipend in the amount of $15,000, $16,500, and $18,000 during the first, second, and third years of study, respectively.
Tuition.--The Secretary shall pay to the appropriate institution an amount adequate to cover the tuition, fees, and health insurance of each individual awarded a fellowship under this Act.
Administrative and travel allowance.--The Secretary shall pay to each host institution an annual $5,000 allowance for the purpose of covering-- (A) administrative expenses; (B) travel expenses associated with Fellow participation in academic seminars or conferences approved by the host institution; and (C) round-trip travel expenses associated with Fellow participation in the internship required by section 6 of this Act.
Each Fellow shall participate in a 3-month internship related to the dissertation topic of the Fellow at a national laboratory, equivalent industrial laboratory, or any other institution or agency approved by the host institution.
Academic Progress Required.--No student shall receive support pursuant to an award under this Act-- (1) except during periods in which such student is maintaining satisfactory progress in, and devoting essentially full time to, study or research in the field in which such fellowship was awarded, or (2) if the student is engaging in gainful employment other than part-time employment involved in teaching, research, or similar activities determined by the institution to be in support of the student's progress toward a degree.
Reports From Recipients.--The Secretary is authorized to require reports containing such information in such form and filed at such times as the Secretary determines necessary from any person awarded a fellowship under the provisions of this Act.
The reports shall be accompanied by a certificate from an appropriate official at the institution of higher education, or other research center, stating that such individual is fulfilling the requirements of this section.
Failure To Earn Degree.--A recipient of a fellowship under this Act found by the Secretary to have failed in or abandoned the course of study for which assistance was provided under this Act may be required, at the discretion of the Secretary, to repay a pro rata amount of such fellowship assistance received, plus interest and, where applicable, reasonable collection fees, on a schedule and at a rate of interest to be prescribed by the Secretary by regulations issued pursuant to this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated for this Act $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for the succeeding fiscal years.
APPLICATION OF GENERAL EDUCATIONAL PROVISIONS ACT.
Section 421 of the General Educational Provisions Act, pertaining to the availability of funds, shall apply to this Act.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
The term ``host institution'' means an institution where a Paul E. Tsongas Fellow is enrolled for the purpose of pursuing doctoral studies for which support is provided under this Act.