This Act may be cited as the ``Multiple Punitive Damages Fairness Act of 1995''.
For purposes of this Act, the term-- (1) ``claimant'' means any person who brings a civil action and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought; if such an action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, the term includes the claimant's decedent; if such action is brought through or on behalf of a minor or incompetent, the term includes the claimant's legal guardian; (2) ``harm'' means any legally cognizable wrong or injury for which punitive damages may be imposed; (3) ``defendant'' means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity (including any governmental entity); (4) ``punitive damages'' means damages awarded against any person or entity to punish or deter such person or entity, or others, from engaging in similar behavior in the future; (5) ``specific findings of fact'' means findings in written form focusing on specific behavior of a defendant; and (6) ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and any other territory or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision thereof.
MULTIPLE PUNITIVE DAMAGES FAIRNESS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Multiple or repetitive imposition of punitive damages for harms arising out of a single act or course of conduct may deprive a defendant of all the assets or insurance coverage of the defendant, and may endanger the ability of future claimants to receive compensation for basic out-of-pocket expenses and damages for pain and suffering.
The detrimental impact of multiple punitive damages exists even in cases that are settled, rather than tried, because the threat of punitive damages being awarded results in a higher settlement than would ordinarily be obtained.
To the extent this premium exceeds what would otherwise be a fair and reasonable settlement for compensatory damages, assets that could be available for satisfaction of future compensatory claims are dissipated.
Fundamental unfairness results when anyone is punished repeatedly for what is essentially the same conduct.
Federal and State appellate and trial judges, and well- respected commentators, have expressed concern that multiple imposition of punitive damages may violate constitutionally protected due process rights.
Multiple imposition of punitive damages may be a significant obstacle to comprehensive settlement negotiations in repetitive litigation.
Limiting the imposition of multiple punitive damages awards would facilitate resolution of mass tort claims involving thousands of injured claimants.
Federal and State trial courts have not provided adequate solutions to problems caused by the multiple imposition of punitive damages because of a concern that such courts lack the power or authority to prohibit subsequent awards in other courts.
Individual State legislatures can create only a partial remedy to address problems caused by the multiple imposition of punitive damages, because each State lacks the power to control the imposition of punitive damages in other States.
General Rule.--Except as provided in subsection (c), punitive damages shall be prohibited in any civil action in any State or Federal court in which such damages are sought against a defendant based on the same act or course of conduct for which punitive damages have already been sought or awarded against such defendant.
Circumstances for Award.--If the court determines in a pretrial hearing that the claimant will offer new and substantial evidence of previously undiscovered, additional wrongful behavior on the part of the defendant, other than the injury to the claimant, the court may award punitive damages in accordance with subsection (d).
Limitations on Award.--A court awarding punitive damages pursuant to subsection (c) shall-- (1) make specific findings of fact on the record to support the award; (2) reduce the amount of the punitive portion of the damage award by the sum of the amounts of punitive damages previously paid by the defendant in prior actions based on the same act or course of conduct; and (3) prohibit disclosure to the jury of the court's determination and action under this subsection.
Applicability and Preemption.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (3), this section shall apply to-- (A) any civil action brought on any theory where punitive damages are sought based on the same act or course of conduct for which punitive damages have already been sought or awarded against the defendant; and (B) all civil actions in which the trial has not commenced before the effective date of this Act.
Except as provided in paragraph (3), this section shall apply to all civil actions in which the trial has not commenced before the effective date of this Act.
This section shall not apply to any civil action involving damages awarded under any Federal or State statute that prescribes the precise amount of punitive damages to be awarded.
This section shall not preempt or supersede any existing Federal or State law limiting or otherwise restricting the recovery for punitive damages to the extent that such law is inconsistent with the provisions of this section.
EFFECT ON OTHER LAW.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to-- (1) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by any State under any law; (2) supersede any Federal law; (3) waive or affect any defense of sovereign immunity asserted by the United States; (4) affect the applicability of any provision of chapter 97 of title 28, United States Code; (5) preempt State choice-of-law rules with respect to claims brought by a foreign nation or a citizen of a foreign nation; (6) affect the right of any court to transfer venue or to apply the law of a foreign nation or to dismiss a claim of a foreign nation or of a citizen of a foreign nation on the ground of inconvenient forum; or (7) create a cause of action for punitive damages.