Section 1.--(a) The Secretary of the Interior (``Secretary'') shall enter into expedited negotiations with the Alaska Native Village Corporations of Tyonek Native Corporation, Chickaloon-Moose Creek Native Association, Inc., Ninilchik Native Association, Inc., Seldovia Native Association, Inc., and Knikatnu, Inc. for the purpose of conveying to the Village Corporations, within 180 days of enactment of this Act, the lands described in paragraph (d) as ``West Side Lands'' or other lands or interests therein in the Cook Inlet Region of Alaska or other appropriate alternative financial consideration, as the Secretary and the Village Corporations may agree satisfies the obligations of this Act in partial fulfillment of the acreage entitlement of each Village Corporation under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act of 1971, (``Settlement Act'').
If the Secretary successfully completes negotiation with a Village Corporation within 180 days of enactment of this Act, then, as to reach such Village Corporation which has reached an agreement with the Secretary, the conveyance obligation provided in subsection (b) of this Act shall be suspended and the Secretary shall within 90 days convey to each such Village Corporation such lands and interests in lands in the Cook Inlet Region of Alaska or provide other appropriate alternative financial consideration provided for in the agreement with the affected Village Corporation.
The Secretary shall consult with Cook Inlet Region, Inc. (``CIRI'') regarding to CIRI's subsurface entitlement underlying the surface estate of each Village Corporation named in this subsection.
If, within 80 days of enactment of this Act, the Secretary has been unable to reach agreement with a Village Corporation named in subsection (a), then, as to each such Village Corporation, the Secretary shall within 210 days after enactment of this Act convey all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the surface estate of 50 percentum of the West Side Lands in order of existing Village Corporation selection priority made in 1974.
If the Secretary does not complete the conveyances described in the first sentence of this subsection within 210 days of enactment of this Act, then such conveyances will occur by operation of law 240 days after enactment of this Act.
Title to the lands described in this subsection shall be vested in the Village Corporations with regard to whether such selections are listed in appendix A or appendix C of the Deficiency Agreement dated August 31, 1976.
(1) Immediately upon completion of the conveyances described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall enter into expedited negotiations with the Village Corporations named in subsection (a) for the purpose of completing the conveyance to the Village Corporations of any remaining West Side Lands which were not conveyed to the Village Corporations pursuant to subsection (b) of this Act or alternative lands or interests in lands in the Cook Inlet Region of Alaska or such other appropriate alternative financial considerations.
If within 180 days of completion of the conveyances described in subsection (b), the Secretary has been unable to reach agreement with any of the Village Corporations named in subsection (a), then the Secretary shall file a report with the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Resources Committee of the United States House of Representatives describing the course of negotiations and explaining why, in the Secretary's view, no agreement was reached.
If the Secretary has been unable to reach agreement as described in subsection (c) of this Act with a Village Corporation named in subsection (a), litigation may be commenced to seek conveyance of the remaining lands described in appendix C of the Deficiency Agreement dated August 31, 1976, at any time within twelve months of enactment of this Act, by any of the five affected village corporations or CIRI.
Exclusive jurisdiction over such action is vested in the United States District Court for the District of Alaska.
If such litigation is commenced, trial de novo to the court shall be held and the Deficiency Agreement shall be construed as an agreement for the benefit of Alaska Natives as Native Americans consistent with the Federal trust responsibility.
The ``West Side Lands'' are those lands selected by the Village Corporations pursuant to section 12(a) of the ``Settlement Act'' as determined by the order of existing Village Corporation selection priority ranking made by rounds in 1974, and on file with the Secretary and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Resources of the United States House of Representatives and legally described as follows: To Chickaloon-Moose Creek Native Association, Inc.: Seward Meridan, Alaska Township 1 North, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 24, 25, and 36 (fractional).
To Knikatnu, Inc.: Seward Meridan, Alaska Township 1 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 1 (fractional) Township 3 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 3 (fractional) Section 4 and 9.
Township 1 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 9 (fractional).
To Ninilchik Native Association, Inc.: Seward Meridian, Alaska Township 1 South, Range 19 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 29 and 32 (fractional).
Township 2 South, Range 19 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 6 and 18 (fractional).
Township 2 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 1 (fractional).
Sections 6 and 14; Sections 23, 24, and 26 (fractional).
Sections 32 and 33; Sections 34 and 35 (fractional).
Township 3 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 10 (fractional) Township 3 South, Range 21 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 13 and 19 through 24, inclusive; Section 25 (fractional) Sections 32 and 34 (fractional).
Township 1 North, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 6 through 8 (fractional), inclusive; Section 16; Sections 22 and 23 (fractional); Section 26.
Township 4 North, Range 19 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 20 and 36.
To Seldovia Native Association, Inc.: Seward Meridian, Alaska Township 2 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 13 (fractional).
Township 3 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 7 and 8; Section 16 (fractional); Sections 17 and 18; Sections 19 and 20 (fractional).
To Tyonek Native Corporation: Seward Meridian, Alaska Township 1 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 2 (fractional); Section 3.
Township 2 South, Range 21 West (Unsurveyed) Section 36.
Township 2 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 12 (fractional); Section 31.
Township 3 South, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Sections 15, 21, and 30 (fractional).
Township 3 South, Range 21 West (Unsurveyed) Section 26; Section 27 and 28 (fractional); Sections 29 through 31 (fractional), inclusive; Sections 33, 35, and 36 (fractional).
Township 1 North, Range 20 West (Unsurveyed) Section 15 (fractional); Section 35.
Aggregating approximately 29,900 acres, more or less.
All conveyances made under this Act shall be made in accordance with Section 12(a), 14(f), and 17(b) of the Settlement Act.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to increase or decrease the entitlement under the Settlement Act of any Village Corporation named in this Act or of CIRI.