(a) Contents of Congressional Budget Resolutions.--Section 301(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2006 or for any ensuing fiscal year shall be consistent with the spending limitation specified in section 1105(i) of title 31, United States Code.''.
Spending Limitation Point of Order.--Section 312 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Spending Limitation Point of Order.--(1) It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any concurrent resolution on the budget for fiscal year 2006 or for any fiscal year thereafter, or any amendment thereto or conference report thereon, that is not consistent with the spending limitation specified in section 1105(i) of title 31, United States Code.
Paragraph (1) may be waived or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate only by the affirmative vote of two- thirds of the Members, duly chosen and sworn.
An affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Members, duly chosen and sworn, shall be required in the Senate to sustain an appeal of the ruling of the chair on such point of order.
Appeals in the Senate from the decisions of the chair relating to paragraph (1) shall be limited to one hour, to be equally divided between, and controlled by, the mover and the manager of the concurrent resolution.''.
REDUCTION OF FICA RATES RESULTING FROM PERSONAL SOCIAL SECURITY SAVINGS PROGRAM.
Employee Contribution.--Section 3101 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax on employees) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Reduction in Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Tax Rate.-- ``(1) In general.--In any year which follows a reduction year and each year thereafter, the rate of tax imposed under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the reduction percentage.
Reduction year.--For purposes of this section-- ``(A) In general.--The term `reduction year' means any year after the transition year in which the OASDI rate ratio exceeds 125 percent.
Transition year.--The term `transition year' means the first full calendar year following the termination year (as defined in section 4(b)(2) of the Social Security Personal Savings Guarantee and Prosperity Act of 2004).
Reduction percentage.--For purposes of this section, the term `reduction percentage' means the excess of-- ``(A) the rate in effect under subsection (a) for the reduction year, over ``(B) the rate (rounded up to the nearest one tenth of a percent) under which the OASDI rate ratio for the reduction year would have been 125 percent if-- ``(i) such rate had been applicable under subsection (a) and section 3111(a) during such year, and ``(ii) the rate under section 1401(a) during such year were twice such rate.
OASDI rate ratio.--The term `OASDI rate ratio' means, with respect to any calendar year, the ratio-- ``(A) the numerator of which is the combined balance in the Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, as of the last day of such calendar year, and ``(B) the denominator of which is the amount paid from such Trust Funds during such calendar year for all purposes authorized by section 201 of the Social Security Act (excluding any transfer payments between such Trust Funds and reducing the amount of any transfer to the Railroad Retirement Account by the amount of any transfers into either such Trust Fund from such Account).
Limitation on reduction.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any reduction to the extent that such reduction would cause the rate of tax imposed under subsection (a) to be less than 4.95 percent.''.
Employer Contribution.--Section 3111 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax on employers) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Reduction in Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Tax Rate.-- ``(1) In general.--In any year which follows a reduction year and each year thereafter, the rate of tax imposed under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the reduction percentage.
Reduction year; reduction percentage.--For purposes of this section, the terms `reduction year' and `reduction percentage' have the meanings given such terms by section 3101(d).
Limitation on reduction.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any reduction to the extent that such reduction would cause the rate of tax imposed under subsection (a) to be less than 4.95 percent.''.
Self-Employment Contribution.--Section 1401 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax on self-employment income) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Reduction in Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Tax Rate.-- ``(1) In general.--In any year which follows a reduction year and each year thereafter, the rate of tax imposed under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the reduction percentage.
Reduction year; reduction percentage.--For purposes of this section, the terms `reduction year' and `reduction percentage' have the meanings given such terms by section 3101(d).
Limitation on reduction.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any reduction to the extent that such reduction would cause the rate of tax imposed under subsection (a) to be less than 9.9 percent.