This Act may be cited as the ``Louisiana Purchase and Lewis and Clark Expedition Bicentennial Commission Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the bicentennial of the Louisiana Purchase occurs in 2003, two hundred years after the United States, under the leadership of President Thomas Jefferson and after due consideration and approval by Congress, paid $15 million to France to acquire the vast area in the western half of the Mississippi River Basin; (2) the Louisiana Purchase was the largest peaceful land transaction in history and virtually doubled the size of the United States; (3) the Louisiana Purchase opened the heart of the North American continent for exploration, settlement, and achievement, as exemplified by the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1803 to 1806, which secured through heroic efforts the first documentation of the inhabitants, riches, and grandeur of this new territory of the United States; (4) in the wake of the Louisiana Purchase and Lewis and Clark Expedition, immigrants from around the world came to the American frontier, which became emblematic of the search for political, economic, and spiritual freedom; and (5) commemoration of the Louisiana Purchase and the opening of the West can enhance public understanding of the impact of Westward expansion on American society and can provide lessons for democratic governance in our own time.
ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Louisiana Purchase and Lewis and Clark Expedition Bicentennial Commission'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') to plan, encourage, coordinate, and conduct the commemoration of the two hundredth anniversary of the Louisiana Purchase and its exploration by Lewis and Clark.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 24 members, who shall be appointed not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, as follows: (1) Eight members appointed by the President upon the recommendation of the majority leader of the Senate in consultation with the minority leader of the Senate.
Eight members appointed by the President upon recommendation of the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Eight members appointed by the President, which members shall be broadly representative of the people of the United States, and not otherwise officers or employees of the United States.
Qualifications.--The President and each of the individuals making recommendations to the President regarding appointments shall seek to achieve a balanced membership representing, to the extent practicable, the Nation as a whole.
The Commission members shall be chosen from among individuals who have demonstrated scholarship, a strong sense of public service, expertise in the learned professions, and abilities likely to contribute to the fulfillment of the duties of the Commission.
Terms.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
International Participation.--The President is authorized and requested to invite the governments of Canada, France, Great Britain, Mexico, and Spain each to appoint, not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, one individual to serve as a nonvoting participant in the activities of the Commission.
Chair and Vice-Chair.--The President shall designate one of the members to be Chairperson, who shall serve in that position at the pleasure of the President.
The Commission shall elect a Vice- Chairperson from among its members.
Quorum.--Thirteen members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may conduct meetings.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--The members of the Commission shall serve without compensation, but each member shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of Commission duties.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In general.--The Commission shall-- (1) plan and develop activities appropriate to commemorate the bicentennial of the Louisiana Purchase and the Lewis and Clark Expedition, including a limited number of projects to be undertaken by the Federal Government, seeking to harmonize and balance the important goals of ceremony and celebration with the equally important goals of scholarship and education; (2) consult with and encourage Indian tribes, appropriate Federal departments and agencies, State and local governments, foreign governments, and private organizations to organize and participate in bicentennial activities commemorating or examining the history of the Louisiana Territory, the negotiation of the Louisiana Purchase, the Lewis and Clark Expedition, the specific characteristics of the frontier movement and the westward expansion of the United States with their influences on the culture of the world; and (3) coordinate, generally, activities throughout the United States and international activities related to the history and influence of the Louisiana Purchase and the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
Federal Agency Cooperation.--Federal departments and agencies are authorized and requested to cooperate with the Commission in planning, encouraging, coordinating, and conducting appropriate commemorative activities.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
In general.--The Commission may provide for-- (1) the preparation, distribution, dissemination, exhibition, and sale of historical, commemorative, and informational materials and objects which will contribute to public awareness of, and interest in, the bicentennial, except that any commemorative coins, medals, or postage stamps recommended to be issued by the United States shall be sold only by an agency of the United States; (2) competitions and awards for historical, scholarly, artistic, literary, musical, and other works, programs, and projects relating to the bicentennial; (3) a bicentennial calendar or register of programs and projects, and in other ways provide a central clearinghouse for information and coordination regarding dates, events, places, documents, artifacts, and personalities of bicentennial historical and commemorative significance; and (4) the design and designation of logos, symbols, or marks for use in connection with the commemoration of the bicentennial of the Louisiana Purchase and Lewis and Clark Expedition, and shall prescribe rules and regulations regarding their use, which shall provide that the Commission may not sell, lease, or otherwise grant to any person the right to use any such logo, symbol, or mark in connection with the production or manufacture of any commercial goods, or as part of an advertisement promoting any commercial goods or services.
Donations.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may accept, use, solicit, and dispose of donations of money, property, or personal services.
Limitations.--The Commission may not accept donations-- (A) the value of which exceeds $50,000 annually, in the case of donations from an individual; or (B) the value of which exceeds $250,000 annually, in the case of donations from a corporation, partnership, or other business organization.
Exception.--The limitations in paragraph (2) shall not apply in the case of an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 501(c)(3)) and exempt from taxation under section 501(a) of such Code.
Preservation.--All books, manuscripts, miscellaneous printed matter, memorabilia, relics, and other materials or property relating to the time period of the Louisiana Purchase and the Lewis and Clark Expedition, received by the Commission by donation may be deposited for preservation in National, State, or local libraries, museums, or other agencies.
ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS AND POWERS.
In General.-- (1) Appointment of officers.--The Chairperson, with the advice of the whole Commission, shall appoint, to serve at the pleasure of the Chairperson, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service-- (A) a Director who may be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule established under section 5315 of such title; and (B) a Deputy Director who may be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule established under section 5316 of such title.
Delegation to director.--The Commission may delegate such powers and duties to the Director as may be necessary for the efficient operation and management of the Commission.
General Powers.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Commission, the Commission may-- (1) appoint and fix the compensation of such additional personnel, not to exceed 20 staff members, as it deems advisable, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and without regard to chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, but at rates not in excess of the maximum rate for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of such title; (2) appoint such advisory committees as it deems necessary; and (3) procure supplies, services, and property, make contracts, expend funds appropriated, donated, or received to carry out such contracts.
Staff Detailed From Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Staff Paid From Donated Funds.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel to be paid out of private donations.
Principal Office.--The principal office of the Commission shall be in St. Louis, Missouri.
Annual Reports.--The Commission shall report to the President and Congress annually on its activities, its expenditures, and all donations.
Comprehensive Report.--Not later than three years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to the President and to Congress a comprehensive report incorporating its specific recommendations for the commemoration of the bicentennial of the Louisiana Purchase and Lewis and Clark Expedition and related events.
The report of the Commission shall include recommendations for the allocation of financial and administrative responsibility among the public and private authorities and organizations recommended for participation by the Commission.
This report may recommend activities such as-- (1) the production, publication, and distribution of books, pamphlets, films, electronic publications, and other educational materials focusing on the history and impact of the Louisiana Purchase on the United States and the world; (2) bibliographical and documentary projects, publications, and electronic resources; (3) conferences, convocations, lectures, seminars, and other programs; (4) the development of programs by and for libraries, museums, parks, and historic sites, including national and international traveling exhibitions; (5) ceremonies and celebrations commemorating specific events; (6) the production, distribution, and performance of artistic works, and of programs and activities, focusing on the national and international significance of the Louisiana Purchase and the westward movement opening the frontier for present and future generations; and (7) the issuance of commemorative coins, medals, certificates of recognition, and postage stamps.
Final Report and Termination.--The Commission shall make a final report to the President and Congress, and shall terminate, by March 1, 2007.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the purposes of this Act $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for the subsequent fiscal years through fiscal year 2007.
Availability of Funds.--Amounts appropriated under this section for any fiscal year shall remain available until March 1, 2007.
Limitation.--The total appropriations authorized under this Act shall not exceed $8,000,000.