This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Wheat Gluten Act of 1996''.
TEMPORARY IMPOSITION OF DUTIES PENDING FINAL DETERMINATION.
In General.--In addition to any other duty that may apply, there is imposed a duty of 25 percent ad valorem on wheat gluten described in subsection (b).
Wheat Gluten Described.--Wheat gluten described in this subsection is wheat gluten, whether or not dried, described in heading 1109.00 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States, that is imported directly or indirectly from any member country of the European Union.
Applicability.--The rate of duty imposed under subsection (a) shall apply to goods described in subsection (b) that are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, during the period beginning on the date that is 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and ending on whichever of the following dates occurs first with respect to an investigation initiated under section 3: (1) The date the investigation is suspended pursuant to section 3(b)(2).
The date on which a final negative determination is made by the Commission pursuant to section 705 of the Tariff Act of 1930.
The date on which an order is issued pursuant to section 706 of such Act.
Refunds; Collections.--If the amount of the duty imposed under this section is different from the amount of the cash deposit, bond, or other security required for the countervailing duty imposed under a countervailing duty order issued under section 706 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1671e) as a result of the investigation initiated under section 3, such difference shall be refunded, released, or collected, as the case may be, in accordance with section 707 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1671f).
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the administering authority shall initiate an investigation pursuant to section 702(a) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1671a(a)) with respect to the importation and sales for importation into the United States of wheat gluten described in section 2(b).
Application of Title VII of the Tariff Act of 1930.-- (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the provisions of title VII of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1671 et sequentes) shall apply to the countervailing duty investigation initiated under subsection (a).
Termination or suspension of investigation.-- (A) Termination.--Subsections (a) and (k) of section 704 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1671c (a) and (k)) shall not apply to the investigation initiated pursuant to subsection (a).
Suspension.--The investigation initiated pursuant to subsection (a) may be suspended pursuant to subsection (b) or (c) of section 704 of such Act, if the requirements of such section 704 and subparagraph (C) are satisfied.
Suspension of investigation procedure.--The requirements of this subparagraph are satisfied if, not less than 30 days before suspending the investigation, the administering authority-- (i) notifies the Committee on Finance of the Senate, the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives, the Commission, and other parties to the investigation, of the administering authority's intention to suspend the investigation; (ii) consults with such committees regarding such suspension; (iii) provides to such committees a copy of the proposed agreement pursuant to which the investigation is to be suspended, together with an explanation of-- (I) how the agreement will be carried out and enforced; (II) how the agreement meets the requirements of subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of section 704 of the Tariff Act of 1930; and (III) any action required of the European Union; and (iv) permits all interested parties to submit comments and information for the record before the date on which notice of suspension of the investigation is published.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Administering authority.--The term ``administering authority'' has the meaning given such term by section 771(1) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1677(1)).
Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the United States International Trade Commission.