This Act may be cited as the ``Gasoline Access and Stabilization Act of 2001''.
NATIONAL REQUIREMENT FOR REFORMULATED AND OXYGENATED GASOLINE.
Reformulated Gasoline.--(1) Section 211 of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7545) is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof: ``(p) Phase III Uniform Formula for Reformulated and Oxygenated Gasoline.-- ``(1) National formula.--After notice and opportunity for hearing, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations for reformulated gasoline and oxygenated gasoline sold for use in all States.
The regulations shall require such gasoline to comply with a national formula promulgated by the Administrator that meets the requirements of both subsections (k) and (m).
The regulations shall prohibit any manufacturer of reformulated gasoline or oxygenated gasoline from selling, offering for sale, or introducing into commerce in any State any gasoline for purposes of compliance with the requirements of subsection (k) or (m) unless the gasoline complies with such national formula.
Oxygenate requirement.--The formula under paragraph (1) shall include provisions regarding the oxygen content of such gasoline which shall require that a single type of oxygenate be used.
Such formula shall insure that the oxygen content shall equal or exceed the following: ``(A) Winter oxygen levels.--2.7 percent by weight (subject to a testing tolerance established by the Administrator) in portions of the year in which any area referred to in subsection (m) is prone to high ambient concentrations of carbon monoxide.
Summer oxygenate levels.--2.0 percent by weight (subject to a testing tolerance established by the Administrator) in portions of the year in which any area referred to in subsection (m) is not prone to high ambient concentrations of carbon monoxide.
Factors to be considered.--In establishing the national formula under this subsection, the Administrator shall take into account the toxicity of various alternatives, the effects of various fuel additives on water quality, crude oil supply, and such other factors as the Administrator determines appropriate.
Alternative.--The reformulated gasoline approved by the Administrator for a State referred to in subsection (c)(4)(B) shall be treated, for any State, as satisfying the requirements of this subsection.
State opt-in to national reformulated gas program or California reformulated gas program.--The Governor of any State may elect to have any area within the State, or the entire State, be treated as a covered area for purposes of subsection (k) by notifying the Administrator of such State's election.
An election provided for in this subsection shall not be subject to any of the requirements or limitations set forth in paragraph (6) of subsection (k).
Such election shall take effect at such time as the State determines in its notice to the Administrator.
Effective date.--The regulations promulgated under paragraph (1) of this subsection shall take effect with respect to all reformulated gasoline and oxygenated gasoline sold, offered for sale, or introduced into commerce after the date 4 years after the promulgation of such regulations.''.
The Administrator shall commence a rulemaking proceeding under this section 211(p) of the Clean Air Act (as added by paragraph (1) of this subsection) promptly after the enactment of this Act.
Other State and Local Variations in Gasoline Prohibited.--(1) Subparagraph (C) of subsection (c)(4) of such Act is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``This subparagraph shall not apply to any gasoline (including reformulated gasoline or oxygenated gasoline) offered for sale, or introduced into commerce after December 31, 2004, and after such date, no State, or political subdivision thereof, (other than the State of California pursuant to subsection (c)(4)(B) or another State exercising the right to opt in to California's reformulated gas standards pursuant to subsection (p)(4)) may prescribe or attempt to enforce any control or prohibition regarding the characteristics or components (including the chemical composition or emission characteristics) of gasoline, or any additive to gasoline, that is not identical to such regulations.''.
Section 211(c)(4)(A) of such Act is amended by inserting after ``for purposes of motor vehicle emission control'' the phrase ``or for any other purpose''.
Not later than 9 months prior to the effective date of regulations under subsection (p) of section 211 of the Clean Air Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall notify each State for which an amendment of the applicable implementation plan under the Clean Air Act will be necessary by reason of the amendment made by this subsection and shall require that each such State submit such revision to the Administrator under section 110 of this Act within 3 months after receiving such notification.
ELIMINATION OF SULFUR REDUCTION PHASE-IN REQUIREMENT.
Amendment.--Section 211(i) of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code 7545(i)) is amended by adding the following at the end thereof: ``(5) Effective September 1, 2006, no person shall manufacture, sell, supply, or offer for sale or supply, dispense, transport, or introduce into commerce motor vehicle diesel fuel which contains a concentration of sulfur in excess of 15 ppm or which fails to meet a cetane minimum index of 40 and a maximum aromatic content of 35 volume percent.''.
Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall promulgate regulations to implement and enforce the requirements of paragraph (5) of section 211(i) of the Clean Air Act, as added by this Act.