This Act may be cited as the ``Supporting Our Patriotic Businesses Act of 2005''.
Congress finds the following: (1) From September 2001 through November 2004, approximately 410,000 members of the reserve components of the Armed Forces, including the National Guard and Reserves, have been mobilized in support of United States military operations.
According to 2004 data from the Manpower Data Center of the Department of Defense, an estimated 35 percent of Guard members and Reservists are either self-employed or own or are employed by a small business.
The majority of privately employed National Guard and Reserve members either work for a small business or are self- employed.
As a result of activations, many small businesses have been forced to go without their owners and key personnel for months, and sometimes years, on end.
The effects have been devastating to such patriotic small businesses.
The Office of Veterans Business Development of the Small Business Administration has made a concerted effort to reach out to small businesses affected by deployments, but given the sheer numbers of those deployed, their resources have been stretched thin.
In addition, the Office of Veterans Business Development has been required to broaden its delivery of services, as directed by Executive Order 13360, to provide procurement training programs for service-disabled veterans.
This Act will help to stem the effects of National Guard and Reservist deployments on small businesses, and better assist veterans and service-disabled veterans with their business needs.
INCREASED FUNDING FOR THE OFFICE OF VETERANS BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Office of Veterans Business Development of the Small Business Administration, and to remain available until expended-- (1) $2,000,000 for fiscal year 2006; (2) $2,100,000 for fiscal year 2007; and (3) $2,200,000 for fiscal year 2008.
PERMANENT EXTENSION OF SBA ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON VETERANS BUSINESS AFFAIRS.
Assumption of Duties.--Section 33 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 657c) is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (h); and (2) by redesignating subsections (i) through (k) as subsections (h) through (j), respectively.
Permanent Extension of Authority.--Section 203 of the Veterans Entrepreneurship and Small Business Development Act of 1999 (15 United States Code 657b note) is amended by striking subsection (h).
PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSING.
In General.--Title VII of the Servicemembers Civil Relief Act (50 United States Code App.
591 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS FOR PROFESSIONAL AND OCCUPATIONAL LICENSES.
Applicability.--This section applies to any servicemember who, after the date of enactment of this section, is ordered to active duty (other than for training) pursuant to section 688, 12301(a), 12301(g), 12302, 12304, 12306, or 12307 of title 10, United States Code, or who is ordered to active duty under section 12301(d) of such title, during a period when members are on active duty pursuant to any such section.
Continuing Education Requirements.--A servicemember described in subsection (a) may not be required to complete the satisfaction of any continuing education requirements imposed with respect to the profession or occupation of the servicemember that accrue during the period of active duty of the servicemember as described in that subsection-- ``(1) during such period of active duty; and ``(2) during the 120-day period beginning on the date of the release of the servicemember from such period of active duty.
Active Duty Defined.--In this section, the term `active duty' has the meaning given that term in section 101(d) of title 10, United States Code.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents for such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Continuing education requirements for professional and occupational licenses.''.
RELIEF FROM TIME LIMITATIONS FOR VETERAN-OWNED SMALL BUSINESSES.
Section 3(q) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(q)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Relief from time limitations.-- ``(A) In general.--Any time limitation on any qualification, certification, or period of participation imposed under this Act on any program available to small business concerns shall be extended for a small business concern that-- ``(i) is owned and controlled by-- ``(I) a veteran who was called or ordered to active duty under a provision of law specified in section 101(a)(13)(B) of title 10, United States, on or after September 11, 2001; or ``(II) a service-disabled veteran who became such a veteran due to an injury or illness incurred or aggravated in the active miliary, naval, or air service during a period of active duty pursuant to a call or order to active duty under a provision of law referred to in subclause (I) on or after September 11, 2001; and ``(ii) was subject to the time limitation during such period of active duty.
Duration.--Upon submission of proper documentation to the Administrator, the extension of a time limitation under subparagraph (A) shall be equal to the period of time that such veteran who owned or controlled such a concern was on active duty as described in that subparagraph.''.
COUNSELING OF MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVES ON NOTIFICATION OF EMPLOYERS REGARDING MOBILIZATION.
Counseling Required.--The Secretary of each military department shall provide each member of a reserve component of the Armed Forces under the jurisdiction of the Secretary who is on active duty for a period of more than 30 days, or on the reserve active-status list, counseling on the importance of notifying such member's employer on a timely basis of any call or order of such member to active duty other than for training.
Frequency of Counseling.--Each member of the Armed Forces described in subsection (a) shall be provided the counseling required by that subsection not less often than once each year.
STUDY ON OPTIONS FOR IMPROVING TIMELY NOTICE OF EMPLOYERS OF MEMBERS OF THE NATIONAL GUARD AND RESERVES REGARDING MOBILIZATION.
Study Required.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a study of the feasibility and advisability of various options for improving the time in which employers of members of the reserve components of the Armed Forces are notified of the call or order of such members to active duty other than for training.
Purpose.--The purpose of the study under paragraph (1) shall be to identify mechanisms, if any, for eliminating or reducing the time between-- (A) the date of the call or order of members of the reserve components of the Armed Forces to active duty; and (B) the date on which employers of such members are notified of the call or order of such members to active duty.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the study conducted under subsection (a).
The report shall include-- (1) a description of the study, including the options addressed under the study; and (2) such recommendations for legislative or administrative action as the Secretary considers appropriate in light of the results of the study.
Appropriate Committees of Congress Defined.--In this section, the term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means-- (1) the Committees on Armed Services and Small Business and Entrepreneurship of the Senate; and (2) the Committees on Armed Services and Small Business of the House of Representatives.