This Act may be cited as the ``Alien Terrorist Removal Act of 1995''.
REMOVAL OF ALIEN TERRORISTS.
The Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101 et sequentes) is amended by inserting the following new section: ``removal of alien terrorists ``Sec.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- ``(1) the term `alien terrorist' means any alien described in section 241(a)(4)(B); ``(2) the term `classified information' has the same meaning as defined in section 1(a) of the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 United States Code App.
; ``(3) the term `national security' has the same meaning as defined in section 1(b) of the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 United States Code App.
; ``(4) the term `special court' means the court described in subsection (c) of this section; and ``(5) the term `special removal hearing' means the hearing described in subsection (e) of this section.
Application for Use of Procedures.--The provisions of this section shall apply whenever the Attorney General certifies under seal to the special court that-- ``(1) the Attorney General or Deputy Attorney General has approved of the proceeding under this section; ``(2) an alien terrorist is physically present in the United States; and ``(3) removal of such alien terrorist by deportation proceedings described in sections 242, 242A, or 242B would pose a risk to the national security of the United States because such proceedings would disclose classified information.
Special Court.-- ``(1) The Chief Justice of the United States shall publicly designate up to seven judges from up to seven United States judicial districts to hear and decide cases arising under this section, in a manner consistent with the designation of judges described in section 103(a) of the Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act (50 United States Code 1803(a)).
The Chief Justice may, in the Chief Justice's discretion, designate the same judges under this section as are designated pursuant to 50 United States Code 1803(a).
Invocation of Special Court Procedure.-- ``(1) When the Attorney General makes the application described in subsection (b), a single judge of the special court shall consider the application in camera and ex parte.
The judge shall invoke the procedures of subsection (e), if the judge determines that there is probable cause to believe that-- ``(A) the alien who is the subject of the application has been correctly identified; ``(B) a deportation proceeding described in sections 242, 242A, or 242B would pose a risk to the national security of the United States because such proceedings would disclose classified information; and ``(C) the threat posed by the alien's physical presence is immediate and involves the risk of death or serious bodily harm.
Special Removal Hearing.-- ``(1) Except as provided in paragraph (4), the special removal hearing authorized by a showing of probable cause described in subsection (d)(2) shall be open to the public.
The alien shall have a right to be present at such hearing and to be represented by counsel.
Any alien financially unable to obtain counsel shall be entitled to have counsel assigned to represent such alien.
Counsel may be appointed as described in section 3006A of title 18, United States Code.
The alien shall have a right to introduce evidence on his own behalf, and except as provided in paragraph (4), shall have a right to cross-examine any witness or request that the judge issue a subpoena for the presence of a named witness.
The judge shall authorize the introduction in camera and ex parte of any item of evidence for which the judge determines that public disclosure would pose a risk to the national security of the United States because it would disclose classified information.
With respect to any evidence described in paragraph (4), the judge shall cause to be delivered to the alien either-- ``(A)(i) the substitution for such evidence of a statement admitting relevant facts that the specific evidence would tend to prove, or (ii) the substitution for such evidence of a summary of the specific evidence; or ``(B) if disclosure of even the substituted evidence described in subparagraph (A) would create a substantial risk of death or serious bodily harm to any person, a statement informing the alien that no such summary is possible.
If the judge determines-- ``(A) that the substituted evidence described in paragraph (5)(A) will provide the alien with substantially the same ability to make his defense as would disclosure of the specific evidence, or ``(B) that disclosure of even the substituted evidence described in paragraph (5)(A) would create a substantial risk of death or serious bodily harm to any person, then the determination of deportation (described in subsection (f)) may be made pursuant to this section.
Determination of Deportation.-- ``(1) If the determination in subsection (e)(6)(A) has been made, the judge shall, considering the evidence on the record as a whole, require that the alien be deported if the Attorney General proves, by clear and convincing evidence, that the alien is subject to deportation because he is an alien as described in section 241(a)(4)(B).
If the determination in subsection (e)(6)(B) has been made, the judge shall, considering the evidence received (in camera and otherwise), require that the alien be deported if the Attorney General proves, by clear, convincing, and unequivocal evidence, that the alien is subject to deportation because he is an alien as described in section 241(a)(4)(B).
Appeals.-- ``(1) The alien may appeal a determination under subsection (f) to the court of appeals for the Federal Circuit, by filing a notice of appeal with such court within twenty days of the determination under such subsection.
The Attorney General may appeal a determination under subsection (d), (e), or (f) to the court of appeals for the Federal Circuit, by filing a notice of appeal with such court within twenty days of the determination under any one of such subsections.
When requested by the Attorney General, the entire record of the proceeding under this section shall be transmitted to the court of appeals under seal.
The court of appeals shall consider such appeal in camera and ex parte.