This Act may be cited as the ``Pharmacy Education Aid Act of 2001''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Pharmacists are an important link in our Nation's health care system.
A critical shortage of pharmacists is threatening the ability of community pharmacies to continue to provide important prescription related services.
The Institute of Medicine (``IOM'') prepared a landmark report on medical errors, including medication errors.
In the report, entitled ``To Err is Human: Building a Safer Health System'', IOM indicated that medication errors can be partially attributed to factors such as staff shortages; having too many customers places great pressure on available staff, leading to a lack of concentration.
In section 5 of Public Law 106-129, the Congress acknowledged a growing demand for pharmacists by requiring the Secretary of Health and Human Services to conduct a study to determine whether there is a shortage of pharmacists in the United States and, if so, to what extent.
The study required by Public Law 106-129 was conducted by the Health Resources and Services Administration (``HRSA'').
The report from the study was submitted to the Congress in December 2000, and is entitled ``The Pharmacist Workforce: A Study in Supply and Demand for Pharmacists''.
The findings described in the HRSA report include the following: (A) ``While the overall supply of pharmacists has increased in the past decade, there has been an unprecedented demand for pharmacists and for pharmaceutical care services, which has not been met by the currently available supply.''
The ``evidence clearly indicates the emergence of a shortage of pharmacists over the past two years.''
``The factors causing the current shortage are of a nature not likely to abate in the near future without fundamental changes in pharmacy practice and education.''
In the report, HRSA projects that the number of prescriptions filled by community pharmacists will increase 20 percent by 2004.
In contrast, the number of community pharmacists is expected to increase only 6 percent by 2005.
The demand for pharmacists will increase as prescription drug use continues to grow.
The Federal Government has a role and the responsibility, through programs such as the National Health Service Corps and programs under title VII of the Public Health Service Act, to ensure access to pharmacists services.
Although the statutory provisions for the program for the National Health Service Corps expressly reference physicians, dentists, certified nurse midwives, certified nurse practitioners, and physician assistants, there is no statutory reference to pharmacists.
The National Health Service Corps statute should provide for the significant participation of pharmacists.
INCLUSION OF PRACTICE OF PHARMACY IN PROGRAM FOR NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS.
Inclusion in Corps Mission.--Section 331(a)(3) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254d(a)(3)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (D), by adding at the end the following: ``Such term includes pharmacist services.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(E)(i) The term `pharmacist services' includes medication therapy management services.
The term `medication therapy management services', with respect to pharmacist services, includes services to assure that medications are used appropriately by patients; to enhance patients' understanding of the appropriate use of medications; to increase patients' adherence to prescription medication regimens; to reduce the risk of adverse events associated with medications; and to reduce the need for other costly medical services through better management of medication therapy.
Such services may include case management, disease management, drug therapy management, patient training and education, counseling, drug therapy problem resolution, medication administration, the provision of special packaging, or other services that enhance the use of prescription medications.''.
Scholarship Program.--Section 338A(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254l(a)(1)) is amended by inserting ``pharmacists,'' after ``physicians,''.
Loan Repayment Program.--Section 338B(a)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254l-1(a)(1)) is amended by inserting ``pharmacists,'' after ``physicians,''.
Funding.--Section 338H(b)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254q(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by inserting before the period the following: ``, which may include such contracts for individuals who are in a course of study or program leading to a pharmacy degree''; and (2) by adding at the end the following subparagraph: ``(C) Scholarships for first-year study in pharmacy.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall obligate not less than 10 percent for the purpose of providing contracts for scholarships under this subpart to individuals who are entering the first year of study in a course of study or program leading to a pharmacy degree.
Amounts obligated under this subparagraph shall be in addition to amounts obligated under subparagraph (A).''.
CERTAIN HEALTH PROFESSIONS PROGRAMS REGARDING PRACTICE OF PHARMACY.
Part E of title VII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 294n et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following subpart: ``Subpart 3--Certain Workforce Programs ``SEC.
Recruiting and Retaining Students and Faculty.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make awards of grants or contracts to qualifying schools of pharmacy (as defined in subsection (f)) for the purpose of carrying out programs for recruiting and retaining students and teaching faculty for such schools, including programs to provide scholarships for attendance at such schools to full-time students who have financial need for the scholarships and who demonstrate a commitment to becoming practicing pharmacists or faculty regarding the practice of pharmacy.
Preference in providing scholarships.--An award may not be made under paragraph (1) unless the qualifying school of pharmacy involved agrees that, in providing scholarships pursuant to the award, the school will give preference to students for whom the costs of attending the school would constitute a severe financial hardship.
Loan Repayment Program Regarding Faculty Positions.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may establish a program of entering into contracts with individuals described in paragraph (2) under which the individuals agree to serve as members of the faculties of qualifying schools of pharmacy in consideration of the Federal Government agreeing to pay, for each year of such service, not more than $20,000 of the principal and interest of the educational loans of such individuals.
Eligible individuals.--The individuals referred to in paragraph (1) are individuals who-- ``(A) have a doctoral degree in pharmacy or the pharmaceutical sciences; or ``(B) are enrolled in a school of pharmacy and are in the final academic year of such school in a program leading to such a doctoral degree.
Requirements regarding faculty positions.--The Secretary may not enter into a contract under paragraph (1) unless-- ``(A) the individual involved has entered into a contract with a qualifying school of pharmacy to serve as a member of the faculty of the school for not less than 2 years; ``(B) the contract referred to in subparagraph (A) provides that, in serving as a member of the faculty pursuant to such subparagraph, the individual will-- ``(i) serve full time; or ``(ii) serve as a member of the adjunct clinical faculty and in so serving will actively supervise pharmacy students for 25 academic weeks per year (or such greater number of academic weeks as may be specified in the contract); and ``(C) such contract provides that-- ``(i) the school will, for each year for which the individual will serve as a member of the faculty under the contract with the school, make payments of the principal and interest due on the educational loans of the individual for such year in an amount equal to the amount of such payments made by the Secretary for the year; ``(ii) the payments made by the school pursuant to clause (i) on behalf of the individual will be in addition to the pay that the individual would otherwise receive for serving as a member of such faculty; and ``(iii) the school, in making a determination of the amount of compensation to be provided by the school to the individual for serving as a member of the faculty, will make the determination without regard to the amount of payments made (or to be made) to the individual by the Federal Government under paragraph (1).
Applicability of certain provisions.--The provisions of sections 338C, 338G, and 338I shall apply to the program established in paragraph (1) to the same extent and in the same manner as such provisions apply to the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program established in subpart III of part D of title III, including the applicability of provisions regarding reimbursements for increased tax liability and provisions regarding bankruptcy.
Waiver regarding school contributions.--The Secretary may waive the requirement established in paragraph (3)(C) if the Secretary determines that the requirement will impose an undue financial hardship on the school involved.
Information Technology.--The Secretary may make awards of grants or contracts to qualifying schools of pharmacy for the purpose of assisting such schools in acquiring and installing computer-based systems to provide pharmaceutical education.
Education provided through such systems may be graduate education, professional education, or continuing education.
The computer-based systems may be designed to provide on-site education, or education at remote sites (commonly referred to as distance learning), or both.
Facilities.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make awards of grants or contracts to qualifying schools of pharmacy for construction projects to expand, remodel, renovate, or alter existing facilities for such schools or to provide new facilities for the schools.
Certain restrictions.--An award under paragraph (1) may not be expended for the costs of acquiring land or for off- site improvements.
Recapture of payments.--If, during the 20-year period beginning on the date of the completion of construction pursuant to paragraph (1)-- ``(A) the school of pharmacy involved, or other owner of the facility, ceases to be a public or nonprofit private entity; or ``(B) the facility involved ceases to be used for the purposes for which it was constructed (unless the Secretary determines, in accordance with regulations, that there is good cause for releasing the school or other owner from such obligation); the United States is entitled to recover from the school or other owner of the facility the amount bearing the same ratio to the current value (as determined by an agreement between the parties or by action brought in the United States District Court for the district in which such facility is situated) of the facility as the amount of the Federal participation bore to the cost of the construction of such facility.
Requirement Regarding Education in Practice of Pharmacy.-- With respect to the qualifying school of pharmacy involved, the Secretary shall ensure that programs and activities carried out with Federal funds provided under this section have the goal of educating students to become licensed pharmacists, or the goal of providing for faculty to educate students to become licensed pharmacists.
Qualifying School of Pharmacy.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualifying school of pharmacy' means a school of pharmacy (as defined in section 799B) that, in providing clinical experience for students, requires that the students serve in a clinical rotation in which pharmacist services (as defined in section 331(a)(3)(E)) are provided at or for-- ``(1) a medical facility that serves a substantial number of individuals who reside in or are members of a medically underserved community (as so defined); ``(2) an entity described in any of subparagraphs (A) through (L) of section 340B(a)(4) (relating to the definition of covered entity); ``(3) a health care facility of the Department of Veterans Affairs or of any of the Armed Forces of the United States; ``(4) a health care facility of the Bureau of Prisons; ``(5) a health care facility operated by, or with funds received from, the Indian Health Service; or ``(6) a disproportionate share hospital under section 1923 of the Social Security Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.