This Act may be cited as the ``Special Blue Ribbon Commission on Chesapeake Bay Nutrient Pollution Control Financing Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a commission to oversee development of a comprehensive plan to-- (1) remove the Chesapeake Bay from the Environmental Protection Agency listing of impaired waterways by the year 2010; (2) reduce the sediment and nutrient loadings to the Chesapeake Bay to meet the water quality goals of the Chesapeake 2000 Agreement; (3)(A) identify the availability of Federal, state, and local financial resources to achieve the reduction of sediment and nutrient loadings to the Chesapeake Bay; and (B) recommend the allocation of those financial resources; and (4) identify the private and public partnerships that may be established to provide resources to the effort to reduce sediment and nutrient loadings to the Chesapeake Bay.
Establishment.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall establish a commission to be known as the ``Special Blue Ribbon Commission on Chesapeake Bay Nutrient Pollution Control Financing'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Members.--The Commission shall be composed of 21 members, including-- (A) each of the signatories to the Chesapeake Bay Agreement; (B) each of the governors of the States of Delaware, New York, and West Virginia or their designees; and (C) not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 12 members appointed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in consultation with the other members of the Executive Council of the Chesapeake Bay program, that-- (i) include at least 3 members representing local governments in Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Virginia; (ii) include, from the Chesapeake Bay watershed, at least-- (I) 1 member from an academic, technical, or scientific institution; (II) 1 member from the business community; (III) 1 member from the agricultural community; and (IV) 1 member from environmental organizations; and (iii) are balanced by area of expertise and balanced geographically, to the extent consistent with maintaining the highest level of expertise on the Commission.
Chairperson.--The members of the Commission shall elect a chairperson from among the members of the Commission.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Public meetings.--Any meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public.
Notice.--Notice of each meeting of the Commission shall be published in media outlets of the Chesapeake Bay watershed area in advance of the meeting.
Recordkeeping.--Minutes of any meetings of the Commission shall be kept by the Commission.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold the initial meeting of the Commission.
Required meetings.--The Commission shall hold not less than 1 meeting in each of-- (A) Virginia; (B) Maryland; and (C) Pennsylvania.
In General.--The Commission shall oversee development of a comprehensive implementation plan to address-- (1) the funding needs for reducing, by not later than 2010, nutrient pollution loads in the Chesapeake Bay to a level sufficient to comply with the nutrient and sediment reduction goals of the Chesapeake 2000 Agreement; (2) the appropriate responsibilities of the Federal Government and State and local governments-- (A) in financing-- (i) sewage treatment plant upgrades; (ii) agricultural and other nonpoint source runoff controls; and (iii) urban stormwater management; and (B) in adopting, or facilitating the adoption of, an appropriate variety of financial incentives and regulatory measures to achieve that goal; and (3) opportunities for enhancing the role of the private sector in financial support for the restoration of the Chesapeake Bay, either directly or through public-private partnerships.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which the Commission is established, the Commission shall submit to the President and Congress a report that contains-- (A) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, including recommendations of the Commission for administrative or legislative actions at the Federal, State, and local levels that are necessary and expedient to implement the comprehensive plan described in section 4(a) to restore the water quality of the Chesapeake Bay; and (B) a summary of the public comments received in accordance with the notice in paragraph (2).
Notice and public comment.--Before submitting the report in paragraph (1), the Commission shall publish in appropriate publications a notice that a draft report is available for public review and comment.
Information From Federal Agencies.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may secure directly from a Federal agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Provision of information.--On request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of the agency shall provide the information to the Commission.
Multidisciplinary Science and Technical Advisory Panel.-- (1) In general.--To assist the Commission in carrying out the duties of the Commission under section 4, the Commission may establish a multidisciplinary science and technical advisory panel composed of members appointed by the Commission that are experts in-- (A) the science and technology of-- (i) water quality improvement; or (ii) sediment and nutrient removal; and (B) public financing.
Use of best available data.--The science advisory panel shall ensure that the scientific information considered by the Commission is based on the best available scientific, technical, and public financing data.
Contracts.--The Commission may, subject to the availability of appropriations, enter into such contracts as are necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws (including regulations), appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as are necessary to enable the Commission to perform the duties of the Commission.
Confirmation of executive director.--The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits the final report of the Commission under section 4(b)(1).