This Act may be cited as the ``Child Care Facilities Financing Act''.
TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE GRANTS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Child care facility.--The term ``child care facility'' means a center-based or home-based child care facility.
Eligible intermediary.--The term ``eligible intermediary'' means a private, nonprofit intermediary organization that has demonstrated experience in-- (A) providing technical or financial assistance for the construction and renovation of physical facilities; (B) providing technical or financial assistance to child care providers; and (C) securing private sources for capital financing of child care or other low-income community development.
Eligible recipient.--The term ``eligible recipient'' means-- (A) any existing or new center-based or home-based child care provider that provides services to eligible children under a program carried out under the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858 et sequentes), or another program serving low-income children as determined by the Secretary; and (B) any organization in the process of establishing a center-based or home-based child care program or otherwise seeking to provide child care services to children described in subparagraph (A).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Grant Authority.--The Secretary may award grants on a competitive basis in accordance with this section to eligible intermediaries to assist the intermediaries in carrying out the activities described in subsection (e).
Applications.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section an eligible intermediary shall submit to the Secretary an application, in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Priority.-- (1) In general.--In awarding grants under this section the Secretary shall give priority to applicants under subsection (c) that propose to assist eligible recipients that serve-- (A) low-income areas, such as-- (i) a community that-- (I) is in a metropolitan area; and (II) has a median household income that is not more than 80 percent of the median household income of the metropolitan area; or (ii) a community that-- (I) is not in a metropolitan area; and (II) has a median income that is not more than 80 percent of the median household income of the State in which the community is located; or (B) low-income individuals, such as an individual who is an eligible child, as defined in section 658P of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858m).
Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``metropolitan area'' has the meaning given the term in section 102 of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5302).
Use of Funds.-- (1) Revolving fund.--Each eligible intermediary that receives a grant under this section shall deposit the grant amount into a child care revolving fund established by the eligible intermediary.
Payments from fund.--Subject to subsection (f), from amounts deposited into the revolving fund under paragraph (1), each eligible intermediary shall provide technical and financial assistance (in the form of loans, grants, investments, guarantees, interest subsidies, and other appropriate forms of assistance) to eligible recipients to pay for the Federal share of the cost of the acquisition, construction, or improvement of child care facilities or equipment, or for the improvement of related management and business practices, for each such recipient.
The amounts may be used solely for the purpose of providing technical or financial assistance.
Loan repayments and investment proceeds.--Any amount received by an eligible intermediary from an eligible recipient in the form of a loan repayment or investment proceeds shall be deposited into the child care revolving fund of the eligible intermediary for redistribution to other eligible recipients in accordance with this section.
Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--The Federal share of the cost described in subsection (e)(2) shall be not more than 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost may be provided in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.