This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Autoimmune Diseases Research and Prevention Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) The term ``autoimmune disease'' refers to a varied group of more than 80 serious, chronic illnesses that involve the human organ system, the nervous, gastrointestinal and endocrine systems, the skin and other connective tissues, eyes, and blood and blood vessels.
These diseases include, but are not limited to, Epstein-Barr virus, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, Graves' disease, and vasculitis syndromes.
50 million Americans are afflicted with some form of autoimmune disease.
75 percent of autoimmune diseases occur in women, most frequently during but not limited to the childbearing years.
Taken together, autoimmune diseases represent the fourth largest cause of disability among women in the United States.
Female-to-male ratios in autoimmune diseases are dramatically skewed toward women, in some cases by ratios as high as 50 to 1.
Autoimmune diseases remain among the most poorly understood and poorly recognized of any category of illnesses; while science suggest they may have a genetric component, they can cluster in families as different illnesses.
To help women live longer, healthier lives, more research is needed to shed light on genetic as well as hormonal and environmental risk factors that contribute to the causes of these diseases, as well as providing early diagnosis and treatment.
EXPANSION AND INTENSIFICATION OF ACTIVITIES REGARDING AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES ON WOMEN.
Part P of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 280g et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
AUTOIMMUNE DISEASES IN WOMEN.
Definition.--In this section, an `autoimmune disease' means an illness in which the body's immune system becomes misdirected, attacking the organs it was designed to protect.
It includes, but is not limited to, Epstein-Barr virus, lupus, rheumatoid arthritis, scleroderma, multiple sclerosis, Guillain-Barre syndrome, Hashimoto's throiditis, Graves disease, and vasculitis syndromes.
In General.--The Director of the Office on Women's Health in the Department of Health and Human Services shall expand, intensify, and coordinate research and related activities of the Department with respect to autoimmune diseases in women.
Coordination With Other Institutes.--The Director of the Office on Women's Health shall coordinate activities under subsection (b) with other similar activities conducted by the other national research institutes and agencies of the National Institutes of Health to the extent that such Institutes and agencies have responsibilities that are related to autoimmune diseases in women.
Certain Programs.--In carrying out subsection (b), the Director of the Office of Women's Health shall conduct or support research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and develop methods for preventing, autoimmune diseases in women.
Activities under such subsection shall include conducting and supporting the following: ``(1) Research to determine the prevalence of autoimmune diseases in women, including African American women and other women who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups.
Basic research concerning the etiology and causes of autoimmune diseases in women, including genetic, hormonal, and environmental factors.
Epidemiological studies to address the frequency and natural history of such diseases and the differences among men and women, and among racial and ethnic groups, with respect to such diseases.
The development of safe, efficient, and cost- effective diagnostic approaches to evaluating women with suspected autoimmune diseases.
Clinical research for the development and evaluation of new treatments for women, including rehabilitation.
Studies to gain a better understanding of methods of preventing autoimmune diseases in women.
Information and education programs for patients and health care providers on genetic, hormonal, and environmental risk factors associated with autoimmune diseases in women, and on the importance of the prevention or control of such risk factors and timely referral with appropriate diagnosis and treatment.
Such programs shall include information and education on the prevalence and nature of autoimmune diseases in women, and on health-related behaviors that can improve certain risk factors.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
The authorization of appropriations established in the preceding sentence is in addition to any other authorization of appropriation that is available for such purpose.