This Act may be cited as the ``Long-Term Care Act of 1994''.
NONRECOGNITION OF GAIN ON SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE TO EXTENT PROCEEDS USED FOR ENTRANCE INTO CONTINUING CARE RETIREMENT COMMUNITY.
In General.--Section 1034 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rollover of gain of sale of principal residence) is amended by redesignating subsection (l) as subsection (m) and by inserting after subsection (k) the following new subsection: ``(l) Nonrecognition of Gain If New Residence Is Qualified Continuing Care Retirement Community.-- ``(1) In general.--Gross income shall not include gain from the sale of the principal residence of the taxpayer if-- ``(A) the taxpayer attained age 55 before the date of such sale, and ``(B) within the 2-year period beginning on such date, the taxpayer has as his principal residence a qualified continuing care retirement community.
Limitation.--The amount excluded from gross income under paragraph (1) shall not exceed the amount paid by the taxpayer during such 2-year period to such retirement community in order for the taxpayer or his spouse to reside in such community.
Recapture in certain cases.-- ``(A) In general.--If the taxpayer ceases to have as his principal residence (other than by reason of death) a qualified continuing care retirement community, the amount excluded from gross income under paragraph (1) shall be included in gross income for the taxable year in which such cessation occurs.
Exceptions.--The amount includible in gross income under subparagraph (A) shall be reduced by the amount paid by the taxpayer (during the 6-month period after the date of cessation)-- ``(i) to a qualified continuing care retirement community in order for the taxpayer or his spouse to reside in such community (but only if the community becomes the principal residence of the taxpayer or his spouse during such period), or ``(ii) for qualified long-term care expenses (as defined in section 408(d)(8)) of the taxpayer or his spouse.
Special rules for married individuals.--In the case of a husband and wife who file a joint return for the taxable year which includes the date of the sale of the old residence-- ``(A) the age requirement of paragraph (1)(A) shall be treated as met if either spouse meets such requirement, and ``(B) paragraph (3) shall be applied by taking into account one-half of the gain with respect to each spouse.
Qualified continuing care retirement community.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified continuing care retirement community' has the meaning given such term by section 7872(g).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to old residences sold after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME FOR AMOUNTS WITHDRAWN FROM INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT PLANS FOR LONG-TERM CARE.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax treatment of distributions from individual retirement plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(8) Distributions for qualified long-term care expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--No amount (which but for this paragraph would be includible in the gross income of the payee or distributee under paragraph (1)) shall be included in gross income during the taxable year if-- ``(i) the payee or distributee has attained age 59\1/2\ on or before the date of the distribution, and ``(ii) the distribution is used during such year to pay qualified long-term care expenses for the benefit of the payee or distributee or the spouse of the payee or distributee if such spouse has attained age 59\1/2\ on or before the date of the distribution.
Qualified long-term care expenses.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `qualified long- term care expenses' means any amount paid-- ``(i) as premiums for any qualified long- term care insurance policy, or ``(ii) for services of a type for which coverage may be provided under a qualified long-term care insurance policy.
Qualified long-term care insurance policy.-- For purposes of subparagraph (B)-- ``(i) In general.--Subject to clause (ii), the term `qualified long-term care insurance policy' means an insurance policy or rider, issued by a qualified issuer, and certified by the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in accordance with procedures similar to the procedures prescribed in section 1882 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1385ss) used in the certification of medicare supplemental policies (as defined in subsection (g)(1) of such section)) to be advertised, marketed, offered, or designed to provide coverage-- ``(I) for not less than 12 consecutive months for each covered person, ``(II) on an expense incurred, indemnity, or prepaid basis, ``(III) for 1 or more medically necessary, diagnostic services, preventive services, therapeutic services, rehabilitation services, maintenance services, personal care services, or continuing care services, and ``(IV) provided in a setting other than an acute care unit of a hospital.
Coverage specifically excluded.-- Such term does not include any insurance policy or rider which is offered primarily to provide any combination of the following kinds of coverage: ``(I) Basic Medicare supplement coverage.
Basic hospital expense coverage.
Basic medical-surgical expense coverage.
Hospital confinement indemnity coverage.
Major medical expense coverage.
Disability income protection coverage.
Limited benefit health coverage.
Qualified issuer.--For purposes of clause (i), the term `qualified issuer' means any of the following: ``(I) Private insurance company.
Nonprofit medical service corporation.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to distributions after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.
INCREASE IN EXCLUSION OF GAIN ON SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE BY INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE ATTAINED AGE 55 FOR AMOUNTS SET ASIDE FOR LONG-TERM CARE.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 121(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to one-time exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence by individual who has attained age 55) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Dollar limitation.-- ``(A) In general.--The amount of the gain excluded from gross income under subsection (a) shall not exceed $125,000 ($62,500 in the case of a separate return by a married individual).
Exception for amounts set aside for long-term care.-- ``(i) In general.--The dollar amount applicable under subparagraph (A) shall be increased by the amount set aside by the taxpayer (during the taxable year in which the sale or exchange occurs) in a separate account the principal and earnings on which are to be used by the taxpayer only to pay qualified long-term care expenses (as defined in section 408(d)(8)) for the benefit of the taxpayer or the spouse of the taxpayer.
Tax on amounts not used for long- term care expenses.--If any amount paid or distributed from an account described in clause (i) is used other than to pay qualified long- term care expenses (as so defined) for the benefit of the taxpayer or the spouse of the taxpayer-- ``(I) such amount shall be includible in gross income for the taxable year in which paid or distributed, and ``(II) the taxpayer's tax imposed by this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to 10 percent of such amount.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to sales and exchanges after the date of the enactment of this Act in taxable years ending after such date.
FEDERAL PREEMPTION RELATING TO REVERSE MORTGAGE LOANS.
Laws Relating Generally to Mortgages.--No State or political subdivision of a State may establish, continue in effect, or enforce any mortgage loan law, as such law applies to any reverse mortgage loan, unless the mortgage loan law expressly applies to reverse mortgage loans (or to certain types of such loans) or on its face evidences the existence of reverse mortgage loans (or certain types of such loans).
Savings Provision.--Subsection (a) may not be construed-- (1) to annul, alter, or affect any mortgage loan law as such law applies to any mortgage loan that is not a reverse mortgage loan; or (2) to limit the authority of any State or any political subdivision of a State to establish, continue in effect, or enforce any provision of law expressly applicable to reverse mortgage loans (or certain types of such loans).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Mortgage loan.--The term ``mortgage loan'' means any loan for the unpaid purchase price of real property or advances on real property that, pursuant to the laws of the applicable State or political subdivision of a State, is secured by any lien on or interest in the property.
Mortgage loan law.--The term ``mortgage loan law'' means any law that applies to any mortgage loan or regulates, limits, authorizes, or otherwise affects any mortgage loan.
Reverse mortgage.--The term ``reverse mortgage'' means any mortgage loan-- (A) that is secured by a dwelling that is the principal residence of the borrower and is designed principally as a 1-family residence; (B) under which payments are made to the borrower based on the equity of the borrower in the residence; (C) under which no repayment of principal and interest is required until the entire indebtedness under the loan becomes due and payable; and (D) that provides that the borrower shall not be liable for any remaining indebtedness resulting from the failure of the security for the loan to cover the entire indebtedness under the loan.
PROCEEDS FROM REVERSE MORTGAGE LOANS NOT TREATED AS INCOME OR RECEIPTS FOR MEANS-TESTED PROGRAMS.
For purposes of any Federal program and any State or local program financed in whole or in part with Federal funds-- (1) any payment under a reverse mortgage (as defined in section 5) made to an individual shall not be taken into account as income or receipts for purposes of determining the eligibility, for the month in which such payment is made or any month thereafter, of such individual or any other individual for benefits or assistance, or the amount or extent of benefits or assistance, under such a program, and (2) any unpaid amounts under such a mortgage shall be treated as the borrower's equity in the residence and shall not be treated as loan proceeds.