OF IRAN'S PAST MILITARY DIMENSIONS OF IRAN'S NUCLEAR PROGRAM.
Not later than 30 calendar days after the IAEA submits its final assessment on the resolution on all past and present outstanding issues related to Iran's nuclear program to the Board of Governors, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a detailed report on the IAEA's report to the Board of Governors, and shall provide to the appropriate congressional committees and leadership a briefing, in a classified setting as necessary, on how outstanding issues were resolved by the IAEA.
STATEMENT OF POLICY ON EFFECTIVE RE-IMPOSITION OF SANCTIONS.
Finding.--There is a wide range of national and multilateral tools, including the re-imposition of sanctions, available to the United States and United States partners, including European allies, should Iran fail to meet its JCPOA commitments.
Statements of Policy.-- (1) The United States is prepared to enforce any violation of the JCPOA.
The United States should continue to ensure that a range of national and multilateral tools remain available to respond to non-performance by Iran of its JCPOA commitments.
The United States will continue to leverage the commitments of its European allies to join in re-imposing sanctions in a calibrated manner as appropriate in the event Iran violates the JCPOA incrementally.
UNITED STATES COORDINATOR FOR THE JOINT COMPREHENSIVE PLAN OF ACTION.
Designation.--The President shall designate within the Department of State a special coordinator for implementation of and compliance with the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action regarding the Iran's nuclear program (in this section referred to as the ``Coordinator'').
Status.--The role of the Coordinator should be filled by an official of the Department of State appointed by and serving at the pleasure of the President.
Duties.--The Coordinator shall carry out the following duties: (1) Coordinate all activities related to implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action, including-- (A) activities of the United States Government necessary for implementation of the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action; (B) activities of the United States Government to monitor all elements of the implementation of the JCPOA by Iran and track all incidences of noncompliance with the JCPOA; and (C) with the Secretary of Energy, activities of the United States Government with respect to the JCPOA that involve the International Atomic Energy Agency and other nongovernmental or multilateral organizations, as appropriate.
Coordinate with the Department of the Treasury and other agencies as appropriate-- (A) to ensure the continued comprehensive investigation and designation of persons providing support for, or otherwise facilitating, the ability of the Government of Iran-- (i) to acquire, develop, or engage in the proliferation of ballistic missiles or cruise missiles; (ii) to support, directly or indirectly, acts of international terrorism; or (iii) to commit human rights abuses; and (B) to assess and report on the use by the Government of Iran of funds made available through sanctions relief.
Consultations.--The Coordinator shall consult with Congress, domestic and international nongovernmental organizations, and multilateral organizations and institutions as the Coordinator considers appropriate to fulfill the purposes of this section.
UNIFIED POLICY ON ARMS AND BALLISTIC AND CRUISE MISSILE SALES TO IRAN.
It is the sense of Congress that Iran should continue to be prohibited from undertaking any activity related to ballistic or cruise missiles capable of delivering nuclear weapons, including launches using ballistic or cruise missile technology, and United Nations member states should take all necessary measures to prevent the transfer of technology or technical assistance to Iran related to such activities.
16. INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) must have sufficient funding, manpower, and authority to undertake its verification responsibilities related to the JCPOA or any other related agreement, and the President should engage with international partners to ensure that the IAEA receives the full additional $10,600,000 per year necessary to fulfill its verification responsibilities under the JCPOA or any other related agreement.
Report.--Not later than January 10, 2016, and every 180 days thereafter, the President shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report outlining efforts with international partners to achieve the goal in subsection (a) and identifying impediments to achieving the goal.
Authorization.--There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 2016 through 2026 such sums as may be necessary to meet the United States annual funding commitments to the IAEA as well as the United States portion of additional funds needed for the IAEA to fulfill its verification responsibilities under the JCPOA or any other related agreement.
In this Act: (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate; and (B) the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Financial Services, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives.
Appropriate congressional committees and leadership.-- The term ``appropriate congressional committees and leadership'' means the appropriate congressional committees, the Majority and Minority Leaders of the Senate, and the Speaker, Majority Leader, and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Joint comprehensive plan of action.--The term ``Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action'' means the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action signed at Vienna on July 14, 2015, by Iran and by France, Germany, the Russian Federation, the People's Republic of China, the United Kingdom, and the United States, and all implementing materials and agreements related to the Joint Comprehensive Plan of Action.
Intelligence community.--The term ``intelligence community'' means the intelligence community specified in or designated under section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 3003(4)).