This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Telehealth and Telemedicine Improvement Act''.
Teleconsultation and Teleretinal Imaging.-- (1) In general.--Subchapter I of chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Teleconsultation and teleretinal imaging ``(a) Teleconsultation.--(1) The Secretary shall carry out a program to increase the use of teleconsultation, telemedicine, telehealth, and home telehealth by the Department.
The Secretary shall, in consultation with appropriate professional societies, promulgate technical and clinical care standards for the use of teleconsultation services within facilities of the Department.
Teleretinal Imaging.--(1) The Secretary shall carry out a program to increase the use of teleretinal imaging by the Department in each Veterans Integrated Services Network.
In each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2013 and ending with fiscal year 2018, the Secretary shall increase the number of patients enrolled in each teleretinal imaging program under paragraph (1) by not less than five percent from the number of patients enrolled in each respective program in the previous fiscal year.
Annual Reports.--Not later than March 1 of each year, the Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the Department's implementation of telehealth and telemedicine programs, including the program of teleconsultation, telemedicine, telehealth, and home telehealth under subsection (a) and the program of teleretinal imaging under subsection (b).
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `home telehealth' includes, but is not limited to, the use of telecommunication technology and information technology to support the monitoring, transmission, and interpretation of clinical data derived from patients situated in a home, community, or other non-health-care facility setting.
The term `teleconsultation' includes, but is not limited to, the use by a health care provider of telecommunication technology and information technology to assist another health care provider, at a distant site, in their management, assessment, diagnosis, and treatment of a patient.
The term `telehealth' includes, but is not limited to, the use of telecommunication technology and information technology to support the provision of health care in situations where the patient and health care provider are separated by geographic distance.
The term `telemedicine' includes, but is not limited to, the use of telecommunication technology and information technology to support the provision of health care in situations where the patient and health care provider are separated by geographic distance and the provider is directly managing the care of the patient.
The term `teleretinal imaging' includes, but is not limited to, the use of telecommunication technology and information technology to support the remote assessment of eye conditions.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 17 of such title is amended by inserting after the item related to section 1708 the following new item: ``1709.
Teleconsultation and teleretinal imaging.''.
Training in Telemedicine.-- (1) Medical residents.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall require each Department of Veterans Affairs facility that is involved in the training of medical residents to work with each university concerned to develop an elective rotation in telemedicine for such residents.
Rural veterans.--The Secretary shall provide health care professionals of the Department with education and training with respect to using telemedicine to provide care to veterans in rural areas.
Enhancement of VERA.-- (1) Incentives for provision of teleconsultation, teleretinal imaging, telemedicine, and telehealth services.-- The Secretary shall modify the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation system to provide incentives for the use of teleconsultation, teleretinal imaging, telemedicine, and telehealth coordination services.
Inclusion of telemedicine visits in workload reporting.--The Secretary shall modify the Veterans Equitable Resource Allocation system to require the inclusion of all telemedicine visits in the calculation of facility workload.
Definitions.--In this section, the terms ``teleconsultation'', ``telehealth'', ``telemedicine'', and ``teleretinal imaging'' have the meanings given such terms in section 1709(d) of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a)(1).
AUTHORITY TO WAIVE COLLECTION OF COPAYMENTS FOR TELEHEALTH AND TELEMEDICINE VISITS OF VETERANS.
In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1722A the following new section: ``Sec.
Copayments: waiver of collection of copayments for telehealth and telemedicine visits of veterans ``(a) In General.--The Secretary may waive the imposition or collection of copayments for teleconsultation, telemedicine, teleretinal imaging, telehealth, and home telehealth visits of veterans under the laws administered by the Secretary.
Definitions.--The terms `teleconsultation', `telemedicine', `teleretinal imaging', `telehealth', and `home telehealth' have the meanings given such terms in section 1709(d) of this title.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 17 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1722A the following new item: ``1722B.
Copayments: waiver of collection of copayments for telehealth and telemedicine visits of veterans.