This Act may be cited as the ``Global Nuclear Security Initiative Act of 2002''.
SECURITY OF NUCLEAR MATERIALS AND FACILITIES WORLDWIDE.
Sense of Congress on Program To Secure Stockpiles of Highly Enriched Uranium and Plutonium.--(1) It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Secretary of State and Secretary of Defense, should develop a comprehensive program of activities to encourage all countries with nuclear materials to adhere to, or to adopt standards equivalent to, the International Atomic Energy Agency standard on The Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities (INFCIRC/225/Rev.4), relating to the security of stockpiles of highly enriched uranium (HEU) and plutonium (Pu).
To the maximum extent practicable, the program should be developed in consultation with the Russian Federation, other Group of 8 countries, and other allies of the United States.
Activities under the program may include specific, targeted incentives intended to encourage countries that cannot undertake the expense of conforming to the standard referred to in paragraph (1) to relinquish their highly enriched uranium or plutonium, including incentives in which a country, group of countries, or international body-- (A) purchases such materials and provides for their security (including by removal to another location); (B) undertakes the costs of decommissioning facilities that house such materials; (C) in the case of research reactors, converts such reactors to low-enriched uranium reactors; or (D) upgrades the security of facilities that house such materials in order to meet stringent security standards that are established for purposes of the program based upon agreed best practices.
Study of Program To Secure Certain Radiological Materials.--(1) The Secretary of Energy, acting through the Administrator for Nuclear Security, shall require the Office of International Materials Protection, Control, and Accounting of the Department of Energy to conduct a study to determine the feasibility and advisability of developing a program to secure radiological materials outside the United States that pose a threat to the national security of the United States.
The study under paragraph (1) shall include the following: (A) An identification of the categories of radiological materials that are covered by that paragraph, including an order of priority for securing each category of such radiological materials.
An estimate of the number of sites at which such radiological materials are present.
An assessment of the effort required to secure such radiological materials at such sites, including-- (i) a description of the security upgrades, if any, that are required at such sites; (ii) an assessment of the costs of securing such radiological materials at such sites; (iii) a description of any cost-sharing arrangements to defray such costs; (iv) a description of any legal impediments to such effort, including a description of means of overcoming such impediments; and (v) a description of the coordination required for such effort among appropriate United States Government entities (including the Nuclear Regulatory Commission), participating countries, and international bodies (including the International Atomic Energy Agency).
A description of the pilot project undertaken in Russia.
In identifying categories of radiological materials under paragraph (2)(A), the Secretary shall take into account matters relating to specific activity, half-life, radiation type and energy, attainability, difficulty of handling, and toxicity, and such other matters as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the study conducted under this subsection.
The report shall include the matters specified under paragraph (2) and such other matters, including recommendations, as the Secretary considers appropriate as a result of the study.
In this subsection, the term ``radiological material'' means any radioactive material, other than plutonium or uranium enriched above 20 percent uranium-235.
Study of Actions To Address Terrorist Threat to Nuclear Power Plants Outside the United States.--(1) The Secretary of Energy shall, in consultation with the Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the International Atomic Energy Agency, conduct a study of the feasibility and advisability of various actions to reduce the risks associated with terrorist attacks on nuclear power plants outside the United States.
Not later than nine months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study under paragraph (1).
The report shall include the following: (A) A description of the actions studied.
An assessment of the feasibility and advisability of undertaking one or more such actions.
Any other matters, including recommendations, that the Secretary considers appropriate.
Amendment of Convention on Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials.--(1) It is the sense of Congress that the President should encourage amendment of the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials in order to provide that the Convention shall-- (A) apply to both the domestic and international use and transport of nuclear materials; (B) incorporate fundamental practices for the physical protection of such materials; and (C) address protection against sabotage involving nuclear materials.
In this subsection, the term ``Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials'' means the Convention on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Materials, With Annex, done at Vienna on October 26, 1979.