This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Oil and Gas Reform Act of 1999''.
SANCTIONS FOR VIOLATIONS RELATING TO FEDERAL OIL AND GAS ROYALTIES.
Section 109 of the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act of 1982 (30 United States Code 1719) is amended to read as follows: ``civil penalties ``Sec.
Royalty Violations.--(1) No person shall-- ``(A) after due notice of violation or after such violation has been reported under paragraph (3)(A), fail or refuse to comply with any requirement of any mineral leasing law or any regulation, order, lease, or permit under such a law; ``(B) fail or refuse to make any royalty payment in the amount or value required by any mineral leasing law or any regulation, order, or lease under such a law; ``(C) fail or refuse to make any royalty payment by the date required by any mineral leasing law or any regulation, order, or lease under such a law; or ``(D) prepare, maintain, or submit any false, inaccurate, or misleading report, notice, affidavit, record, data, or other written information or filing related to royalty payments that is required under any mineral leasing law or regulation issued under any mineral leasing law.
A person who violates paragraph (1) shall be liable-- ``(A) in the case of a violation of subparagraph (B) or (C) of paragraph (1) for an amount equal to 3 times the royalty the person fails or refuses to pay, plus interest on that trebled amount measured from the first date the royalty payment was due; and ``(B) in the case of any violation, for a civil penalty of $25,000 per violation for each day the violation continues.
Paragraph (2) shall not apply to a violation of paragraph (1) if the person who commits the violation, within 30 days of the violation-- ``(A) reports the violation to the Secretary or a representative designated by the Secretary; and ``(B) corrects the violation.
Lease Administration Violations.--Any person who-- ``(1) fails to notify the Secretary of-- ``(A) any designation by the person under section 102(a); or ``(B) any other assignment of obligations or responsibilities of the person under a lease; ``(2) fails or refuses to permit-- ``(A) lawful entry; ``(B) inspection, including any inspection authorized by section 108; or ``(C) audit, including any failure or refusal to promptly tender requested documents; ``(3) fails or refuses to comply with subsection 102(b)(3) (relating to notification regarding beginning or resumption of production); or ``(4) fails to correctly report and timely provide operations or financial records necessary for the Secretary or any authorized designee of the Secretary to accomplish lease management responsibilities, shall be liable for a penalty of up to $10,000 per violation for each day such violation continues.
Theft.--Any person who-- ``(1) knowingly or willfully takes or removes, transports, uses or diverts any oil or gas from any lease site without having valid legal authority to do so; or ``(2) purchases, accepts, sells, transports, or conveys to another, any oil or gas knowing or having reason to know that such oil or gas was stolen or unlawfully removed or diverted, shall be liable for a penalty of up to $25,000 per violation for each day such violation continues without correction.
Repeated Violations.--(1)(A) If the Secretary or an authorized designee of the Secretary determines that any person has repeatedly violated subsection (a), (b), or (c), the Secretary or designee shall notify the person of the violation and demand compliance.
A person notified pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall correct the violations by not later than 30 calendar days after the date of the notification.
Any person who fails to comply with a demand under subparagraph (A) shall be liable to the United States for a civil penalty equal to 3 times the amount of any civil penalty that otherwise applies under subsection (a), (b), or (c) to the violations to which the demand relates.
In addition to the penalty provided in paragraph (1)(C), if the Secretary determines that any person has repeatedly violated subsection (a), (b), or (c) or any lease management order, the Secretary may-- ``(A) shut in and cease production of any oil or gas lease held by the person; ``(B) prohibit the person-- ``(i) from acquiring any additional oil or gas lease, including by transfer or assignment; and ``(ii) from being designated under section 102(a) to make payments due under any lease; ``(C) cancel or transfer any interest in an oil or gas lease held by the person; and ``(D) collect from the person reimbursement, including interest, of all costs of release, transfer, or reclamation of lease sites canceled or transferred, including costs of disposing of lease property, facilities, and equipment.
Administrative Appeal.--(1) Any determination by the Secretary or a designee of the Secretary of the amount of any royalties or civil penalties owed under subsection (a), (b), (c), or (d) shall be final, unless within 15 days after notification by the Secretary or designee the person liable for such amount files an administrative appeal in accordance with regulations issued by the Secretary.
If a person files an administrative appeal pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary or designee shall make a final determination in accordance with the regulations referred to in paragraph (1).
Deduction.--The amount of any penalty under this section, as finally determined may be deducted from any sums owing by the United States to the person charged.
Compromise and Reduction.--On a case-by-case basis the Secretary may compromise or reduce civil penalties under this section.
Notice.--Notice under this subsection (a) shall be by personal service by an authorized representative of the Secretary or by registered mail.
Any person may, in the manner prescribed by the Secretary, designate a representative to receive any notice under this subsection.
Record of Determination.--In determining the amount of such penalty, or whether it should be remitted or reduced, and in what amount, the Secretary shall state on the record the reasons for his determinations.
Judicial Review.--Any person who has requested a hearing in accordance with subsection (e) within the time the Secretary has prescribed for such a hearing and who is aggrieved by a final order of the Secretary under this section may seek review of such order in the United States district court for the judicial district in which the violation allegedly took place.
Review by the district court shall be only on the administrative record and not de novo.
Such an action shall be barred unless filed within 90 days after the Secretary's final order.
Failure To Pay.--If any person fails to pay an assessment of a civil penalty under this Act-- ``(1) after the order making the assessment has become a final order and if such person does not file a petition for judicial review of the order in accordance with subsection (j), or ``(2) after a court in an action brought under subsection (j) has entered a final judgment in favor of the Secretary, the court shall have jurisdiction to award the amount assessed plus interest from the date of the expiration of the 90-day period referred to in subsection (j).
Judgment by the court shall include an order to pay.
Relationship to Mineral Leasing Act.--No person shall be liable for a civil penalty under subsection (a) or (b) for failure to pay any rental for any lease automatically terminated pursuant to section 31 of the Mineral Leasing Act.
Tolling of Statutes of Limitation.--(1) Any determination by the Secretary or a designee of the Secretary that a person has violated subsection (a), (b)(2), or (b)(4) shall toll any applicable statute of limitations for all oil and gas leases held or operated by such person, until the later of-- ``(A) the date on which the person corrects the violation and certifies that all violations of a like nature have been corrected for all of the oil and gas leases held or operated by such person; or ``(B) the date a final, nonappealable order has been issued by the Secretary or a court of competent jurisdiction.
A person determined by the Secretary or a designee of the Secretary to have violated subsection (a), (b)(2), or (b)(4) shall maintain all records with respect to the person's oil and gas leases until the later of-- ``(A) the date the Secretary releases the person from the obligation to maintain such records; and ``(B) the expiration of the period during which the records must be maintained under section 103(b).
State Sharing of Penalties.--Amounts received by the United States in an action brought under section 3730 of title 31, United States Code, that arises from any underpayment of royalties owed to the United States under any lease shall be treated as royalties paid to the United States under that lease for purposes of the mineral leasing laws and the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-4 et sequentes).''.
Section 206 of the Federal Oil and Gas Royalty Management Act of 1982 (30 United States Code 1736) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``trebled royalties or'' after ``50 per centum of any'' and before ``civil penalty''; and (2) by striking the second sentence.