This Act may be cited as the ``California Coastal Protection and Louisiana Energy Enhancement Act''.
In this Act: (1) Eligible lease.--The term ``eligible lease'' means any of the 40 leases on the Outer Continental Shelf off the coast of California that-- (A) were issued between 1968 and 1984 under section 8 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1337); and (B) are nonproducing as of January 1, 2002.
Eligible lessee.--The term ``eligible lessee'' means the lessee under an eligible lease.
Preserve.--The term ``preserve'' means the ecological preserve established under section 3(b).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
REDIRECTION OF NONPRODUCING OIL AND GAS LEASES TO LESS ENVIRONMENTALLY SENSITIVE AREAS ON THE OUTER CONTINENTAL SHELF.
Lease Cancellation and Credits.-- (1) Offer.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall make an offer to all eligible lessees to issue credits in exchange for the cancellation of all eligible leases in accordance with this subsection.
Acceptance.--To accept the offer of the Secretary under paragraph (1) with respect to an eligible lease, an eligible lessee shall submit to the Secretary a written agreement that if all eligible lessees accept the offer and credits are issued under paragraph (3), the eligible lessee-- (A) will dismiss any civil action brought by the eligible lessee against the United States relating to the eligible lease that is pending as of the date of cancellation of the eligible lease; and (B) waives the right to bring any further civil action regarding the eligible lease after that date.
Issuance of credits.--If, not later than 60 days after the date of the offer under paragraph (1), all eligible lessees accept the offer in accordance with paragraph (2), the Secretary shall-- (A) cancel all eligible leases; and (B) issue to each eligible lessee credits in the amount determined under paragraph (4).
Amount.-- (A) In general.--For each eligible lease, the Secretary shall issue credits in an amount equal to the sum of-- (i) the amount of consideration paid to the Federal Government for the eligible lease; and (ii) the difference between-- (I) the amount of direct expenditures made after the date of issuance of the eligible lease in connection with the exploration and development of the eligible lease; and (II) the amount of revenues earned from the eligible lease before the date of cancellation.
Exclusions.--The potential value of oil and gas resources associated with the eligible leases shall not be a factor in determining the amount of credits under subparagraph (A).
Use of credits.-- (A) In general.--Credits issued under paragraph (3)-- (i) subject to subparagraph (C), may be used-- (I) to bid on lease sales in the Western and Central Planning Areas of the Gulf of Mexico; or (II) to make royalty payments on production for oil and gas resources in those planning areas in existence as of the date of enactment of this Act; or (ii) may be sold or transferred in accordance with paragraph (6).
Acceptance of credits.-- (i) In general.--The Secretary shall accept credits issued under paragraph (3) in the same manner as-- (I) cash for the payment of a cash bonus bid for leases issued in the Western and Central Planning Areas of the Gulf of Mexico under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes); or (II) royalty payments on oil and gas production in the Western and Central Planning Areas of the Gulf of Mexico in existence as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Exception.--The Secretary shall not accept credits issued under paragraph (3) for an activity in an area-- (I) that is subject to a leasing moratorium; or (II) in which leasing is otherwise prohibited as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Limitation.--In any 1 fiscal year, the Secretary shall accept credits in an amount no greater than 25 percent of the total amount of credits issued under paragraph (3).
Sale or transfer.-- (A) In general.--An eligible lessee may transfer or sell any credits issued under paragraph (3) to any other person qualified to hold leases under the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331 et sequentes).
Requirements.--A sale or transfer of credits under subparagraph (A) shall be subject to-- (i) this Act; and (ii) any other terms to which the lessee and the transferee may agree.
Limitations.--Credits transferred or sold under subparagraph (A) shall be accepted in accordance with paragraph (5)(B).
Notification.-- (i) In general.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which an eligible lessee transfers or sells any credits, the eligible lessee shall notify the Secretary of the transfer or sale.
Validity.--A transfer or sale of a credit shall not be valid until the date on which the Secretary receives notification under clause (i).
No additional compensation.--An eligible lessee that participates in the cancellation of an eligible lease under this Act-- (A) shall be considered to be fully compensated for the value of the eligible lease; and (B) shall not be eligible to seek additional compensation from the Federal Government for the eligible lease.
Effect.--Nothing in this Act constitutes a findings by Congress, or should be understood to be based on a finding by Congress, that-- (A) actions by the Federal Government involving the eligible leases before the date of enactment of this Act constituted a breach of contract; or (B) the eligible leases have any particular value.
Ecological Preserve.-- (1) In general.--Outer Continental Shelf land for which an eligible lease is canceled under subsection (a) shall-- (A) be permanently withdrawn from all forms of disposition, including mineral leasing; and (B) be reserved as an ecological preserve to protect traditional fishing areas and to provide conservation, scientific, and recreational benefits.
Management.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall manage the preserve in a manner consistent with the management of the Santa Barbara Channel Ecological Preserve in the State of California.
Coordination with secretary of commerce.--The Secretary shall coordinate management activities relating to any portion of the preserve that is adjacent to a national marine sanctuary with the Secretary of Commerce.
Buffer zone.--Not later than 1 year after the date of establishment of the preserve, the Secretary shall determine whether Outer Continental Shelf land adjacent to the preserve should be withdrawn from all forms of disposition, including mineral leasing, to serve as a buffer zone.