This Act may be cited as the ``Idaho Panhandle National Forest Improvement Act of 2003''.
CONVEYANCE ADMINISTRATIVE SITES, NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM LAND, IDAHO.
Conveyance Authorized.-- (1) Authority.--The Secretary of Agriculture may convey any or all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the parcels of National Forest System land, including any improvements thereon, described in paragraph (2).
Parcels authorized for conveyance.--The following parcels of National Forest System land are authorized to be conveyed under this section: (A) Granite/Reeder Bay, Priest Lake parcel, consisting of approximately 80 acres, and described as the S.\1/2\ NE.\1/4\ of section 17, township 61 north, range 4 east, Boise meridian.
North South Ski area, consisting of approximately 50 acres, and described as the SE.\1/4\ SE.\1/4\ SW.\1/4\, S.\1/2\ SW.\1/4\ SE.\1/4\, NE.\1/4\ SW.\1/4\ SE.\1/4\, and SW.\1/4\ SE.\1/4\ SE.\1/4\ of section 13, township 43 north, range 3 west, Boise meridian.
Shoshone work camp (including easements for utilities), consisting of a portion of S.\1/2\ SE.\1/4\ of section 5, township 50 north, range 4 east, Boise meridian.
Modification of descriptions.--The Secretary may modify the descriptions in paragraph (2) to correct errors in the descriptions or to reconfigure the parcels to facilitate their conveyance under this section.
Consideration.-- (1) Market value required.--As consideration for the conveyance of a parcel of National Forest System land under this section, the recipient of the parcel shall pay to the Secretary an amount equal to the market value of the parcel, as determined under subsection (c).
At the election of the Secretary, the consideration may be in the form of cash or other consideration, including the acquisition by the Secretary of improved or unimproved property or property with improvements constructed to the specifications of the Secretary.
Valuation.--The value of a parcel to be conveyed under this section, and the value of any property or improvements to be received in exchange for the parcel, shall be determined by an appraisal that-- (A) is acceptable to the Secretary; and (B) conforms with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions.
Equalization of values.--Notwithstanding section 206(b) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1716(b)), the Secretary may accept a cash equalization payment in excess of 25 percent of the value of a parcel conveyed under this section.
Conveyance Process.-- (1) Solicitations of offers.--The Secretary may solicit offers for the conveyance of property under this section on such terms and conditions as the Secretary may prescribe.
The Secretary may reject any offer made under this section if the Secretary determines that the offer is not adequate or not in the public interest.
Methods of conveyance.--The Secretary may convey property under this section at public or private sale, including at auction, or by exchange, in accordance with such terms, conditions, and procedures as the Secretary determines to be in the best interests of the United States.
Applicable law.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the conveyance of National Forest System land under this section shall be subject to the laws applicable to the conveyance and acquisition of land for the National Forest System.
The Agriculture Property Management Regulations shall not apply to the conveyance of National Forest System land under this section or any other action taken under this section.
Deposit and Use of Proceeds.-- (1) Deposit.--The Secretary shall deposit the proceeds derived from the conveyence of property under this section in the fund established by Public Law 90-171 (commonly known as the ``Sisk Act''; 16 United States Code 484a).
Use.--Amounts deposited under this subsection shall be available to the Secretary, without further appropriation and until expended-- (A) for the acquisition of, construction of, or rehabilitation of existing facilities for, a new ranger station in the Silver Valley portion of the Panhandle National Forest in the State of Idaho; and (B) to the extent that the amount of funds deposited exceeds the amount needed for the purpose described in subparagraph (A), for the acquisition, construction, or rehabilitation of other facilities in the Panhandle National Forest.
Limitations.--Funds deposited under this subsection shall not-- (A) be paid or distributed to States or counties under any provision of law; or (B) be considered to be moneys received from units of the National Forest System for purposes of-- (i) the sixth paragraph under the heading ``Forest Service'' in the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 United States Code 500); (ii) section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Law''; 16 United States Code 500); or (iii) the fourteenth paragraph under the heading ``Forest Service'' in the Act of March 4, 1913 (16 United States Code 501).
New administrative facilities authorized.--The Secretary may acquire, construct, or rehabilitate the ranger station described in paragraph (2)(A), and acquire associated land, using amounts deposited under this subsection and, to the extent such amounts are insufficient for such purpose, other funds appropriated or otherwise made available for such purpose.
Management of Acquired Law.--Subject to valid existing rights, the Secretary shall manage any land acquired under this section in accordance with the Act of March 1, 1911 (commonly known as the ``Weeks Act''; 16 United States Code 480 et sequentes) and other laws relating to the National Forest System.
Withdrawals and Revocations.-- (1) Public land orders.--Effective on the date of the enactment of this Act, any public land order withdrawing the property authorized for conveyance under this section from appropriation under the public land laws is revoked with respect to the property.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, the property authorized for conveyance under this section is withdrawn from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws of the United States.