This Act may be cited as the ``Industry Training Consortia Act''.
In this Act: (1) Employer.--The term ``employer'' includes a business.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
TITLE I--SKILL GRANTS SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation and coordination with the Secretary of Labor and the Administrator of the Small Business Administration, shall provide grants to eligible entities described in subsection (b).
The Secretary shall provide the grants to encourage employers to form consortia to share the cost of providing, and reduce the risk of investing in, employer-led education and training programs for employees that meet employer needs and market demand in specific occupations, for purposes of strengthening United States competitiveness.
Eligible Entities Described.-- (1) In general.--An eligible entity described in this subsection is a consortium that-- (A) shall consist of representatives from not fewer than 10 employers (or nonprofit organizations that represent employers) who are in a common industry or who have common skill needs; and (B) may consist of representatives from 1 or more of the following: (i) Labor organizations.
State and local government agencies.
Majority of representatives.--A majority of the representatives comprising the consortium shall be representatives described in paragraph (1)(A).
Priority for Small Businesses.--In providing grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to an eligible entity if a majority of representatives forming the entity represent small- business concerns, as described in section 3(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(a)).
Maximum Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant provided to an eligible entity under subsection (a) may not exceed $1,000,000 for any fiscal year.
To be eligible to receive a grant under section 101, an eligible entity shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
In General.--The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 101 to an eligible entity unless such entity agrees to use amounts received from such grant to develop an employer-led education and training program (which may be focused on developing skills related to computer technology, computer-based manufacturing technology, telecommunications, and other information technologies) necessary to meet employer needs and market demand in specific occupations.
Conduct of Program.-- (1) In general.--In carrying out the program described in subsection (a), the eligible entity may provide for-- (A) an assessment of training and job skill needs for industry and other employers; (B) development of a sequence of skill standards that are correlated with advanced industry or occupational practices; (C) development of curriculum and training methods; (D) purchase or receipt of donations of training equipment; (E) identification of education and training providers; (F) development of apprenticeship programs; (G) development of education and training programs for incumbent and dislocated workers and new workers; (H) development of the membership of the entity; (I) development of internship, field, and technical project experiences; and (J) provision of assistance to member employers in their human resource development planning.
Additional requirement.--In carrying out the program described in subsection (a), the eligible entity shall-- (A) provide for development and tracking of performance outcome measures for the program and the education and training providers involved in the program; and (B) prepare and submit to the Secretary such reports as the Secretary may require on best practices developed by the entity through the education and training program.
Administrative Costs.--The eligible entity may use not more than 10 percent of the amount of such a grant to pay for administrative costs associated with the program described in subsection (a).
REQUIREMENT OF MATCHING FUNDS.
The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 101 to an eligible entity unless such entity agrees that-- (1) the entity will make available non-Federal contributions toward the costs of carrying out activities under section 103 in an amount that is not less than $2 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under a grant under section 101; and (2) of such non-Federal contributions, not less than $1 of each such $2 shall be from employers with representatives serving on the eligible entity.
LIMIT ON ADMINISTRATIVE EXPENSES.
The Secretary may use not more than 5 percent of the funds made available to carry out this title-- (1) to pay for Federal administrative costs associated with making grants under this title, including carrying out activities described in section 106; and (2) to develop and maintain an electronic clearinghouse of information on industry-led training consortia programs.
INFORMATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary shall distribute information and provide technical assistance to eligible entities on best practices developed through the education and training programs.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2001, 2002, and 2003.
TITLE II--PLANNING GRANTS SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Commerce, in consultation with the Secretary of Labor, shall provide grants to States to enable the States to assist employers, organizations, and agencies described in section 101(b) in conducting planning to form consortia described in such section.
Maximum Amount of Grant.--The amount of a grant provided to a State under subsection (a) may not exceed $500,000 for any fiscal year.
To be eligible to receive a grant under section 201, a State shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
REQUIREMENT OF MATCHING FUNDS.
The Secretary may not provide a grant under section 201 to a State unless such State agrees that the State will make available non-Federal contributions toward the costs of carrying out activities under this title in an amount that is not less than $1 for each $1 of Federal funds provided under a grant under section 201.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.