This Act may be cited as the ``R.I.G.H.T.
TITLE I--CONGRESSIONAL COMPENSATION SEC.
ACCRUAL RATES FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND CONGRESSIONAL EMPLOYEES UNDER CSRS AND FERS.
CSRS.-- (1) Members.-- (A) In general.--Section 8339(c) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking all that follows ``with respect to--'' and inserting the following: ``(1) so much of his service as a Member as was performed before the beginning of the One Hundred Fifth Congress; ``(2) so much of his military service as-- ``(A) is creditable for the purpose of this subsection; and ``(B) was performed before the beginning of such Congress; and ``(3) so much of his Congressional employee service as was performed before the beginning of such Congress; by multiplying 2\1/2\ percent of his average pay by the years of that service.''.
Technical amendment.--Section 8332(d) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``section 8339(c)(1)'' and inserting ``section 8339(c)''.
Congressional employees.--Section 8339(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``so much of'' after ``is computed with respect to''; and (B) by inserting ``as was performed before the beginning of the One Hundred Fifth Congress,'' before ``by multiplying''.
Capitol police.--Section 8339(q) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``in acccordance with subsection (b),'' and inserting ``in accordance with subsection (b) (disregarding the amendments made by section 101(a)(2) of the R.I.G.H.T.
FERS.-- (1) Members.--Section 8415(b) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``shall'' and inserting ``shall, to the extent that such service was performed before the beginning of the One Hundred Fifth Congress,''.
Congressional employees.--Section 8415(c) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``shall'' and inserting ``shall, to the extent that such service was performed before the beginning of the One Hundred Fifth Congress,''.
Provisions relating to the 1.1 percent accrual rate.-- Section 8415(g) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1) by striking ``an employee under paragraph (2),'' and inserting ``an employee or Member under paragraph (2),''; (B) in paragraph (2) by inserting ``or Member'' after ``in the case of an employee'' and by striking ``Congressional employee,''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection-- ``(A) this subsection shall not apply in the case of a Member or Congressional employee whose separation (on which entitlement to annuity is based) occurs before the beginning of the One Hundred Fifth Congress; and ``(B) in the case of a Member or Congressional employee to whom this subsection applies, the 1.1 percent accrual rate shall apply only with respect to any period of service other than a period with respect to which the 1.7 percent accrual rate applies under subsection (b) or (c).''.
ELIMINATION OF AUTOMATIC ANNUITY ADJUSTMENTS FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
The portion of anuity of a Member of Congress which is based solely on service as a Member of Congress shall not be subject to a COLA adjustment under section 8340 or 8462 of title 5, United States Code.
ELIMINATION OF AUTOMATIC PAY ADJUSTMENTS FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS; RECORDED VOTE REQUIRED ON ANY PAY ADJUSTMENT FOR MEMBERS.
In General.--Section 601(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
(1) Until otherwise provided under section 225 of the Federal Salary Act of 1967 (2 United States Code 351 and following) or any other provision of law, the annual rate of pay for-- ``(A) each Senator, Member of the House of Representatives, and Delegate to the House of Representatives, and the Resident Commissioner from Puerto Rico, ``(B) the President pro tempore of the Senate, the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate, and the majority leader and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, and ``(C) the Speaker of the House of Representatives, shall be the rate payable for each such office or position on the date of the enactment of the R.I.G.H.T.
(A) Any bill or resolution, and any amendment to any bill or resolution, that provides for any adjustment in the amount of pay payable for any office or position referred to in paragraph (1) may be adopted by the House of Representatives only by a vote recorded so as to reflect the vote of each Member voting.
The provisions of subparagraph (A) are enacted-- ``(i) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and, as such, they shall be considered as part of the rules of the House, and such rule shall supersede other rules only to the extent inconsistent therewith; and ``(ii) with full recognition of the constitutional right of the House to change such rule at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of the House.
This paragraph shall not apply with respect to any recommendations which are subject section 225(i) of the Federal Salary Act of 1967.''.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect on the day after the date of the first election of Representatives (within the meaning of the 27th article of amendment to the Constitution of the United States) occurring after the date of the enactment of this Act.
LOBBYING RESTRICTIONS FOR FORMER MEMBERS OF CONGRESS AND STAFF.
Time Limit.--Section 207(e) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``1 year'' in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), and (5) and inserting ``2 years''.
Committee Staff.--Section 207(e)(2)(B) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (i), by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting ``; and'' and by adding after clause (ii) the following: ``(iii) any employee of a committee of Congress of which such Senator or Member was a member.''.
Special Limitation.--Section 207(e)(6) of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``(A)'' and subparagraph (B); (2) by striking ``and (4)'' and inserting ``(4), and (5)''; and (3) by striking ``75 percent'' and inserting ``50 percent''.
DENIAL OF FLOOR PRIVILEGES TO FORMER MEMBERS OF CONGRESS WHO ARE REGISTERED LOBBYISTS.
House Floor Privileges.--Clause 3 of rule XXXII of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by striking ``and only '' and inserting ``, only'', and by inserting ``, and only if they are not registered lobbyists under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995'' before the period at the end.
Additional Privileges.--(1) No former Member of Congress who is a registered lobbyist under the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 may enter any dining area in the Capital which is reserved for Members of Congress or enter any gymnasium facility which is reserved for Members of Congress.
The Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives shall have authority to prescribe regulations to carry out this subsection.
REQUIRING IDENTIFICATION FOR REGISTERED LOBBYISTS.
In General.--Section 4 of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 (2 United States Code 1603) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Identification for Registered Lobbyists.--Each person required to register under this section shall wear, in a visible manner, an identification badge similar to the identification badge required for persons who use the press gallery of the House of Representatives or the Senate.
The form of such identification shall be prescribed by the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives and the Sergeant at Arms of the Senate acting jointly and shall be worn when such registered person is in the United States Capitol or in an office building of the House of Representatives or the Senate while engaged in lobbying activities.
When a person registers under subsection (a), such person shall be given such a badge.''.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall take effect with respect to registrations under section 4 of the Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 which occur after the expiration of the 60-day period which begins on the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--CONGRESSIONAL TRAVEL SEC.
LIMITATION ON TRANSPORTATION OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS ON MILITARY AIRCRAFT.
Limitation on Transportation.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 157 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Limitation on transportation of Members of Congress on military aircraft ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense may not provide transportation on a military aircraft to a destination for a Member or group of Members of Congress unless-- ``(1) the transportation is provided on a space-available basis as part of the scheduled operations of the military aircraft unrelated to the provision of transportation to the Member or group of Members; ``(2) the destination, or an airfield located within a reasonable distance from the destination, is not accessible by regularly scheduled flights of commercial aircraft; or ``(3) the transportation is the least expensive method for the Member or group of Members to reach the destination by aircraft.
Special Rule for Members and Staff Travelling to a Hearing.-- The Secretary may not provide transportation on a military aircraft for a Member or group of Members of Congress or the staff of the Member or group of Members for travel to a hearing of a Committee of Congress unless the transportation meets the requirement in subsection (a)(3).
Destination.--The Secretary shall not select the destination of a military aircraft to accommodate the travel plans of a Member or group of Members of Congress requesting transportation that meets the requirement in subsection (a)(1).''.
Member of Congress Defined.--In this section, the term `Member of Congress' means a Senator or Representative in, or a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.''.
Conforming amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``2643.
Limitation on transportation of Members of Congress on military aircraft.''.
Prior Approval Requirement for Members and Staff Travelling to a Hearing.--A Member or group of Members of the House of Representatives or the staff of such Member or group of Members may not accept transportation on a military aircraft for travel to a hearing of a committee of Congress until the chairman of the committee of Congress-- (1) submits information to the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives demonstrating that the transportation is the least expensive method for the Member or group of Members or staff to travel to the hearing by aircraft; and (2) receives approval from the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct for the Member or group of Members or staff to accept the transportation.
RESTRICTION ON FOREIGN TRAVEL BY MEMBERS NOT SEEKING REELECTION.
The Rules of the House of Representatives are amended by adding at the end the following new rule: ``Rule LIII.
``restriction on foreign travel by members not seeking reelection.
A retiring Member, or such Member's personal staff, shall not engage in travel outside the United States pursuant to clause 8 of rule I, clause 2(n) or 5(e) of rule XI, or section 502(b) of the Mutual Security Act of 1954 (22 United States Code 1754), unless the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct determines such travel is essential to the official responsibilities of the retiring member.
As used in this rule-- ``(1) a Member is a retiring Member after the earlier of the date upon which the Member-- ``(A) announces to the press the intention not to seek election to the House of Representatives for the succeeding Congress; ``(B) fails to meet the qualifying deadline for election to the House of Representatives for the succeeding Congress; or ``(C) is defeated in any primary or general election to the House of Representatives for the succeeding Congress; and ``(1) the term `Member' means a Representative in, or a Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the House of Representatives.''.
LIMITATION ON USE OF TRAVEL AWARDS.
In General.--(1) Except as provided by paragraph (2) and notwithstanding any provision of law or any rule, regulation, or other authority, any travel award that accrues by reason of official travel of a Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives may be used only with respect to official travel.
Any travel award that accrues by reason of official travel of a Member of the House of Representatives may be used by the spouse or children of that Member for travel between Washington, D.C., and the district of that Member.
Regulations.--The Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives shall have authority to prescribe regulations to carry out this section.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``Member of the House of Representatives'' means a Representative in, or a Delgate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress; (2) the term ``offical travel'' means, with respect to the House of Representatives, travel performed for the conduct of official business of the House of Representatives, including official and representational duties of a Member relating to the district of the Member; and (3) the term ``travel award'' means any frequent flier mileage, free travel, discounted travel, or other travel benefit, whether awarded by coupon, membership, or otherwise.