This Act may be cited as the ``National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare Act of 1997''.
There is established a commission to be known as the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicare (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
The Congress finds that-- (1) the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes) provides essential health care coverage to this Nation's senior citizens and to individuals with disabilities; (2) the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund established under that Act has been spending more than it receives since 1995, and will be bankrupt in the year 2001; (3) the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund faces even greater solvency problems in the long run with the aging of the baby boom generation and the continuing decline in the number of workers paying into the medicare program for each medicare beneficiary; (4) the trustees of the trust funds of the medicare program have reported that growth in spending within the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund established under that Act is unsustainable; and (5) expeditious action is needed in order to restore the financial integrity of the medicare program and to maintain this Nation's commitment to senior citizens and to individuals with disabilities.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall-- (1) review and analyze the long-term financial condition of the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395 et sequentes); (2) identify problems that threaten the financial integrity of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund established under that title (42 United States Code 1395i, 1395t); (3) analyze potential solutions to the problems identified under paragraph (2) that will ensure both the financial integrity of the medicare program and the provision of appropriate benefits under such program; (4) make recommendations to restore the solvency of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and the financial integrity of the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund through the year 2030, when the last of the baby boomers reaches age 65; (5) make recommendations for establishing the appropriate financial structure of the medicare program as a whole; (6) make recommendations for establishing the appropriate balance of benefits covered and beneficiary contributions to the medicare program; (7) make recommendations for the time periods during which the recommendations described in paragraphs (4), (5), and (6) should be implemented; and (8) review and analyze such other matters as the Commission deems appropriate.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members, of whom-- (1) three shall be appointed by the President; (2) six shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the Senate, of whom not more than 4 shall be of the same political party; and (3) six shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, of whom not more than 4 shall be of the same political party.
Comptroller General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall advise the Commission on the methodology to be used in identifying problems and analyzing potential solutions in accordance with the duties of the Commission described in section 4.
Terms of Appointment.--The members shall serve on the Commission for the life of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall locate its headquarters in the District of Columbia, and shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
Quorum.--Ten members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Majority Leader of the Senate, shall designate 1 of the members appointed under subsection (a) as Chairperson of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made not later than 30 days after the Commission is given notice of the vacancy.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Executive Director.-- (1) Appointment.--The Chairperson shall appoint an executive director of the Commission.
Compensation.--The executive director shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may appoint such personnel as the executive director considers appropriate.
Applicability of Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title (relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates).
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Other Resources.--The Commission shall have reasonable access to materials, resources, statistical data, and other information from the Library of Congress and agencies and elected representatives of the executive and legislative branches of the Federal Government.
The Chairperson of the Commission shall make requests for such access in writing when necessary.
Physical Facilities.--The Administrator of the General Services Administration shall locate suitable office space for the operation of the Commission.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Commission and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for the proper functioning of the Commission.
Hearings.--The Commission may conduct public hearings or forums at the discretion of the Commission, at any time and place the Commission is able to secure facilities and witnesses, for the purpose of carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of the recommendations, findings, and conclusions of the Commission.
The Commission shall terminate on the date which is 30 days after the date the Commission submits its report to the President and to Congress under section 8.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Sums appropriated under this section shall be paid equally from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund and from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i, 1395t).