This Act may be cited as the ``Securities and Exchange Commission Authorization Act of 1993''.
Section 35 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78kk) is amended to read as follows: ``authorization of appropriations ``Sec.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out the functions, powers, and duties of the Commission-- ``(1) $281,900,000 for fiscal year 1994; and ``(2) $317,700,000 for fiscal year 1995.
Funds appropriated for any fiscal year pursuant to this section are authorized to remain available during the succeeding fiscal year.''.
SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION FEES.
Full Cost Recovery of Commission Expenses.--The Securities Exchange Act of 1934 is further amended by inserting after section 31 the following new section: ``full cost recovery of commission expenses ``Sec.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section-- ``(1) to establish a system for the annual adjustment of fees collected by the Commission so that the total amount appropriated to the Commission for any fiscal year will be offset by the amount collected during such fiscal year; and ``(2) in order to permit an orderly transition to this method of funding the Commission, to require that such fees continue to collect general revenues during each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1998 in amounts commensurate with the amount of such revenues produced by such fees prior to the enactment of this section.
Establishment of Adjusted Rates.-- ``(1) Obligation to adjust rates to recover cost.--For each of the fiscal years after fiscal year 1993, the Commission, by rule or order, shall adjust the rate of each of the fees described in subsection (c) to secure (when combined with fees collected during the period from October 1 through December 31 under the rates then in effect) a total amount of collections of such fees during such fiscal year that can reasonably be expected to equal the sum of-- ``(A) the applicable surplus amount for such fiscal year, if any; and ``(B) subject to subsection (e)(1), the amount appropriated for such fiscal year of this title (determined without regard to any reduction of the net amount appropriated that is attributable to offsetting collections).
Method of adjustment.--Such rates shall be adjusted by making an equal proportionate change in each of such rates, except that the Commission may round such proportionate changes to avoid requiring rates that are unduly mathematically complex.
Effective date of adjustments.--Such adjusted rates shall apply-- ``(A) with respect to any fee described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (5) of subsection (c), to any fee paid on or after January 1 of such fiscal year; and ``(B) with respect to any fee described in paragraph (4) of such subsection, to any fee based on a transaction occurring on or after January 1 of such fiscal year.
Any such adjusted rate shall continue to apply until the effective date of a subsequent adjusted rate.
Fees to Which Adjustments Apply.--For purposes of this section, the fees described in this subsection are-- ``(1) the fees collected under section 6(b) of the Securities Act of 1933; ``(2) the fees collected under section 13(e) of this title; ``(3) the fees collected under section 14(g) of this title; ``(4) the fees collected under section 31 of this title; and ``(5) the fees collected under section 203A of the Investment Advisers Act of 1940.
Applicable Surplus Amount.--For purposes of subsection (b)(1)(A), the applicable surplus amount is equal to-- ``(1) $171,000,000 for fiscal year 1994; ``(2) $174,000,000 for fiscal year 1995; ``(3) $178,000,000 for fiscal year 1996; ``(4) $181,000,000 for fiscal year 1997; ``(5) $184,000,000 for fiscal year 1998; and ``(6) zero each succeeding fiscal year.
Deposit and Credit of Offsetting Collections.-- ``(1) Offsetting collections contingent on appropriations.--The authority of the Commission to collect and deposit fees as offsetting collections pursuant to paragraph (2) is available only to the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Offsetting collections.--Of the moneys received during any fiscal year from fees described in subsection (c), there shall (subject to paragraph (1)) be deposited as an offsetting collection in, and credited to, the account providing appropriations to carry out the functions described in the sections referred to in such subsection, an amount equal to the amount appropriated to the Commission for such fiscal year (determined without regard to any reduction attributable to such offsetting collections and excluding any amounts that are permitted to remain available after the close of the succeeding fiscal year).
General revenues.--The remainder of any moneys received during any fiscal year (after complying with paragraph (2)) shall be deposited in the Treasury of the United States as miscellaneous receipts.
Judicial Review; Reports to Congress.--The determinations and adjustments made by the Commission under this section shall not be subject to judicial review.
The Commission shall, not less than 30 days before the effective date of any adjustments required by this section, submit such adjustments to the Congress together with a report explaining the estimates and calculations on which such adjustments are based.
Reclassification for Budget Purposes.-- ``(1) Effect on discretionary spending limits.--For purposes of complying with section 251 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, the change mandated by subsection (e) of this section in the budgetary treatment of certain moneys received from fees shall be treated as a change in concepts and definitions within the meaning of section 251(b)(1)(A) of that Act.
Accordingly-- ``(A) at the earliest time allowed by section 251(b)(1) of that Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall adjust the discretionary spending limits in accordance with section 251(b)(1) to reflect this change in concepts and definitions; and ``(B) if a final sequestration report under section 254(g) of that Act is issued before the adjustment under subparagraph (A) occurs, the change in budgetary treatment mandated by subsection (e) of this section shall be disregarded for all purposes of that report.
Effect on pay-as-you-go limits.--The changes mandated by this section shall be treated as affecting receipts for purposes of section 252 of that Act only to the extent that the applicable surplus amount differs from the surplus amount in the baseline.
For this purpose, the surplus amount in the baseline shall be determined by subtracting the baseline estimate of outlays of the Commission from the baseline estimate of receipts generated by the fees described in subsection (c).''.
Adjustment of Fees to Recover Costs.-- (1) Changes in application and collection of transaction fees under section 31 of the securities exchange act of 1934.-- Section 31 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78ee) is amended to read as follows: ``transaction fees ``Sec.
Cost Recovery.--The Commission shall, in accordance with this section and subject to section 31A(e), collect transaction fees to recover the costs of supervision and regulation of, and enforcement with respect to, securities markets and securities professionals.
Such costs shall include a proportional share of related Commission expenses in the following areas: enforcement activities, policy and rulemaking activities, administration, legal services, investor information services, and international regulatory activities.
Exchange-Traded Securities.--Every national securities exchange shall pay to the Commission a fee in an amount equal to 1/ 300th of 1 percent of the aggregate dollar amount of sales of securities (other than bonds, debentures, and other evidences of indebtedness) transacted on such national securities exchange.
Off-Exchange-Traded Securities.--For transactions occurring on or after January 1, 1994, every national securities association shall pay to the Commission a fee in an amount equal to 1/300th of 1 percent of the aggregate dollar amount of sales transacted by or through any member of such association otherwise than on a national securities exchange of-- ``(1) securities registered on such an exchange (other than bonds, debentures, and other evidences of indebtedness); and ``(2) securities (other than bonds, debentures, and other evidences of indebtedness) subject to prompt last sale reporting pursuant to the rules of a registered national securities association.
Dates for Payment of Fees.--For transactions occurring on or after January 1, 1994, the fees required by subsections (b) and (c) shall be paid semiannually.
Fees shall be paid on September 15 for transactions occurring during the period from the preceding January 1 through June 30, and shall be paid on March 15 for transactions occurring during the period from the preceding July 1 through December 31.
Exemptions.--The Commission, by rule, may exempt any sale of securities or any class of sales of securities from any fee imposed by this section, if the Commission finds that such exemption is consistent with the public interest, the equal regulation of markets and brokers and dealers, and the development of a national market system.
Rates Subject to Adjustment and Contingent on Appropriations.--The fees required by this section are subject to adjustment by the Commission pursuant to section 31A of this title.
The authority to collect such fees and the total amount of such fees are subject to subsection (e) of such section.''.
Registration fees.--Section 6(b) of the Securities Act of 1933 (15 United States Code 77f(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b)(1) The Commission shall, in accordance with this subsection and subject to section 31A(e) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, collect registration fees to recover the costs of services of the securities registration process.
Such costs shall include a proportional share of related Commission expenses in the following areas: enforcement activities, policy and rulemaking activities, administration, legal services, investor information services, and international regulatory activities.
At the time of filing a registration statement, the applicant shall pay to the Commission a fee of \1/32\ of 1 percent of the maximum aggregate price at which such securities are proposed to be offered, but in no case shall such fee be less than $100.
The fees required by this subsection are subject to adjustment by the Commission pursuant to section 31A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
The authority to collect such fees and the total amount of such fees are subject to subsection (e) of such section.''.
Self-tendering transactions.--Section 13(e)(3) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78m(e)(3)) is amended-- (A) by inserting after ``(3)'' the following: ``The Commission shall, in accordance with this paragraph and subject to section 31A(e), collect fees to recover the costs of supervision and regulation of, and enforcement with respect to, disclosure relating to transactions subject to this subsection.
Such costs shall include a proportional share of related Commission expenses in the following areas: enforcement activities, policy and rulemaking activities, administration, legal services, investor information services, and international regulatory activities.
''; (B) by striking ``\1/50\ of 1 per centum'' and inserting ``\1/32\ of 1 percent''; and (C) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The fees required by this paragraph are subject to adjustment by the Commission pursuant to section 31A of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934.
The authority to collect such fees and the total amount of such fees are subject to subsection (e) of such section.''.
Proxy filing fees.--Section 14(g) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78n(g)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``\1/50\ of 1 per centum'' each place it appears in paragraphs (1)(A)(i), (1)(A)(ii), and (3) and inserting ``\1/32\ of 1 percent''; (B) by redesignating paragraphs (1) through (4) as paragraphs (2) through (5); (C) by striking such subsection designation and by inserting before such redesignated paragraph (2) the following: ``(g)(1) The Commission shall, in accordance with this paragraph and subject to section 31A(e), collect proxy filing fees to recover the costs of supervision and regulation of the proxy filing and disclosure process.
Such costs shall include a proportional share of related Commission expenses in the following areas: enforcement activities, policy and rulemaking activities, administration, legal services, investor information services, and international regulatory activities.
''; and (D) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) The fees required by this subsection are subject to adjustment by the Commission pursuant to section 31A of this title.
The authority to collect such fees and the total amount of such fees are subject to subsection (e) of such section.''.
Effective Dates.--Except as otherwise provided therein, the amendments made by this section are effective for fiscal years after fiscal year 1993.
Study Required.--The Securities and Exchange Commission shall conduct a study of the structure and procedures for the collection of fees by the Commission pursuant to the amendments made by this Act.
Such study shall include (but not be limited to) an examination of-- (1) the expanding statutory mandate and regulatory responsibilities of the Commission, (2) the adequacy of current fees to meet Commission resource needs, (3) the possible need for new fees in specific program areas, (4) the extent to which beneficiaries of Commission regulatory activities equitably share fee burdens, and (5) the impact of specific fees on the international competitiveness of United States markets.
Report Required.--Not later than March 31, 1995, the Commission shall submit to the Congress a final report containing a detailed statement of findings made and conclusions drawn from the study conducted under this section, including such recommendations for administrative and legislative action as the Commission determines to be appropriate.
Passed the House of Representatives July 20, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.