This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Immigration Reform Commission Act of 2006''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Comprehensive Immigration Reform Commission''.
The Commission will review and evaluate the implementation and impact of United States immigration policy.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall conduct a comprehensive review of immigration reform policies that affect family reunification, employment-based immigration, the protection of refugees, and the diversity of admissions by country of origin, consistent with the purpose specified in section 3 and shall submit the report required under subsection (b).
Report.-- (1) Report.--Not later than 6 months after the selection of the 2 co-chairpersons and the Executive Director of the Commission, the Commission shall prepare and submit a final report that contains a detailed statement of the recommendations, findings, and conclusions of the Commission to the Congress and the President.
Public availability.--The report submitted under this subsection shall be made available to the public.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members, to be appointed as follows: (1) The majority leader of the Senate shall appoint 2 members.
The minority leader of the Senate shall appoint 2 members.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives shall appoint 2 members.
The minority leader of the House of Representatives shall appoint 2 members.
Appointments.--The Commission may not include more than 4 Members of Congress or other elected Federal, State, or local government officials.
Period of Appointment.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancies shall not affect the power and duties of the Commission but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Date.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed by not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Initial Organization Period.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall develop and implement a schedule for completion of the review and report required under section 4.
Co-Chairpersons.--The Commission shall select 2 Co-Chairpersons from among its members.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 30 days after the date on which the Commission submits the report required under section 4(b)(1).
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Co-Chairpersons or a majority of its members.
Open meetings.--Each meeting of the Commission, other than meetings in which classified information is to be discussed, shall be open to the public.
Hearings.--The Commission may hold such hearings and undertake such other activities as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Travel Expenses.--Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in performance of services for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) Executive director.--The Commission shall have a staff headed by an Executive Director.
The Executive Director shall be paid at a rate equivalent to a rate established for the Senior Executive Service under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff appointment.--With the approval of the Commission, the Executive Director may appoint such personnel as the Executive Director determines to be appropriate.
Actuarial experts and consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the Executive Director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of government employees.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist in carrying out the duties of the Commission.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
Other resources.--The Commission shall have reasonable access to materials, resources, statistical data, and other information such Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties from the Library of Congress, the Chief Actuary of Social Security, the Congressional Budget Office, and other agencies and elected representatives of the executive and legislative branches of the Federal Government.
The Co- Chairpersons of the Commission shall make requests for such access in writing when necessary.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2007 $1,500,000 to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under the subsection (a) shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.