TREATMENT OF FUNERAL TRUSTS.
In General.--Subpart F of part I of subchapter J of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
TREATMENT OF FUNERAL TRUSTS.
In General.--In the case of a qualified funeral trust-- ``(1) subparts B, C, D, and E shall not apply, and ``(2) no deduction shall be allowed by section 642(b).
Qualified Funeral Trust.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified funeral trust' means any trust (other than a foreign trust) if-- ``(1) the trust arises as a result of a contract with a person engaged in the trade or business of providing funeral or burial services or property necessary to provide such services, ``(2) the sole purpose of the trust is to hold, invest, and reinvest funds in the trust and to use such funds solely to make payments for such services or property for the benefit of the beneficiaries of the trust, ``(3) the only beneficiaries of such trust are individuals who have entered into contracts described in paragraph (1) to have such services or property provided at their death, ``(4) the only contributions to the trust are contributions by or for the benefit of such beneficiaries, and ``(5) the trust would (but for this section) be treated as owned by the beneficiaries under subpart E. ``(c) Dollar Limitation on Contributions.-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified funeral trust' shall not include any trust which accepts aggregate contributions by or for the benefit of an individual in excess of $7,000.
Related trusts.--For purposes of paragraph (1), all trusts having trustees which are related persons shall be treated as 1 trust.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, persons are related if-- ``(A) the relationship between such persons would result in the disallowance of losses under section 267 or 707(b), ``(B) such persons are treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52, or ``(C) the Secretary determines that treating such persons as related is necessary to prevent avoidance of the purposes of this section.
Inflation adjustment.--In the case of any contract referred to in subsection (b)(1) which is entered into during any calendar year after 1997, the dollar amount referred to paragraph (1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for such calendar year, by substituting `calendar year 1996' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any dollar amount after being increased under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $100, such dollar amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $100.
Application of Rate Schedule.--Section 1(e) shall be applied to each qualified funeral trust by treating each beneficiary's interest in each such trust as a separate trust.
Treatment of Amounts Refunded to Beneficiary on Cancellation.--No gain or loss shall be recognized to a beneficiary described in subsection (b)(3) of any qualified funeral trust by reason of any payment from such trust to such beneficiary by reason of cancellation of a contract referred to in subsection (b)(1).
If any payment referred to in the preceding sentence consists of property other than money, the basis of such property in the hands of such beneficiary shall be the same as the trust's basis in such property immediately before the payment.
Exception if Interest Paid To Beneficiaries Pursuant to Election.--If, on or before the date on which a qualified funeral trust is established, the trustee, pursuant to an agreement with a beneficiary of such trust, elects to pay (not less than annually) to such beneficiary all income of the trust which is attributable to such beneficiary, then for purposes of this title such beneficiary's interest in such trust shall be treated as a separate trust to which this section does not apply.
The election under this subsection, once made, shall be irrevocable.
Simplified Reporting.--The Secretary may prescribe rules for simplified reporting of all qualified funeral trusts having a single trustee.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart F of part I of subchapter J of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Treatment of funeral trusts.''
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to items which, but for such amendment, would be taken into account in taxable years of a grantor or beneficiary which end after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Trusts established before date of enactment.--In the case of a trust established before the date of the enactment of this Act, section 684(f) of such Code (as added by this section) shall be applied by treating an election which is made before the end of the 1-year period beginning with the date of the enactment of this Act as if such election were made on or before the date on which the trust was established, if such election is made pursuant to an agreement, described in such section 684(f), entered into during such period.