This Act may be cited as the ``Northern Ireland Fair Employment Practices Act of 1995''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Currently, overall unemployment in Northern Ireland is approximately 13 percent, as compared to 9 percent in the rest of the United Kingdom.
Unemployment in the minority community in Northern Ireland is 22.8 percent, and in some portions of the minority community unemployment has historically exceeded 70 percent.
The British Government Fair Employment Commission (F.E.C.
), formerly the Fair Employment Agency (F.E.A.
), has consistently reported that a member of the minority community is two times more likely to be unemployed than a member of the majority community.
The Investor Responsibility Research Center (IRRC), Washington, District of Columbia, lists 80 publicly held United States companies doing business in Northern Ireland, which employ approximately 11,000 individuals.
The religious minority population of Northern Ireland is subject to discriminatory hiring practices by some United States businesses which have resulted in a disproportionate number of minority individuals holding menial and low-paying jobs.
The MacBride Principles are a nine point set of guidelines for fair employment in Northern Ireland which establishes a corporate code of conduct to promote equal access to regional employment but does not require disinvestment, quotas, or reverse discrimination.
An article from Northern Ireland may not be entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, in the customs territory of the United States unless there is presented at the time of entry to the customs officer concerned documentation indicating that the enterprise which manufactured or assembled such article was in compliance at the time of manufacture with the principles described in section 5.
COMPLIANCE WITH FAIR EMPLOYMENT PRINCIPLES.
Compliance.--Any United States person who-- (1) has a branch or office in Northern Ireland, or (2) controls a corporation, partnership, or other enterprise in Northern Ireland, in which more than twenty people are employed shall take the necessary steps to ensure that, in operating such branch, office, corporation, partnership, or enterprise, those principles relating to employment practices set forth in section 5 are implemented and this Act is complied with.
Report.--Each United States person referred to in subsection (a) shall submit to the Secretary-- (1) a detailed and fully documented annual report, signed under oath, on showing compliance with the provisions of this Act; and (2) such other information as the Secretary determines is necessary.
The principles referred to in section 4 are the MacBride Principles, which are as follows: (1) Increasing the representation of individuals from underrepresented religious groups in the work force including managerial, supervisory, administrative, clerical, and technical jobs.--A workforce that is severely unbalanced may indicate prima facie that full equality of opportunity is not being afforded all segments of the community in Northern Ireland.
Each signatory to the MacBride Principles must make every reasonable lawful effort to increase the representation of underrepresented religious groups at all levels of its operations in Northern Ireland.
Adequate security for the protection of minority employees both at the workplace and while travelling to and from work.--While total security can be guaranteed nowhere today in Northern Ireland, each signatory to the MacBride Principles must make reasonable good faith efforts to protect workers against intimidation and physical abuse at the workplace.
Signatories must also make reasonable good faith efforts to ensure that applicants are not deterred from seeking employment because of fear for their personal safety at the workplace or while travelling to and from work.
The banning of provocative religious or political emblems from the workplace.--Each signatory to the MacBride Principles must make reasonable good faith efforts to prevent the display of provocative sectarian emblems at their plants in Northern Ireland.
All job openings should be advertised publicly and special recruitment efforts made to attract applicants from underrepresented religious groups.--Signatories to the MacBride Principles must exert special efforts to attract employment applications from the sectarian community that is substantially underrepresented in the workforce.
This should not be construed to imply a diminution of opportunity for other applicants.
Layoff, recall, and termination procedures should not in practice favor a particular religious group.--Each signatory to the MacBride Principles must make reasonable good faith efforts to ensure that layoff, recall, and termination procedures do not penalize a particular religious group disproportionately.
Layoff and termination practices that involve seniority solely can result in discrimination against a particular religious group if the bulk of employees with greatest seniority are disproportionately from another religious group.
The abolition of job reservations, apprenticeship restrictions, and differential employment criteria which discriminate on the basis of religion.--Signatories to the MacBride Principles must make reasonable good faith efforts to abolish all differential employment criteria whose effect is discrimination on the basis of religion.
For example, job reservations, and apprenticeship regulations that favor relatives of current or former employees can, in practice, promote religious discrimination if the company's workforce has historically been disproportionately drawn from another religious group.
The development of training programs that will prepare substantial numbers of current minority employees for skilled jobs, including the expansion of existing programs and the creation of new programs to train, upgrade, and improve the skills of minority employees.--This does not imply that such programs should not be open to all members of the workforce equally.
The establishment of procedures to assess, identify, and actively recruit minority employees with potential for further advancement.--This section does not imply that such procedures should not apply to all employees equally.
The appointment of a senior management staff member to oversee the company's affirmative action efforts and the setting up of timetables to carry out affirmative action principles.--In addition to the above, each signatory to the MacBride Principles is required to report annually to an independent monitoring agency on its progress in the implementation of these Principles.
Waiver of Provisions.--In any case in which the President determines that compliance by a United States person with the provisions of this Act would harm the national security of the United States, the President may waive those provisions with respect to that United States person.
The President shall publish in the Federal Register each waiver granted under this section and shall submit to the Congress a justification for granting each such waiver.
Any such waiver shall become effective at the end of ninety days after the date on which the justification is submitted to the Congress unless the Congress, within that ninety-day period, adopts a joint resolution disapproving the waiver.
In the computation of such ninety-day period, there shall be excluded the days on which either House of Congress is not in session because of an adjournment of more than three days to a day certain or because of an adjournment of the Congress sine die.
Consideration of Resolutions.-- (1) Any resolution described in subsection (a) shall be considered in the Senate in accordance with the provisions of section 601(b) of the International Security Assistance and Arms Export Control Act of 1976.
For the purpose of expediting the consideration and adoption of a resolution under subsection (a) in the House of Representatives, a motion to proceed to the consideration of such resolution after it has been reported by the appropriate committee shall be treated as highly privileged in the House of Representatives.
Definitions.--For the purpose of this Act-- (1) the term ``United States person'' means any United States resident or national and any domestic concern (including any permanent domestic establishment of any foreign concern); (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce; and (3) the term ``Northern Ireland'' includes the counties of Antrim, Armagh, Londonderry, Down, Tyrone, and Fermanagh.
Presumption.--A United States person shall be presumed to control a corporation, partnership, or other enterprise in Northern Ireland if-- (1) the United States person beneficially owns or controls (whether directly or indirectly) more than 50 percent of the outstanding voting securities of the corporation, partnership, or enterprise; (2) the United States person beneficially owns or controls (whether directly or indirectly) 25 percent or more of the voting securities of the corporation, partnership, or enterprise, if no other person owns or controls (whether directly or indirectly) an equal or larger percentage; (3) the corporation, partnership, or enterprise is operated by the United States person pursuant to the provisions of an exclusive management contract; (4) a majority of the members of the board of directors of the corporation, partnership, or enterprise are also members of the comparable governing body of the United States person; (5) the United States person has authority to appoint the majority of the members of the board of directors of the corporation, partnership, or enterprise; or (6) the United States person has authority to appoint the chief operating officer of the corporation, partnership, or enterprise.
This Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.