This Act may be cited as the ``Advancement in Pediatric Autism Research Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Infantile autism and autism spectrum disorders are biologically-based neurodevelopmental diseases that cause severe impairments in language and communication and generally manifest in young children sometime during the first two years of life.
Best estimates indicate that 1 in 500 children born today will be diagnosed with an autism spectrum disorder and that 400,000 Americans have autism or an autism spectrum disorder.
Three quarters of those with infantile autism spend their adult lives in institutions or group homes, and usually enter institutions by the age of 13.
The cost of caring for individuals with autism and autism spectrum disorder is great, and is estimated to be $13.3 billion per year solely for direct costs.
The rapid advancements in biomedical science suggest that effective treatments and a cure for autism are attainable if-- (A) there is appropriate coordination of the efforts of the various agencies of the Federal Government involved in biomedical research on autism and autism spectrum disorders; (B) there is an increased understanding of autism and autism spectrum disorders by the scientific and medical communities involved in autism research and treatment; and (C) sufficient funds are allocated to research.
Specifically, more knowledge is needed concerning-- (A) the underlying causes of autism and autism spectrum disorders, how to treat the underlying abnormality or abnormalities causing the severe symptoms of autism, and how to prevent these abnormalities from occurring in the future; (B) the epidemiology of, and the identification of risk factors for, infantile autism and autism spectrum disorders; (C) the development of methods for early medical diagnosis and functional assessment of individuals with autism and autism spectrum disorders, including identification and assessment of the subtypes within the autism spectrum disorders, for the purpose of monitoring the course of the disease and developing medically sound strategies for improving the outcomes of such individuals; (D) existing biomedical and diagnostic data that are relevant to autism and autism spectrum disorders for dissemination to medical personnel, particularly pediatricians, to aid in the early diagnosis and treatment of this disease; and (E) the costs incurred in educating and caring for individuals with autism and autism spectrum disorders.
In 1998, the National Institutes of Health announced a program of research on autism and autism spectrum disorders.
A sufficient level of funding should be made available for carrying out the program.
EXPANSION, INTENSIFICATION, AND COORDINATION OF ACTIVITIES OF NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH WITH RESPECT TO RESEARCH ON AUTISM.
Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``autism ``Sec.
In General.-- ``(1) Expansion of activities.--The Director of NIH (in this section referred to as the `Director') shall expand, intensify, and coordinate the activities of the National Institutes of Health with respect to research on autism.
Administration of program; collaboration among agencies.--The Director shall carry out this section acting through the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health and in collaboration with the Director of the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, the Director of the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke, and the Director of the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders.
Autism coordinating committee.--The Director shall ensure that-- ``(A) there is in operation at the National Institutes of Health a committee to coordinate, with respect to research on autism, the activities of the national research institutes specified in paragraph (2); and ``(B) the coordinating committee is composed of the directors of such national research institutes and such other officials of the National Institutes of Health as the Director determines to be appropriate.
Centers of Excellence.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director shall under subsection (a)(1) make awards of grants and contracts to public or nonprofit private entities to pay all or part of the cost of planning, establishing, improving, and providing basic operating support for centers of excellence regarding research on autism.
Research, training, and information and education.-- Each center under paragraph (1) shall conduct-- ``(A) basic and clinical research into the cause, diagnosis, early detection, prevention, control, and treatment of autism, including research in the fields of developmental neurobiology, genetics, and psychopharmacology; ``(B) training programs for physicians, scientists, and other health and allied health professionals; and ``(C) information and continuing education programs for physicians and other health and allied health professionals who provide care for patients with autism.
Services for patients.--A center under paragraph (1) may expend amounts provided under such paragraph to carry out a program to make individuals aware of opportunities to participate as subjects in research conducted by the centers.
The program may provide fees to such subjects.
The program may, in accordance with such criteria as the Director may establish, provide to such subjects health care, referrals for health and other services, and such incidental services as will facilitate the participation of individuals as such subjects.
Stipends for training of health professionals.--A center under paragraph (1) may expend amounts provided under such paragraph to provide stipends for health professionals enrolled in training programs under paragraph (2)(B).
Coordination of centers; reports.--The Director shall, as appropriate, provide for the coordination of information among centers under paragraph (1) and ensure regular communication between such centers, and may require the periodic preparation of reports on the activities of the centers and the submission of the reports to the Director and the coordinating committee under subsection (a)(3).
Organization of centers.--Each center under paragraph (1) shall use the facilities of a single institution, or be formed from a consortium of cooperating institutions, meeting such requirements as may be prescribed by the Director.
Number of centers; duration of support.--The Director shall, subject to the extent of amounts made available in appropriations Acts, provide for the establishment of not less than five centers under paragraph (1).
Support of such a center may be for a period not exceeding 5 years.
Such period may be extended for one or more additional periods not exceeding 5 years if the operations of such center have been reviewed by an appropriate technical and scientific peer review group established by the Director and if such group has recommended to the Director that such period should be extended.
Information and Education.--The Director shall under subsection (a)(1) carry out a program to provide information and education on autism to health professionals and the general public, including information and education on advances in the diagnosis and treatment of autism.
Facilitation of Research.--The Director shall under subsection (a)(1) provide by contract for a program under which samples of tissues and genetic materials that are of use in research on autism are donated, collected, preserved, and made available for such research.
The program shall be carried out in accordance with accepted scientific and medical standards for the donation, collection, and preservation of such samples.
Public Input.--The Director shall under subsection (a)(1) provide for means through which the public can obtain information on the existing and planned programs and activities of the National Institutes of Health with respect to autism and through which the Director can receive comments from the public regarding such programs and activities.
Autism Spectrum Disorders.--For purposes of this section, the term `autism' includes autism spectrum disorders to the extent determined by the Director to be appropriate.
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $40,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2003.
Such authorizations of appropriations are in addition to any other authorization of appropriations that is available for such purpose.
Allocations.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Director shall make available not less than 75 percent for carrying out subsection (b), not less than 6 percent for carrying out subsection (c), and not less than 4 percent for carrying out subsection (d).