This Act may be cited as the ``Indoor Air Act of 1994''.
The Administrator shall consult and coordinate with the Secretary of Labor, the Secretary of Energy, the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Consumer Product Safety Commission, and other appropriate agencies in implementing this Act.
GUIDELINES FOR IDENTIFYING, REDUCING, AND PREVENTING SIGNIFICANT INDOOR AIR HEALTH RISKS.
List.--Not later than 4 years after the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, publish a list of common significant indoor air health risks.
In identifying a common significant indoor air health risk, the Administrator shall use the best reasonably available scientific data.
Guidelines.--Concurrently with the listing of each common significant indoor air health risk under subsection (a), the Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, publish voluntary guidelines for identifying, reducing, and preventing the common significant indoor air health risk.
Such guidelines may include information and a range of recommendations for operation and maintenance of existing buildings, the design and construction of new buildings, building renovation, and such other activities as necessary to identify and reduce or prevent the common significant indoor air health risks listed under subsection (a).
The guidelines shall achieve significant risk reduction, be technologically achievable and readily implementable, take into consideration safety, energy, and other relevant factors, include an assessment of their effectiveness and cost, and be based on available research and expertise and the study priorities established by the Administrator pursuant to subsection (e).
Review and Revision.--The Administrator shall periodically review and, as necessary, after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, revise the list of common significant indoor air health risks and the guidelines published under this section.
At a minimum, a review and revision shall be completed not later than 4 years after the initial publication of the list and guidelines.
Consistency With Indoor Air Regulations of Other Federal Agencies.--The Administrator shall, after consultation with the Secretary of Labor, insure that the guidelines under this section are fully consistent with any Federal workplace regulations addressing indoor air quality risks.
The guidelines may recommend such additional voluntary actions as may be necessary to protect persons other than workers covered by such regulations from common significant indoor air health risks listed under subsection (a).
The Administrator shall, after consultation with the Secretary of Energy, insure that the guidelines under this section are consistent with applicable energy conservation and efficiency laws and regulations administered by the Secretary.
Priority for Indoor Air Health Studies.--The Administrator shall, subject to the availability of appropriations and using existing authorities, give priority to conducting and providing financial or other assistance to studies concerning indoor air quality, including the following: (1) Human exposure to indoor air pollutants, including baseline levels of exposure in various types of buildings.
The sources of indoor air pollutants.
The effects on human health of indoor air pollutants, including additive, cumulative, and synergistic effects on the general population and subpopulations particularly at risk.
Methods for identifying, reducing, and preventing common significant indoor air health risks.
Appropriate studies, such as those under paragraph (1) and (3), shall be subject to peer review.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the commencement of fiscal year 1996, and after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, the Administrator shall submit a report to Congress on persons operating contractor businesses engaged in the identification, reduction, and prevention of significant indoor air health risks.
Such report shall identify the types or classes of contractors regularly engaged in identifying and reducing or preventing significant indoor air health risks and shall determine the need for a program to certify contractors engaged in 1 or more activities relating to the identification and reduction or prevention of significant indoor air health risks, taking into account costs, benefits, the availability of persons with adequate training, experience, and expertise, the funds needed for such a program, and other relevant factors.
The report shall also consider whether such a program should be carried out by the Administrator directly or by contract, or by another Federal agency or by State or local government.
Certification.--(1) Based on the report under subsection (a), not later than 2 years after the report required by subsection (a) is submitted to Congress, and after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, the Administrator shall establish a program to provide for the certification of contractors engaged on a regular basis in the identification of common significant indoor air health risks.
Based on the report under subsection (a), and after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, the Administrator may also establish a program to certify appropriate contractors engaged in the reduction or prevention of common significant indoor air health risks.
No person may be certified under any program established under paragraph (1) unless, at a minimum-- (A) such person demonstrates an ability to comply with the guidelines established under section 3; and (B) individuals engaged in the identification, reduction, or prevention of common significant indoor air health risks on behalf of such person complete an appropriate course of training, as defined by the Administrator.
Persons certified under this subsection shall comply with the guidelines under section 3 when engaged in the identification, reduction, or prevention of common significant indoor air health risks.
Fees.--A reasonable nondiscriminatory annual fee for the certification of persons under this section shall be imposed by the Administrator or by such other agency or contractor that operates the program.
The fee shall be periodically established at such level as is necessary to cover all costs of the certification program under this section.
Such fees shall be structured such that a person's liability for such fees is reasonably based on the proportion of the program's operating costs that relate to such person, and such person's liability for such fees shall not be based on the income of such person.
Such fees, if collected by the Administrator, shall be available, subject to appropriations, to the Administrator to pay for such costs or to reimburse another Federal agency or a State or local government.
The collection and use of fees shall be audited by the Administrator.
Suspension or Revocation.--The Administrator may suspend or revoke any certification issued under this section whenever the Administrator determines, after notice of at least 60 days to such person, that the holder of the certification has violated any requirement of this section or condition of such certification.
Any person whose certification is proposed to be suspended or revoked, or whose certification is denied, by the Administrator shall be entitled to an administrative hearing.
Participation.--Participation in the certification program under this section shall be voluntary.
Information.--The Administrator shall publish and disseminate-- (1) the list of common significant indoor air health risks under section 3, (2) the guidelines under section 3 for identifying, reducing, and preventing common significant indoor air health risks, and (3) the indoor air health advisories under subsection (b).
Indoor Air Health Advisories.--The Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, and after review and comment by the Science Advisory Board, publish health advisories addressing the health effects of common significant indoor air health risks.
Each health advisory shall, at a minimum-- (1) describe the adverse human health effects of a common significant indoor air health risk, including the risk to vulnerable subpopulations; (2) characterize the causes of the significant indoor air health risk; and (3) summarize the guidelines under section 3 for identifying, reducing, and preventing the significant indoor air health risk.
The Administrator shall publish a health advisory for a common significant indoor air health risk at the same time that the Administrator publishes guidelines for such health risk under section 3.
The Administrator shall, after notice and opportunity of at least 90 days for public comment, develop a voluntary program to provide Federal recognition to buildings that are operated and maintained, taking into consideration all uses of the building, to prevent or minimize common significant indoor air health risks in an exemplary manner while at the same time providing significant energy efficiency benefits and for which there are no outstanding indoor air quality citations by other agencies.
Such recognition shall be based on objective, nondiscriminatory criteria.
STATE AND LOCAL INDOOR AIR HEALTH GRANTS.
In General.--The Administrator may provide grants to States and to local governments to develop and implement programs proposed by any such State or local government to identify, reduce, and prevent common significant indoor air health risks.
Federal Share of Funding.--The Federal share of grants under this section shall not exceed 75 percent of the costs incurred in developing and implementing such programs.
Such share shall be based on the availability of funds appropriated annually and shall supplement State funds for this purpose.
The Administrator, in making such grants, shall seek to treat all States equitably.
BUILDING HEALTH ASSESSMENT PROGRAM.
Authority.--The Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health shall implement a Building Assessment Program to provide assistance and guidance to employers and employees on measures to reduce significant indoor air health risks.
Selection of Buildings for Assessment.--An assessment may be initiated in response to a request from any employer or employee (including an authorized representative of the employee) submitted to the Director for a building assessment.
In making such voluntary assessment, the Director shall have the authority, pursuant to such request, to conduct on-site assessments of individual buildings, including Federal, State, and municipal buildings.
In selecting a building for assessment pursuant to such request, the Director shall consider (1) the seriousness and extent of significant indoor air health risks, and (2) the potential for the building assessment to expand knowledge of building assessment methods and response measures.
Assessment Elements.--Assessments shall include, at a minimum, identification of (1) probable significant indoor air health risks, (2) probable sources and health effects of identified significant indoor air health risks, and (3) in cases where a probable health risk has been identified, measures for eliminating, controlling, or reducing significant indoor air health risks.
If there are applicable guidelines under section 3, the measures included in the assessment shall be consistent with the guidelines, unless the Director adequately explains otherwise.
Reports.--The Director shall prepare and provide a report to the employer, employees (and the authorized representative of the employees), and the building owner or representative as promptly as possible.
Nothing in this Act shall affect the Administrator's authority under other provisions of law to conduct research, development, or demonstration projects relating to indoor air quality or be construed as providing new authority to conduct research, development, or demonstrations.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed as applying to motor vehicles of any kind.
RELATION TO OTHER LAW.
State and Local Authority.--Nothing in this Act shall preempt any Federal, State, or local law or rule of law which is more protective of human health than this Act.
Occupational Safety and Health.--In exercising any authority under this Act, the Administrator shall not, for purposes of section 4(b)(1) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, be deemed to be exercising statutory authority to prescribe or enforce standards or regulations affecting occupational safety and health.
Relationship to Other EPA Authorities.--The Administrator shall insure that any action under this Act is consistent with, and does not duplicate, actions of the Administrator under other authority of law addressing indoor air quality.
Except as provided in section 4, nothing in this Act shall be construed as authorizing the Administrator to exercise any authority to prescribe or enforce any standards or regulations regarding common significant indoor air health risks.
Not later than 2 years after the commencement of fiscal year 1996 and every 2 years thereafter, the Administrator shall submit to the Congress a report on the activities carried out by the Administrator pursuant to this Act.
RISK ANALYSIS AND PRESENTATION.
Goal.--It is the intent of Congress that risk assessments conducted under this Act be conducted in accordance with sound, unbiased, and objective scientific practices.
Public Documents.--The Administrator, in carrying out the Administrator's responsibilities under this Act, shall ensure that the presentation of information on significant indoor air health risks is unbiased and informative.
To the extent feasible, documents made available to the general public which describe the degree of risk from exposure shall, at a minimum, characterize the population or populations addressed by any risk estimates; state the expected risk for the specific population; and state the reasonable range of uncertainty.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The term ``significant indoor air health risk'' means a level of indoor air pollutants, or a condition that may result in a level of indoor air pollutants, that, based on adequate scientific and technical evidence and measurement, is reasonably anticipated to adversely affect human health.
The term ``indoor air pollutant'' means any substance or biological organism which is emitted into, or otherwise enters, air of any kind in a building, structure, or facility.
The term ``person'' includes an individual, a corporation, partnership, association, State, municipality, political subdivision of a State, and any agency, department, or instrumentality of the executive, legislative or judicial branch of the Government of the United States or of any State and any officer, agent or employee thereof.
The term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Maraiana Islands.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to authorize a national program to reduce the threat to human health posed by exposure to contaminants in the air indoors.