This Act may be cited as the ``Private Wireless Spectrum Availability Act''.
As used in this Act-- (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Federal Communications Commission.
Public safety.--The term ``public safety'' means fire, police, or emergency medical service including critical care medical telemetry, and such other services related to public safety as the Commission may include within the definition of public safety for purposes of this Act.
Private wireless.--The term ``private wireless'' encompasses all land mobile telecommunications systems operated by or through industrial, business, transportation, educational, philanthropic or ecclesiastical organizations where these systems, the operation of which may be shared, are for the licensees' internal use, rather than subscriber-based Commercial Mobile Radio Services (CMRS) systems.
Spectrum lease fee.--The term ``spectrum lease fee'' means a periodic payment for the use of a given amount of electromagnetic spectrum in a given area in consideration of which the user is granted a license for such use.
The Congress finds that: (1) Private wireless communications systems enhance the competitiveness of American industry and business in international commerce, promote the development of national infrastructure, improve the delivery of products and services to consumers in the United States and abroad, and contribute to the economic and social welfare of citizens of the United States.
The highly specialized telecommunications requirements of licensees in the private wireless services would be served, and a more favorable climate would be created for the allocation of additional electromagnetic spectrum for those services if an alternative license administration methodology, in addition to the existing competitive bidding process, were made available to the Commission.
Title I of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``SEC.
SPECTRUM LEASE FEE PROGRAM.
Spectrum Lease Fees.-- ``(1) In general.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Private Wireless Spectrum Availability Act, the Commission shall by rule-- ``(A) implement a system of spectrum lease fees applicable to newly allocated frequency bands, as described in section 5 of the Private Wireless Spectrum Availability Act, assigned to systems (other than public safety systems (as defined in section 2(2) of the Private Wireless Spectrum Availability Act)) in private wireless service; ``(B) provide appropriate incentives for licensees to confine their radio communications to the area of operation actually required for that communication; and ``(C) permit private land mobile frequency advisory committees certified by the Commission to assist in the computation, assessment, collection, and processing of amounts received under the system of spectrum lease fees.
Formula.--The Commission shall include as a part of the rulemaking carried out under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) a formula to be used by private wireless licensees and certified frequency advisory committees to compute spectrum lease fees; and ``(B) an explanation of the technical factors included in the spectrum lease fee formula, including the relative weight given to each factor.
Fee Basis.-- ``(1) Initial fees.--Fees assessed under the spectrum lease fee system established under subsection (a) shall be based on the approximate value of the assigned frequencies to licensees.
In assessing the value of the assigned frequencies to licensees under this subsection, the Commission shall take into account all relevant factors, including the amount of assigned bandwidth, the coverage area of a system, the geographic location of the system, and the degree of frequency sharing with other licensees in the same area.
These factors shall be incorporated in the formula described in subsection (a)(2).
Adjustment of fees.--The Commission may adjust the formula developed under subsection (a)(2) whenever it determines that adjustment is necessary in order to calculate the lease fees more accurately or fairly.
Fee cap.--The spectrum lease fees shall be set so that, over a 10-year license term, the amount of revenues generated will not exceed the revenues generated from the auction of comparable spectrum.
For purposes of this paragraph, the `comparable spectrum' shall mean spectrum located within 500 megahertz of that spectrum licensed in a concluded auction for mobile radio communication licenses.
Application to Private Wireless Systems.--After the Commission has implemented the spectrum leasing fee system under subsection (a) and provided licensees access to new spectrum as defined in section 6(c)(2) of the Private Wireless Spectrum Availability Act, it shall assess the fees established for that system against all licensees authorized in any new frequency bands allocated for private wireless use.''.
SPECTRUM LEASE FEE PROGRAM INITIATION.
In General.--The Commission shall allocate for use in the spectrum lease fee program under section 12 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 162) not less than 12 megahertz of electromagnetic spectrum, previously unallocated to private wireless, located between 150 megahertz and 1000 megahertz on a nationwide basis.
Existing Incumbents.--In allocating electromagnetic spectrum under subsection (a), the Commission shall ensure that existing incumbencies do not inhibit effective access to use of newly allocated spectrum to the detriment of the spectrum lease fee program.
Timeframe.-- (1) Allocation.--The Commission shall allocate electromagnetic spectrum under subsection (a) within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Access.--The Commission shall take such reasonable action as may be necessary to ensure that initial access to electromagnetic spectrum allocated under subsection (a) commences not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Section 5 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 155) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(f) Delegation to Certified Frequency Advisory Committees.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission may, by published rule or order, utilize the services of certified private land mobile frequency advisory committees to assist in the computation, assessment, collection, and processing of funds generated through the spectrum lease fee program under section 12 of this Act.
Except as provided in paragraph (3), a decision or order made or taken pursuant to such delegation shall have the same force and effect, and shall be made, evidenced, and enforced in the same manner, as decisions or orders of the Commission.
Processing and depositing of fees.--A frequency advisory committee shall deposit any spectrum lease fees collected by it under Commission authority with a banking agent designated by the Commission in the same manner as it deposits application filing fees collected under section 8 of this Act.
Review of actions.--A decision or order under paragraph (1) is subject to review in the same manner, and to the same extent, as decisions or orders under subsection (c)(1) are subject to review under paragraphs (4) through (7) of subsection (c).
PROHIBITION OF USE OF COMPETITIVE BIDDING.
Section 309(j)(6) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 309(j)(6)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting a semicolon and ``or''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(I) preclude the Commission from considering the public interest benefits of private wireless communications systems (as defined in section 2(3) of the Spectrum Efficiency Reform Act of 1977) and making allocations in circumstances in which-- ``(i) the pre-defined geographic market areas required for competitive bidding processes are incompatible with the needs of radio services for site-specific system deployment; ``(ii) the unique operating characteristics and requirements of Federal agency spectrum users demand, as a prerequisite for sharing of Federal spectrum, that nongovernment access to the spectrum be restricted to radio systems that are non subscriber-based; ``(iii) licensee concern for operational safety, security, and productivity are of paramount importance and, as a consequence, there is no incentive, interest, or intent to use the assigned frequency for producing subscriber-based revenue; or ``(iv) the Commission, in its discretion, deems competitive bidding processes to be incompatible with the public interest, convenience, and necessity.''.
USE OF PROCEEDS FROM SPECTRUM LEASE FEES.
Establishment of Account.--There is hereby established on the books of the Treasury an account for the spectrum license fees generated by the spectrum license fee system established under section 12 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 162).
Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), all proceeds from spectrum lease fees shall be deposited in the Treasury in accordance with chapter 33 of title 31, United States Code, and credited to the account established by this subsection.
Administrative Expenses.--Out of amounts received from spectrum lease payments a fair and reasonable amount, as determined by the Commission, may be retained by a certified frequency advisory committee acting under section 5(f) of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 155(f)) to cover costs incurred by it in administering the spectrum lease fee program.
LEASING NOT TO AFFECT COMMISSION'S DUTY TO ALLOCATE.
The implementation of spectrum lease fees as a license administration mechanism is not a substitute for effective spectrum allocation procedures.
The Commission shall continue to allocate spectrum to various services on the basis of fulfilling the needs of these services, and shall not use fees or auctions as an allocation mechanism.