FINDINGS, PURPOSE, AND DEFINITIONS.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) A primary purpose of the National Fire Plan is to reduce the risk of severe wild fires in the areas, known as the ``wildland/urban interface'', where communities adjoin or intermingle with Federal public lands.
Substantial amounts of funds have been appropriated to the Forest Service and agencies of the Department of the Interior to implement the National Fire Plan.
The Comptroller General has found that implementation of the National Fire Plan still lacks clearly defined and effective leadership and that the Forest Service and agencies of the Department of the Interior do not have adequate data for making informed decisions and for measuring their progress.
In a December 2001 report to the Secretary of the Interior, the National Academy of Public Information recommended establishment of an interagency council to implement both the Federal Wildland Fire Management Policy and the National Fire Plan.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to improve implementation of the National Fire Plan with respect to reducing the buildup of vegetative fuels in the wildland/urban interface.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Federal public lands.--The term ``Federal public lands'' means lands managed by the Forest Service or an agency of the Department of the Interior.
National fire plan.--The term ``National Fire Plan'' means the plans, strategies, projects, and activities of the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior to respond to adverse impacts on communities and the environment from wildfires on Federal public lands, which are based on and reflect the following: (A) The report of the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior entitled ``Managing the Impact of Wildfires on Communities and the Environment'', dated September 8, 2000.
Congressional direction accompanying appropriations to the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior for wildland fire management for fiscal year 2001 and subsequent years.
Wildlife/urban interface.--The term ``wildland/urban interface'' means a geographic area where-- (A) homes and other structures are immediately adjacent to or intermixed with Federal public lands containing flammable vegetation; (B) the conditions on such lands are conducive to large-scale disturbance events; and (C) there is a significant probability of a fire ignition and a resulting spread of the disturbance event.
INTERAGENCY COUNCIL TO COORDINATE IMPLEMENTATION OF NATIONAL FIRE PLAN.
Establishment and Membership.--The Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture shall establish an interagency council to coordinate implementation of the National Fire Plan.
The council shall include at a minimum the following members, or their designees: (1) The Chief of the Forest Service.
The Assistant Secretary of the Interior for Indian Affairs.
The Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
The Director of the National Park Service.
The Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
Duties.-- (1) Criteria to identify affected communities.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the council shall define consistent criteria to identify the communities within the wildland/urban interface that are most at risk from severe wildfires.
Goals and objectives of plan.--The council shall establish clearly defined and outcome-oriented goals and objectives for agencies responsible for implementation of the National Fire Plan.
Measurement of results.--The council shall establish quantifiable annual and long-term performance measures to assess progress in reducing the risks to communities identified pursuant to criteria required by paragraph (1).
Long-term implementation strategy.--The council shall develop a comprehensive long-term strategy for implementation of the National Fire Plan that incorporates the criteria, goals and objectives, and performance measures defined or established under paragraphs (1), (2), and (3).
Use of removed materials.--The council shall provide for collection of data necessary to assist the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior to determine the most effective and appropriate methods of utilizing fuel materials removed from Federal public lands covered by the National Fire Plan.
Consultation.--In defining the criteria and establishing the goals and objectives required by subsection (b), the council shall consult with appropriate State, local, and tribal officials and shall provide an opportunity for receipt and consideration of public comments and suggestions.
FOCUS OF FUEL-REDUCTION EFFORTS.
In implementing the National Fire Plan, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall assure that-- (1) in conducting fuel-reduction efforts, priority is given to the communities identified pursuant to the criteria required by section 2(b)(1); and (2) no other projects to reduce fuels are carried out in a State until all necessary fuel-reduction efforts with respect to such communities in that State are completed.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to Congress a report on the steps taken to implement this Act.