This Act may be cited as the ``Microcredit for Self-Sufficiency Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) More than 1,000,000,000 people in the developing world are living in severe poverty.
According to the United Nations Children's Fund, the mortality for children under the age of 5 is 10 percent in all developing countries and nearly 20 percent in the poorest countries.
Nearly 33,000 children die each day from malnutrition and disease which is largely preventable.
(A) Women in poverty generally have larger work loads and less access to educational and economic opportunities than their male counterparts.
Directly aiding the poorest of the poor, especially women, in the developing world has a positive effect not only on family incomes, but also on child nutrition, health, and education, since women tend to reinvest income in their families.
(A) The poor in the developing world, particularly women, generally lack stable employment and social safety nets.
Many women turn to self-employment to generate a substantial portion of their livelihood.
These poor entrepreneurs are often trapped in poverty because they cannot obtain credit at reasonable rates to build their asset base or expand their otherwise viable self- employment activities.
Many of the poor are forced to pay interest rates as high as 10 percent per day to money lenders.
(A) On February 2-4, 1997, an international Microcredit Summit was held in Washington, D.C., to launch a plan to expand access to credit for self-employment and other financial and business services to 100,000,000 of the world's poorest families, especially the women of those families, by 2005.
With an average of 5 people to a family, achieving this goal will mean that the benefits of microcredit will reach nearly half of the world's more than 1,000,000,000 absolute poor.
(A) The poor are able to expand their incomes and their businesses dramatically when they have access to loans at reasonable interest rates.
Through the development of self-sustaining microcredit programs, poor people themselves can lead the fight against hunger and poverty.
(A) Nongovernmental organizations such as the Grameen Bank, Accion International, and the Foundation for International Community Assistance (FINCA) have been successful in lending directly to the very poor.
These institutions generate repayment rates averaging 95 percent or higher.
(A) Microcredit institutions not only reduce poverty, but also reduce the dependency on foreign assistance.
Interest income on a credit portfolio can be used to pay recurring institutional costs, assuring that the long-term development is sustained.
Microcredit institutions leverage foreign assistance resources because loans are recycled, generating new benefits to program participants.
The development of sustainable microcredit institutions that provide credit and training, and mobilize domestic savings, are critical to a global strategy of poverty reduction and broad-based economic development.
(A) In 1994, AID launched a Microenterprise Initiative in consultation with Congress.
The Initiative was committed to expanding funding for AID's microenterprise programs, provided funding of $137,000,000 for fiscal year 1994, and set a goal that, by the end of fiscal year 1996, half of all microenterprise resources would support programs and institutions providing credit to the poorest with loans under $300.
In fiscal year 1996, total funding for microenterprise activities fell to $111,000,000 of which only 39 percent was used for programs benefiting the poorest with loans under $300.
Increased investment in microcredit institutions serving the poorest is critical to achieving the Microcredit Summit's goal.
AID's funding for microenterprise activities in the developing world should be expanded to $160,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 to parallel the growing capacity of microcredit institutions in the developing world.
Providing the United States share of the global investment needed to achieve the goal of the Microcredit Summit will require only a modest increase in United States funding for international microcredit programs, with an increased focus on institutions serving the poorest.
(A) In order to reach tens of millions of the poorest with microcredit, it is crucial to expand and replicate successful microcredit institutions.
Microcredit institutions need assistance in developing their institutional capacity to expand their services and tap commercial sources of capital.
PVOs and other nongovernmental organizations have demonstrated competence in developing networks of local microcredit institutions that can reach large numbers of the very poor, and help the very poor achieve financial sustainability.
Since AID has developed very effective partnerships with PVOs and other nongovernmental organizations, AID should place a priority on investing in PVOs and other nongovernmental organizations through AID's central funding mechanisms.
By expanding and replicating successful microcredit institutions, AID should be able to assure the creation of a global infrastructure to provide financial services to the world's poorest families.
(A) AID can provide leadership among bilateral and multilateral development aid agencies as such agencies expand their support of microenterprise for the poorest.
AID should seek to improve the coordination of efforts at the operational level to promote the best practices for providing financial services to the poor and to ensure that adequate institutional capacity is developed.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to provide for the continuation and expansion of AID's commitment to develop microcredit institutions; (2) to make microenterprise development the centerpiece of the overall economic growth strategy of AID; (3) to support and develop the capacity of United States PVOs, and other international nongovernmental organizations to provide credit, savings, and training services to microentrepreneurs; and (4) to increase the amount of assistance devoted to providing access to credit for the poorest sector in developing countries, particularly women.
In this Act: (1) AID.--The term ``AID'' means the United States Agency for International Development.
Microcredit, microenterprise, poverty lending; poverty lending portion of mixed programs; mixed programs.--The terms ``microcredit'', ``microenterprise'', ``poverty lending portion of mixed programs'', and ``mixed programs'' have the meaning given such terms under the 1994 Microenterprise Initiative of AID.
PVOs and other nongovernmental organizations.--The term ``PVOs and other nongovernmental organizations'' means-- (A) private voluntary organizations (including cooperative organizations), and (B) international, regional, or national nongovernmental organizations, that are active in the region or country where the project is located and that have the capacity to develop and implement microenterprise programs that are oriented toward working directly with the poor, especially the poorest and women.
Authorization.-- (1) In general.--The President, acting through the Administrator of AID, is authorized to establish programs to provide credit and other assistance for microenterprises in developing countries.
Use of pvos and other nongovernmental organizations.-- Programs to provide credit for microenterprises and related activities under this section shall be carried out primarily by United States PVOs and other United States and indigenous nongovernmental organizations, including credit unions, cooperative organizations, and other private financial intermediaries.
Eligibility Criteria.--The Administrator of AID shall establish criteria for determining which entities described in subsection (a)(2) are eligible to carry out the purposes described in section 2(b).
Such criteria shall include the following: (1) The extent to which the recipients of credit from the entity lack access to the local formal financial sector.
The extent to which the recipients of credit from the entity are among the poorest people in the country.
The extent to which the entity is oriented toward working directly with poor women.
The extent to which the entity is implementing a plan to become financially self-reliant by charging realistic interest rates to its borrowers.
Funding Levels for Fiscal Year 1999.-- (1) In general.--Of the amounts made available to carry out chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes), not less than $160,000,000 of the funds made available for fiscal year 1999 shall be used to provide assistance under this Act.
The funds authorized under the preceding sentence shall be in addition to any funds made available in fiscal year 1999 for microenterprise activities in the former Soviet Union and Eastern Europe pursuant to the FREEDOM Support Act and any funds for special assistance initiatives within Europe, the newly independent states of the Former Soviet Union, Asia, and the Near East.
Additional requirements.-- (A) Poverty lending.--Of the funds made available under paragraph (1), not less than $80,000,000 shall be used to support poverty lending.
Support of pvos and other nongovernmental organizations.--Of the funds made available under paragraph (1), not less than $35,000,000 shall be provided through the central funding mechanisms of AID for support of United States PVOs and United States and indigenous nongovernmental organizations.
Matching grant program.--Of the funds made available under paragraph (1), not less than $10,000,000 shall be used for the private voluntary organizations matching grant program of AID for support of United States PVOs.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) To support poverty lending.--The term ``to support poverty lending'' means-- (i) funds lent to members of the poverty target population (as defined in subparagraph (B)) in low-income countries in amounts equivalent to $300 or less in 1997 United States dollars; and (ii) funds used for institutional development of an entity described in subsection (a)(2), that is engaged in-- (I) making loans of $300 or less in 1997 United States dollars to members of the poverty target population; or (II) the poverty lending portion of a mixed program.
Poverty target population.--The term ``poverty target population'' means the poorest 50 percent of those individuals living below the poverty line, defined by the national government of the foreign country to which funds are being provided.
Strengthening of Appropriate Mechanisms.--The Administrator of AID shall-- (1) strengthen appropriate mechanisms, including mechanisms for central microenterprise programs, for the purpose of strengthening the institutional development of the entities described in section 4(a)(2); and (2) develop and strengthen appropriate mechanisms for the purpose of gathering and disseminating the best practice for targeting microcredit to the poorest segment of the population.
Monitoring System.--In order to sustain the impact of the assistance authorized under section 4, the Administrator of AID shall establish a monitoring system that-- (1) establishes performance goals for such assistance and expresses such goals in an objective and quantifiable form; (2) establishes performance systems or indicators to measure the extent to which projects are achieving such goals; and (3) provides a basis for recommendations for adjustments to such assistance to enhance the benefit of such assistance for the very poor, particularly women.
Additional Monitoring Requirements.--As a part of the monitoring system established under subsection (b), the Administrator of AID-- (1) using data provided by lending institutions, shall monitor the actual amount of microenterprise credit and the number of loans made available to the poverty target population as a result of each project or program carried out pursuant to this Act; (2) using data provided by lending institutions, shall monitor the amount of funding provided pursuant to this Act which is allocated to organizations engaged in making loans of under $300 to the poverty target population, or to the poverty lending portion of mixed programs; (3) shall report to Congress annually on the progress in implementing AID's institutional plan of action to achieve the Microcredit Summit goal of expanding access to credit and other financial and business services to 100,000,000 of the world's poorest families, especially the women in those families, by 2005; and (4) shall include a summary of the information collected under paragraphs (1) and (2) in AID's annual presentation to Congress.