This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Development Information Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the availability of accurate and timely information on economic development programs of the Federal Government, States, and political subdivisions of States, and of other data of use to public officials, economic development practitioners, business and community leaders, academia, and the general public in their pursuit of sound economic development, is essential to the maintenance of the national economy at a high level and to the relief of those regions, counties, and communities suffering substantial and persistent unemployment and underemployment; and (2) previous efforts of the Economic Development Administration to provide such information, through an Office of Economic Conversion Information, have achieved success, primarily in assisting communities impacted by the closing or realignment of military or Department of Energy installations, or the closing or downsizing of defense-related industries.
Declaration.--Congress declares that, in furtherance of maintaining the national economy at a high level-- (1) the provision of economic development information should be expanded so that such information is available to assist all areas suffering from economic distress or long-term economic deterioration; and (2) such information should provide access to various Governmentwide and other economic development resources in such format as to be readily useful to those who may have occasion to employ the information for economic development purposes.
OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION.
Title VI of the Public Works and Economic Development Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3201-3204) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT INFORMATION.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish in the Economic Development Administration an Office of Economic Development Information (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Office').
Duties.--The Office shall-- ``(1) serve as a central information clearinghouse on matters relating to economic development programs and activities of the Federal Government and State governments, including political subdivisions of States; ``(2) help potential and actual applicants for economic development assistance under Federal, State, and local laws in locating and applying for such assistance, including financial and technical assistance; and ``(3) develop electronic links or other connections to information databases provided by Federal departments and agencies, State and local governmental agencies, public and private entities, and individuals to assist other such agencies, entities, and individuals in the process of identifying and applying for assistance and resources under economic development programs and activities of the Federal, State, and local governments.
Electronic Links and Connections.--The databases to which the Office shall develop electronic links or other connections shall include the following kinds of information: ``(1) Relevant information concerning available economic development programs of the Federal Government, including key contact personnel, descriptions of the application process, eligibility requirements and criteria, selection and followup procedures, and other such relevant information.
Relevant information concerning major State and local governmental economic development programs, including lists of appropriate offices, officers, and contact personnel connected with, or involved in, such programs.
Relevant and available economic data and trends, including information about the national, regional, and local impacts of trade agreements, defense spending and downsizing, technological change, and other sources of substantial economic dislocation.
Case studies and best practices in economic development, adjustment, and reinvestment.
Technology utilization programs, assistance, and resources.
Compilations of published works (including books, reports, articles, videos, and tapes), and selected texts of such works, related to all facets of economic development.
Information concerning current revolving loan fund programs and finance programs directly related to economic development objectives.
Resources that assist in identifying potential sources of capital for businesses, including revolving loan funds, venture capital, and other capital tools.
Resources that assist economic developers in understanding and pursuing sustainable development and initiatives.
Public Access to Data Services.--The Office shall establish the means to ensure easy access by the public to the Office's information clearinghouse, and shall take all appropriate steps to ensure that the clearinghouse and its resources are as accessible, user-friendly, and culturally neutral as possible.
As soon as practicable, and until replaced by a means determined by the Secretary to be more effective in accomplishing the purposes of this section, access to the data services of the Office shall include each of the following means: ``(1) An Internet web site, with sorted key locations by economic development related topics for users to access lists of various Governmentwide and other economic development web site resources.
A toll-free nationwide telephone number to provide direct phone access to the public.
On-line electronic access through existing computer network services and publicly available computer database access facilities.
Printed manuals and orientation materials.
Periodic orientation workshops available to the public.
On-call information specialists to address special problems requiring person-to-person assistance.
Coordination With Other Federal Departments and Agencies.-- The Secretary shall enter into such agreements and understandings as may be necessary with other Federal departments and agencies to coordinate the accomplishment of the objectives of this section.
Economic Development Defined.--In this section, the term ``economic development'' includes economic adjustment, disaster recovery, industrial retention, and defense reinvestment.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary.