SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Water Resources Development Act of 1994''.
Table of Contents.-- Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Cost-sharing of environmental projects.
Recovery of costs for clean up of hazardous or toxic substances.
Collaborative research and development.
National inventory of dams.
Hydroelectric power project uprating.
Engineering and environmental innovations of national significance.
Federal lump-sum payments for federal operation and maintenance costs.
Cost-sharing for removal of existing project features.
Contract goals for small disadvantaged business concerns and historically black colleges and universities or minority institutions.
Cost-sharing for dam safety work.
Revocation of section 211, River and Harbor Act of 1950.
Research and development in support of Army Civil Works Program.
Interagency and international support authority.
Expansion of section 1135 program.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
COST-SHARING OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROJECTS.
Section 103(c) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (100 United States Statutes at Large 4085) is amended by adding the following new subsection: ``(7) environmental protection and restoration: 25 percent.''.
RECOVERY OF COSTS FOR CLEAN UP OF HAZARDOUS OR TOXIC SUBSTANCES.
Amounts recovered under section 107 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9607) for any response action taken by the Secretary in support of the Army Civil Works Program shall be credited to the appropriate trust fund account from which the cost of such response action has been paid or will be charged.
COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT.
Section 7 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1988 (102 United States Statutes at Large 4022) is amended by-- (1) redesignating subsections (b), (c) and (d) as paragraphs (1), (2) and (3); (2) deleting subsection (e); and, (3) adding the following new subsection: ``(b) Pre-agreement Temporary Protection of Technology.--If the Secretary determines that information developed as a result of research and development activities conducted by the Corps of Engineers is likely to be subject to a cooperative research and development agreement within 2 years of its development and that such information would be a trade secret or commercial or financial information that would be privileged or confidential if the information had been obtained from a non-Federal party participating in a cooperative research and development agreement under section 12 of the Stevenson- Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980, the Secretary may provide appropriate protection against the dissemination of such information, including exemption from subchapter II of chapter 5 of title 5, United States Code, until the earlier of the date the Secretary enters into such an agreement with respect to such information or the last day of the 2-year period beginning on the date of such determination.
Any information covered by this subsection which becomes the subject of a cooperative research and development agreement shall be accorded the protection provided under 15 United States Code 3710a(c)(7)(B) as if such information had been developed under a cooperative research and development agreement.''.
NATIONAL INVENTORY OF DAMS.
Section 13 of Public Law 92-367, 33 United States Code 467l, is amended by striking the second sentence in its entirety and replacing it with the following: ``There is authorized to be appropriated up to $500,000 each fiscal year for the purpose of carrying out this section.''.
HYDROELECTRIC POWER PROJECT UPRATING.
In accomplishing the maintenance, rehabilitation, and modernization of hydroelectric power generating facilities at water resources projects under the justification of the Department of the Army, the Secretary is authorized to increase the efficiency of energy production and the capacity of these facilities if, after consulting with other appropriate Federal and State agencies, the Secretary determines that such uprating-- (1) is economically justified and financially feasible; (2) will not result in significant adverse effects on the other purposes for which the project is authorized; (3) will not result in significant adverse environmental impacts; and (4) will not involve major structural or operation changes in the project.
This section does not affect the authority of the Secretary and the Administrator of the Bonneville Power Administration under section 2406 of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (16 United States Code 839d-1).
ENGINEERING AND ENVIRONMENTAL INNOVATIONS OF NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE.
To encourage innovative and environmentally sound engineering solutions and innovative environmental solutions to problems of national significance, the Secretary may undertake surveys, plans, and studies and prepare reports which may lead to work under existing civil works authorities or to recommendations for authorizations.
There is authorized to be appropriated up to $3,000,000 each fiscal year for the purpose of carrying out this section.
The Secretary may also accept and expend additional funds from other Federal agencies, States, or non- Federal entities for purposes of carrying out this section.
FEDERAL LUMP-SUM PAYMENTS FOR FEDERAL OPERATION AND MAINTENANCE COSTS.
At a water resources project where the non-Federal interest is responsible for performing the operation, maintenance, replacement, and rehabilitation of the project and the Federal Government is responsible for paying a portion of the operation, maintenance, replacement, and rehabilitation costs, the Secretary may provide, under terms and conditions acceptable to the Secretary, a payment of the estimated total Federal share of such costs to the non-Federal interest after completion of construction of the project or a separable element thereof.
The amount to be paid shall be equal to the present value of the Federal payments over the life of the project, as estimated by the Government, and shall be computed using an interest rate determined by the Secretary of the Treasury taking into consideration current market yields on outstanding marketable obligations of the United States with maturities comparable to the remaining life of the project.
The Secretary may make a payment under this section only if the non-Federal interest has entered into a binding agreement with the Secretary to perform the operation, maintenance, replacement, and rehabilitation of the project or separable element.
The agreement must be in accordance with the requirements of section 221 of the Flood Control Act of 1970 (84 United States Statutes at Large 1818), and must contain provisions specifying the terms and conditions under which a payment may be made under this section and the rights of, and remedies available to, the Federal Government to recover all or a portion of a payment made under this section in the event the non-Federal interest suspends or terminates its performance of operation, maintenance, replacement, and rehabilitation of the project or separable element, or fails to perform such activities in a manner satisfactory to the Secretary.
Except as provided in subsection (c), a payment provided to the non-Federal interest under this section shall relieve the Government of any future obligations for paying any of the operation, maintenance, replacement, and rehabilitation costs for the project or separable element.
COST-SHARING FOR REMOVAL OF EXISTING PROJECT FEATURES.
After the date of enactment of this Act, any proposal submitted to the Congress by the Secretary for modification of an existing authorized water resources development project by removal of one or more of the project features which would significantly and adversely impact the authorized project purposes or outputs shall include the recommendation that the non-Federal sponsor shall bear 50 percent of the cost of any such modification, including the costs of acquiring any additional interests in lands which become necessary for accomplishing the modification.
The Technical Advisory Committee established pursuant to section 310(a) of Public Law 101-640 shall no longer exist after the date of enactment of this Act.
Section 203(b) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1992 (106 United States Statutes at Large 4826) is amended by striking out ``(8662)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(8862)''.
Section 225(c) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1992 (106 United States Statutes at Large 4838) is amended by striking out ``(8662)'' in the second sentence and inserting in lieu thereof ``(8862)''.
Section 1001 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 as amended (33 United States Code 579a) is further amended by-- (1) striking ``10'' where it appears in the first sentence of paragraph (2) of subsection (b) and replacing it with ``5''; (2) striking the word ``Before'' at the beginning of the second sentence of paragraph (2) of subsection (b) and replacing it with the words ``Upon official''; and (3) inserting the words ``planning, designing, or'' immediately before the word ``construction'' in the last sentence of paragraph (2) of subsection (b).
Section 52(a) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1988 (102 United States Statutes at Large 4044) is repealed.
CONTRACT GOALS FOR SMALL DISADVANTAGED BUSINESS CONCERNS AND HISTORICALLY BLACK COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES OR MINORITY INSTITUTIONS.
Goal.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the Secretary shall establish a goal of 5 percent of the total amount of civil works funds obligated for contracts and subcontracts entered into by the Department of the Army for fiscal years 1994 through 2000 for award to small business concerns owned and controlled by socially and economically disadvantaged individuals (as such term is used in section 8(d) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637(d)) and regulations under that section), the majority of the earnings of which directly accrue to such individuals, and to historically Black colleges and universities or minority institutions (as defined in paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) of section 312(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1058)).
Competitive Procedure.--To the extent practicable and when necessary to facilitate achievement of the 5 percent goal in subsection (a)-- (1) the Secretary is authorized to enter into contracts using less than full and open competitive procedures, but shall pay a price not exceeding the fair market cost by more than 10 percent in payment per contract to contractors or subcontractors of contracts described in subsection (a); and (2) the Secretary shall maximize the number of small disadvantaged business concerns, historically Black colleges and universities, and minority institutions participating in the program.
Exception.--The Secretary shall adjust the percentage specified in subsection (b)(1) of this section for any industry category if available information clearly indicates that nondisadvantaged small business concerns in such industry category are generally being denied a reasonable opportunity to compete for contracts because of the use of that percentage.
Nonapplicability.--Subsection (a) does not apply if-- (1) the Secretary determines that the existence of a national emergency requires otherwise; and (2) the Secretary notifies the Congress of such determination and the reasons therefor.
COST-SHARING FOR DAM SAFETY WORK.
Section 1203(a)(1) of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 is amended by inserting the following language immediately after the first sentence: ``Where cost sharing was not based on a cost allocation, 15 percent of the modification costs shall be assigned among project purposes in the same manner as costs were originally assigned, as determined by the Secretary.''.
REVOCATION OF SECTION 211, RIVER AND HARBOR ACT OF 1950.
Section 211 of the River and Harbor Act of 1950, Public Law 516, 81st Congress, is hereby repealed.
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT IN SUPPORT OF ARMY CIVIL WORKERS PROGRAM.
In carrying out research and development in support of the Civil Works program of the Department of the Army, the Secretary may utilize contracts, cooperative research and development agreements, cooperative agreements, and grants with non-Federal entities, including State and local governments, colleges and universities, consortia, professional and technical societies, public and private scientific and technical foundations, research institutions, educational organizations, and non-profit organizations.
With respect to contracts for research and development, the Secretary may include requirements that have potential commercial application and may also use such potential application as an evaluation factor where appropriate.
INTERAGENCY AND INTERNATIONAL SUPPORT AUTHORITY.
The Secretary may engage in activities in support of other Federal agencies or international organizations on problems of national significance to the United States.
The Secretary may engage in activities in support of international organizations only after consulting with the Department of State.
The Secretary may apply the technical and managerial expertise of the Army Corps of Engineers to domestic and international problems related to water resources, infrastructure development and environmental protection.
There is authorized to be appropriated up to $3,000,000 each fiscal year for the purpose of carrying out this section.
The Secretary may also accept and expend additional funds from other Federal agencies or international organizations for purposes of carrying out this section.
EXPANSION OF SECTION 1135 PROGRAM.
Section 1135 of the Water Resources Development Act of 1986 (33 United States Code 2309a) is amended by-- (1) striking the period at the end of subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``and to determine if the operation of such projects has contributed to the degradation of the quality of the environment.
''; (2) striking the last two sentences of subsection (b); and, (3) redesignating subsections (c), (d), and (e) as (e), (f), and (g) and inserting the following new subsections: ``(c) If the Secretary determines that operation of a water resources project has contributed to the degradation of the quality of the environment, the Secretary may also undertake measures for restoration of environmental quality, provided such measures are feasible and consistent with the authorized project purposes.
The non-Federal share of the cost of any modifications or measures carried out or undertaken pursuant to subsections (b) or (c) of this section shall be 25 percent.
No more than $5,000,000 in Federal funds may be expended on any single modification or measure carried out or undertaken pursuant to this section.''.
There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United States the ``Army Civil Works Regulatory Program Fund'' (hereafter referred to as the ``Regulatory Program Fund'') into which shall be deposited fees collected by the Secretary of the Army pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section.
Amounts deposited into the Regulatory Program Fund are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Army to cover a portion of the expenses incurred by the Department of the Army in administering laws pertaining to the regulation of the navigable waters of the United States as well as wetlands.
Regulatory Fees.--(1) To the extent provided for in appropriation Acts, the Secretary of the Army shall establish and collect fees for the evaluation of commercial permit applications; for the recovery of costs associated with the preparation of Environmental Impact Statements required by the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969; and for the recovery of costs associated with wetlands delineations for major developments affecting wetlands.
Amounts collected pursuant to this paragraph shall be deposited into the Regulatory Program Fund established by paragraph (a) of this section.
The fees described in paragraph (1) of this subsection shall be established by the Secretary of the Army at rates that will allow for the recovery of receipts at amounts as provided for in appropriation Acts.
S 2233 IS----2 S 2233 IS----3