Definitions.-- (1) Classified school employee.--In this Act, the term ``classified school employee'' means an employee working in any grade from pre-kindergarten through higher education, in any of the following nine occupational specialities: (A) Paraprofessionals.
Clerical and administrative services.
Food and nutrition services.
Custodial and maintenance services.
Health and student services.
Other definitions.--The terms used in this Act have the meaning given the terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) Classified school employees provide valuable service to public schools in the United States.
Classified school employees provide essential services, such as transportation, facilities maintenance and operations, food service, safety, and health care.
Classified school employees play a vital role in providing for the welfare and safety of students.
Classified school employees strive for excellence in all areas of service to the education community.
Exemplary classified school employees should be recognized for their outstanding contributions to quality education in the United States.
In General.--The Secretary of Education shall establish and administer a national recognition program to be known as the ``National Classified School Employees of the Year Awards''.
The purpose of the program shall be to recognize and promote the commitment and excellence exhibited by employees within certain occupational specialties in public schools who provide exemplary service to students in pre- kindergarten through higher education.
Occupational Specialties.-- (1) In general.--The occupational specialties referred to in subsection (a) are the following: (A) Paraprofessionals.
Clerical and administrative services.
Food and nutrition services.
Custodial and maintenance services.
Health and student services.
Number of awards.--Prior to March 31 of each year (beginning with the second calendar year that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act), the Secretary shall select an employee from each occupational specialty described in paragraph (1) to receive an award under the recognition program.
Selection Process.-- (1) Nomination process.-- (A) In general.--Not later than November 1 of each year (beginning with the first calendar year that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act), the Secretary shall solicit nominations from each occupational specialty described in subsection (b)(1) from the chief State school officer of each State.
Nomination submissions.--In order for individuals in a State to be eligible to receive recognition under this section, the chief State school officer of the State shall consider nominations submitted by the following: (i) Local educational agencies.
Any other group determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Demonstration.--Each chief State school officer of a State who desires individuals in the State to receive recognition under this section shall submit the nominations described in paragraph (1) to the Secretary in such manner as the Secretary may require.
Each such nomination shall contain, at a minimum, demonstrations of excellence in the following areas: (A) Work performance.
School and community involvement.
Enhancement of classified school employees' image in the community and schools.
Any other area of superior performance, such as health and safety promotion or efficient use of energy or other resources.
Selection.--The Secretary shall develop uniform national guidelines for evaluating nominations submitted under paragraph (2) in order to select the most deserving nominees based on the demonstrations made in the areas described in such paragraph.