TITLE IX--MEDICAID, PUBLIC HEALTH, AND OTHER HEALTH PROVISIONS Subtitle A--Medicaid Provisions SEC.
NATIONAL BIPARTISAN COMMISSION ON THE FUTURE OF MEDICAID.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Bipartisan Commission on the Future of Medicaid (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Duties of the Commission.--The Commission shall-- (1) review and analyze the long-term financial condition of the medicaid program under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes); (2) identify the factors that are causing, and the consequences of, increases in costs under the medicaid program, including-- (A) the impact of these cost increases upon State budgets, funding for other State programs, and levels of State taxes necessary to fund growing expenditures under the medicaid program; (B) the financial obligations of the Federal government arising from the Federal matching requirement for expenditures under the medicaid program; and (C) the size and scope of the current program and how the program has evolved over time; (3) analyze potential policies that will ensure both the financial integrity of the medicaid program and the provision of appropriate benefits under such program; (4) make recommendations for establishing incentives and structures to promote enhanced efficiencies and ways of encouraging innovative State policies under the medicaid program; (5) make recommendations for establishing the appropriate balance between benefits covered, payments to providers, State and Federal contributions and, where appropriate, recipient cost-sharing obligations; (6) make recommendations on the impact of promoting increased utilization of competitive, private enterprise models to contain program cost growth, through enhanced utilization of private plans, pharmacy benefit managers, and other methods currently being used to contain private sector health-care costs; (7) make recommendations on the financing of prescription drug benefits currently covered under medicaid programs, including analysis of the current Federal manufacturer rebate program, its impact upon both private market prices as well as those paid by other government purchasers, recent State efforts to negotiate additional supplemental manufacturer rebates and the ability of pharmacy benefit managers to lower drug costs; (8) review and analyze such other matters relating to the medicaid program as the Commission deems appropriate; and (9) analyze the impact of impending demographic changes upon medicaid benefits, including long term care services, and make recommendations for how best to appropriately divide State and Federal responsibilities for funding these benefits.
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 17 members, of whom-- (A) four shall be appointed by the President; (B) six shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the Senate, of whom not more than 4 shall be of the same political party; (C) six shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, in consultation with the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, of whom not more than 4 shall be of the same political party; and (D) one, who shall serve as Chairman of the Commission, appointed jointly by the President, Majority Leader of the Senate, and the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Deadline for appointment.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed by not later than December 1, 2002.
Terms of appointment.--The term of any appointment under paragraph (1) to the Commission shall be for the life of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of its Chairman or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--A quorum shall consist of 8 members of the Commission, except that 4 members may conduct a hearing under subsection (e).
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made not later than 30 days after the Commission is given notice of the vacancy and shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall receive travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff and Support Services.-- (1) Executive director.-- (A) Appointment.--The Chairman shall appoint an executive director of the Commission.
Compensation.--The executive director shall be paid the rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may appoint such personnel as the executive director considers appropriate.
Applicability of civil service laws.--The staff of the Commission shall be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title (relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates).
Experts and consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Physical facilities.--The Administrator of the General Services Administration shall locate suitable office space for the operation of the Commission.
The facilities shall serve as the headquarters of the Commission and shall include all necessary equipment and incidentals required for the proper functioning of the Commission.
Powers of Commission.-- (1) Hearings and other activities.--For the purpose of carrying out its duties, the Commission may hold such hearings and undertake such other activities as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Studies by gao.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Comptroller General shall conduct such studies or investigations as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Cost estimates by congressional budget office and office of the chief actuary of hcfa.-- (A) The Director of the Congressional Budget Office or the Chief Actuary of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, or both, shall provide to the Commission, upon the request of the Commission, such cost estimates as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
The Commission shall reimburse the Director of the Congressional Budget Office for expenses relating to the employment in the office of the Director of such additional staff as may be necessary for the Director to comply with requests by the Commission under subparagraph (A).
Detail of federal employees.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
Technical assistance.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of a Federal agency shall provide such technical assistance to the Commission as the Commission determines to be necessary to carry out its duties.
Use of mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as Federal agencies and shall, for purposes of the frank, be considered a commission of Congress as described in section 3215 of title 39, United States Code.
Obtaining information.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency information necessary to enable it to carry out its duties, if the information may be disclosed under section 552 of title 5, United States Code.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Administrative support services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission on a reimbursable basis such administrative support services as the Commission may request.
Printing.--For purposes of costs relating to printing and binding, including the cost of personnel detailed from the Government Printing Office, the Commission shall be deemed to be a committee of the Congress.
Report.--Not later than March 1, 2004, the Commission shall submit a report to the President and Congress which shall contain a detailed statement of only those recommendations, findings, and conclusions of the Commission.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the date of submission of the report required in subsection (f).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $1,500,000 to carry out this section.