SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Working Families Trade Bonus Act''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) exports represent a growing share of United States production, and exports have accounted for more than 10 percent of the United States gross domestic product in recent years, (2) export growth represented more than 36 percent of overall United States growth in gross domestic product between 1987 and 1997, (3) international trade flows in the United States have grown twice as fast as the economy since 1950, and, in real terms, the growth rate for international trade has averaged about 6.5 percent a year, (4) between 1987 and 1997, more than 5,500,000 United States jobs have been created by international trade, (5) the globalization of the United States economy demands that appropriate domestic policy measures be undertaken to assure American workers enjoy the benefits of globalization rather than be undermined by it, and (6) when the domestic economy and United States companies achieve growth and profits from international trade, workers ought to share in the benefits.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to assist American workers in benefiting directly when international trade produces domestic economic growth.
TITLE I--TRADE BONUS SEC.
DETERMINATION AND ANNOUNCEMENT OF TRADE BONUS.
Determination.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Commerce or the Secretary's delegate shall, for each calendar year after 1998, determine whether international trade of the United States contributed to an increase in the gross domestic product of the United States for such calendar year.
Time for determination; submission.--The Secretary shall make and submit to the President the determination under paragraph (1) as soon as practicable after the close of a calendar year, but in no event later than June 1 of the next calendar year.
Such determination shall be made on the basis of the most recent available data as of the time of the determination.
Inclusion in Budget.--The President shall include the determination under subsection (a) with the supplemental summary of the budget for the fiscal year beginning in the calendar year following the calendar year for which the determination was made.
TITLE II--PROVISIONS TO ENSURE WORKERS SHARE IN TRADE BONUS SEC.
UNITED STATES POLICY ON INTERNATIONAL TRADE BONUS.
General Policy of the United States.--It is the policy of the United States that if there is an increase in the portion of the gross domestic product of the United States for any calendar year which is attributable to international trade of the United States-- (1) workers ought to share in the benefits of the increase through-- (A) the establishment of employee stock purchase plans by employers that have not already done so, (B) the expansion of employee stock purchase plans of employers that have already established such plans, and (C) the opportunity to make additional contributions to individual retirement plans if the workers are unable to participate in employee stock purchase plans, (2) employers should contribute additional compensation to such employee stock purchase plans in an amount up to $2,000 per employee, and (3) workers should contribute additional amounts up to $2,000 to individual retirement plans.
Guidelines.--It is the policy of the United States that any employer establishing or expanding an employee stock purchase plan under the policy stated under subsection (a) should-- (1) provide that the amount of additional stock each employee is able to purchase in any year there is a trade bonus is the amount determined by the employer but not in excess of $2,000, (2) make the plan available to the widest range of employees without discriminating in favor of highly compensated employees, (3) allow for the purchase of the maximum amount of stock allowed by law at the lowest price allowed by law, and (4) ensure that the establishment or expansion of such plan-- (A) provides employees with compensation that is in addition to the compensation they would normally receive, and (B) does not result in a lack of diversification of an employee's assets, particularly such employee's retirement assets.
ELIMINATION OF CAPITAL GAINS TAX ON GAIN FROM STOCK ACQUIRED THROUGH EMPLOYEE STOCK PURCHASE PLAN.
In General.--Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 (relating to treatment of capital gains) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXCLUSION FOR GAIN FROM STOCK ACQUIRED THROUGH EMPLOYEE STOCK PURCHASE PLAN.
General Rule.--Gross income of an employee shall not include gain from the sale or exchange of stock-- ``(1) which was acquired by the employee pursuant to an exercise of a trade bonus stock option granted under an employee stock purchase plan (as defined in section 423(b)), and ``(2) with respect to which the requirements of section 423(a) have been met before the sale or exchange.
Trade Bonus Stock Option.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `trade bonus stock option' means an option which-- ``(A) is granted under an employee stock purchase plan (as defined in section 423(b)) for a plan year beginning in a calendar year following a calendar year for which a trade bonus percentage has been determined under section 101 of the Working Families Trade Bonus Act, and ``(B) the employer designates, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe, as a trade bonus stock option.
Annual limitation.--Options may not be designated as trade bonus stock options with respect to an employee for any plan year to the extent that the fair market value of the stock which may be purchased with such options (determined as of the time the options are granted) exceeds $2,000.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (9) of section 1(h) (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended by striking ``and section 1202 gain'' and inserting ``section 1202 gain, and gain excluded from gross income under section 1203(a)''.
Section 172(d)(2)(B) (relating to modifications with respect to net operating loss deduction) is amended by striking ``section 1202'' and inserting ``sections 1202 and 1203''.
Section 642(c)(4) (relating to adjustments) is amended by inserting ``or 1203(a)'' after ``section 1202(a)'' and by inserting ``or 1203'' after ``section 1202''.
Section 643(a)(3) (defining distributable net income) is amended by striking ``section 1202'' and inserting ``sections 1202 and 1203''.
Section 691(c)(4) (relating to coordination with capital gain provisions) is amended by inserting ``1203,'' after ``1202,''.
The second sentence of section 871(a)(2) (relating to capital gains of aliens present in the United States 183 days or more) is amended by inserting ``or 1203'' after ``section 1202''.
The table of sections of part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Exclusion for gain from stock acquired through employee stock purchase plan.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to stock acquired on and after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TRADE BONUS CONTRIBUTIONS TO INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT PLANS.
In General.--Section 219(b) (relating to maximum amount of deduction) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Additional contributions in trade bonus years.-- ``(A) In general.--If there is a determination under section 101 of the Working Families Trade Bonus Act that there is a trade bonus for any calendar year, then, in the case of an eligible individual, the dollar amount in effect under paragraph (1)(A) for taxable years beginning in the subsequent calendar year shall be increased by $2,000.
Eligible individual.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `eligible individual' means, with respect to any taxable year, any individual other than an individual who is eligible to receive a trade bonus stock option (as defined in section 1203(b)) for a plan year beginning in the taxable year.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 408(a)(1) is amended by striking ``in excess of $2,000 on behalf of any individual'' and inserting ``on behalf of any individual in excess of the amount in effect for such taxable year under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Section 408(b)(2)(B) is amended by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting ``the dollar amount in effect under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Section 408(b) is amended by striking ``$2,000'' in the matter following paragraph (4) and inserting ``the dollar amount in effect under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Section 408(j) is amended by striking ``$2,000''.
Section 408(p)(8) is amended by striking ``$2,000'' and inserting ``the dollar amount in effect under section 219(b)(1)(A)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
204. CREDIT FOR SMALL EMPLOYER STOCK PURCHASE PLAN START-UP COSTS.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
SMALL EMPLOYER STOCK PURCHASE PLAN CREDIT.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an eligible employer, the small employer stock purchase plan credit determined under this section for any taxable year is an amount equal to the qualified start-up costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limits on Start-Up Costs.--In the case of qualified start-up costs not paid or incurred directly for the establishment of a qualified stock purchase plan, the amount of the credit determined under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of 50 percent of such costs or-- ``(1) $2,000 for the first taxable year ending after the date the employer established the qualified employer plan to which such costs relate, ``(2) $1,000 for each of the second and third such taxable years, and ``(3) zero for each taxable year thereafter.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible employer.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible employer' means, with respect to any year, an employer which has 100 or fewer employees who received at least $5,000 of compensation from the employer for the preceding year.
Requirement for new qualified employer plans.--Such term shall not include an employer if, during the 3-taxable year period immediately preceding the 1st taxable year for which the credit under this section is otherwise allowable for a qualified stock purchase plan of the employer, the employer and each member of any controlled group including the employer (or any predecessor of either) established or maintained an employee stock purchase plan with respect to which contributions were made, or benefits were accrued, for substantially the same employees as are in the qualified stock purchase plan.
Qualified start-up costs.--The term `qualified start- up costs' means any ordinary and necessary expenses of an eligible employer which are paid or incurred in connection with-- ``(A) the establishment or maintenance of a qualified stock purchase plan in which employees are eligible to participate, and ``(B) providing educational information to employees regarding participation in such plan and the benefits of participating in the plan.
Such term does not include services related to retirement planning, including tax preparation, accounting, legal, or brokerage services.
Qualified stock purchase plan.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified stock purchase plan' means an employee stock purchase plan which-- ``(i) allows an employer to designate options as trade bonus stock options for purposes of section 1203, ``(ii) limits the amount of options which may be so designated for any employee to not more than $2,000 per year, and ``(iii) does not discriminate in favor of highly compensated employees (within the meaning of section 414(q)).
Employee stock purchase plan.--The term `employee stock purchase plan' has the meaning given such term by section 423(b).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Aggregation rules.--All persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52, or subsection (n) or (o) of section 414, shall be treated as one person.
All qualified stock purchase plans of an employer shall be treated as a single qualified stock purchase plan.
Disallowance of deduction.--No deduction shall be allowable under this chapter for any qualified start-up costs for which a credit is determined under subsection (a).
Election not to claim credit.--This section shall not apply to a taxpayer for any taxable year if such taxpayer elects to have this section not apply for such taxable year.''
Credit Allowed as Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) (defining current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) in the case of an eligible employer (as defined in section 45D(c)), the small employer stock purchase plan credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Portion of Credit Refundable.--Section 38(c) (relating to limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Portion of small employer pension plan credit refundable.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of the small employer stock purchase plan credit under subsection (b)(13), the aggregate credits allowed under subpart C shall be increased by the lesser of-- ``(i) the credit which would be allowed without regard to this paragraph and the limitation under paragraph (1), or ``(ii) the amount by which the aggregate amount of credits allowed by this section (without regard to this paragraph) would increase if the limitation under paragraph (1) were increased by the taxpayer's applicable payroll taxes for the taxable year.
Treatment of credit.--The amount of the credit allowed under this paragraph shall not be treated as a credit allowed under this subpart and shall reduce the amount of the credit allowed under this section for the taxable year.
Applicable payroll taxes.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) In general.--The term `applicable payroll taxes' means, with respect to any taxpayer for any taxable year-- ``(I) the amount of the taxes imposed by sections 3111 and 3221(a) on compensation paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year, ``(II) 50 percent of the taxes imposed by section 1401 on the self- employment income of the taxpayer during the taxable year, and ``(III) 50 percent of the taxes imposed by section 3211(a)(1) on amounts received by the taxpayer during the calendar year in which the taxable year begins.
Agreements regarding foreign affiliates.--Section 24(d)(3)(C) shall apply for purposes of clause (i).''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Small employer stock purchase plan credit.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to costs paid or incurred in connection with qualified stock purchase plans established after the date of the enactment of this Act.