This Act may be cited as the ``Infant Immunization Improvement Act of 2008''.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT FOR VACCINATION CO-LOCATION SERVICES AT WIC CLINICS.
Section 317(k) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b(k)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Immunizations.-- ``(A) In general.--An immunization grantee under this section may use amounts made available under this section to provide, through participating WIC clinics-- ``(i) recommended vaccines to children aged 0 to 35 months who satisfy the eligibility requirements; ``(ii) for the coordination of care or immunization services; or ``(iii) payment for the salary of an immunization coordinator.
Immunization information systems.--Any grantee that receives funding under this section for an immunization information system shall permit all clinics that participate in the projects under this section and in the Special Supplemental Food and Nutrition Program under section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 to have access to the system.
Appropriate immunization services.--In carrying out activities under this section related to screening for appropriate immunization services, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and State administrators of the program referred to in subparagraph (A) shall consult with the Food and Nutrition Service of the Department of Agriculture.
Requirement.--Activities under this paragraph shall target areas with the greatest immunization needs in the 0 to 35 month age group.
Definitions.--In this paragraph: ``(i) Immunization information system.--The term `immunization information system' means a confidential, computerized information system that collects and consolidates vaccination data from multiple health-care providers, generates reminder and recall notifications, and assess vaccination coverage.
Such systems may have added capabilities, such as vaccine management, adverse event reporting, lifespan vaccination histories, and interoperability with electronic medical records.
Immunization coordinator.--The term `immunization coordinator' means an individual who coordinates immunization activities, including the screening of immunization records, reminders of necessary immunizations and referrals of patients, if necessary, to an immunization provider.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this paragraph, $5,500,000 for each of the 3-fiscal years beginning with the first fiscal year after the date of enactment of the Infant Immunization Improvement Act of 2008.''.
ANNUAL PUBLIC IMMUNIZATION AWARENESS CAMPAIGN.
Section 317 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(l) Annual Public Immunization Awareness Campaign.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall annually conduct a public, age appropriate, immunization awareness campaign, and carry out immunization education and outreach activities, to-- ``(A) increase the awareness of parents of the benefits of age appropriate immunizations; ``(B) inform the general public concerning the efficacy of new vaccines and new vaccine schedules; and ``(C) disseminate information that emphasizes the benefits of recommended vaccines for the public good.
Timing.--Activities carried out under paragraph (1) shall be timed to coincide, to the extent practicable, with national health observances.
Requirement.--Activities under this subsection shall target areas with the greatest immunization needs in the 0 to 35 month age group.
Funding.--In addition to amounts appropriated under this section for immunization purposes, there is authorized to be appropriated, $5,000,000 for each of the 3-fiscal years beginning with the first fiscal year after the date of enactment of the Infant Immunization Improvement Act of 2008.''.
SENSE OF THE SENATE CONCERNING ELECTRONIC MEDICAL RECORDS.
It is the sense of the Senate that the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention should work to improve the integration of immunization information systems (as defined in section 317(k)(5) of the Public Health Service Act) with electronic medical records, other health information systems, and health information exchanges.