This Act may be cited as the ``Biometric Enhancement for Airport- Risk Reduction Act of 2008''.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Biometric identifier system.--The term ``biometric identifier system'' means a system that uses biometric identifier information to match individuals and confirm identity for transportation security and other purposes.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Homeland Security acting through the Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (Transportation Security Administration).
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the working group of industry stakeholders to be established under subsection (c), shall conduct a study on how airports can transition to uniform, standards-based, and interoperable biometric identifier systems for airport workers with unescorted access to secure or sterile areas of an airport.
Purpose.--The purpose of the study shall be to enhance transportation security against a potential act of terrorism by an airport worker who is allowed unescorted access to secure or sterile areas of an airport.
Risk-based analysis.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall conduct a risk-based analysis of selected Category X and I airports and other airports, as the Secretary determines appropriate, to identify where the implementation of biometric identifier systems could benefit airports.
Considerations.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall consider the following: (A) Parallel systems.--Existing parallel biometric security systems applicable to workers with unescorted access to critical infrastructure, including-- (i) transportation security cards issued under section 70105 of title 46, United States Code; (ii) armed law enforcement travel credentials issued under section 44903(h)(6) of title 49, United States Code; and (iii) other credential programs used by the Federal Government, as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Efforts by transportation security administration.--Any biometric programs or proposals developed by the Assistant Secretary of Homeland Security (Transportation Security Administration).
Infrastructure and technical requirements.--The architecture, modules, interfaces, and transmission of data needed to address risks associated with securing airports by providing interoperable biometric security measures and credentials for airport workers with unescorted access to secure and sterile areas of an airport.
Existing airport systems.--Biometric infrastructure and systems in use in secure and sterile areas of airports.
Incentives.--Possible incentives for airports that voluntarily seek to implement uniform, standards- based, and interoperable biometric identifier systems.
Associated costs.--The costs of implementing uniform, standards-based, and interoperable biometric identifier systems at airports, including-- (i) the costs to airport operators, airport workers, air carriers, and other aviation industry stakeholders; and (ii) the costs associated with ongoing operations and maintenance and modifications and enhancements needed to support changes in physical and electronic infrastructure.
GAO recommendations.--Any recommendations or findings developed by the Government Accountability Office relating to implementing biometric security for airport workers with unescorted access to secure and sterile areas of airports.
Information from other sources.-- Recommendations, guidance, and information from other sources, including government entities, organizations representing airport workers, and private individuals and organizations.
Report.--Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the results of the study conducted under this subsection.
Best Practices.-- (1) Identification of best practices.--The Secretary, in consultation with the working group of aviation industry stakeholders to be established under subsection (c), shall identify best practices for the administration of biometric credentials at airports, including best practices for each of the following processes: (A) Registration and enrollment.
Eligibility vetting and risk assessment.
Development of a cost structure for acquisition of biometric credentials.
Development of redress processes for workers.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (A) submit to the Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report that outlines the best practices identified under paragraph (1); and (B) make the report available to airport operators.
Aviation and Airport Security Working Group.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall convene a working group to assist the Secretary with issues pertaining to implementing and carrying out this section.
Membership.--The Secretary shall ensure that the membership of the working group includes aviation industry stakeholders and specifically includes individuals selected from among-- (A) the membership of the Transportation Security Administration's Aviation Security Advisory Committee; (B) individuals and organizations representing airports; (C) individuals and organizations representing airport workers, including those airport workers with unescorted access to secure and sterile areas of airports; (D) individuals and organizations representing the biometric technology sector; and (E) any other individuals and organizations that the Secretary considers appropriate.
Nonapplicability of faca.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to working group established under this subsection.
Sunset.--The working group established under this subsection shall cease operations 30 days after the date of submission of the report under subsection (a)(5) or 30 days after the date of submission of the report under subsection (b)(2), whichever is later.
Passed the House of Representatives June 18, 2008.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.