CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE FOR RURAL HEALTH RESEARCH, EDUCATION, AND CLINICAL ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Centers of excellence for rural health research, education, and clinical activities ``(a) Establishment of Centers.--The Secretary, through the Director of the Office of Rural Health, shall establish and operate not less than one and not more than five centers of excellence for rural health research, education, and clinical activities, which shall-- ``(1) conduct research on the provision of health services in rural areas; ``(2) develop specific models to be used by the Department in furnishing health services to veterans in rural areas; ``(3) provide education and training for health care professionals of the Department on the furnishing of health services to veterans in rural areas; and ``(4) develop and implement innovative clinical activities and systems of care for the Department for the furnishing of health services to veterans in rural areas.
Geographic Dispersion.--The Secretary shall ensure that the centers established under this section are located at health care facilities that are geographically dispersed throughout the United States.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary may not designate a health care facility as a location for a center under this section unless-- ``(1) the peer review panel established under subsection (d) determines that the proposal submitted by such facility meets the highest competitive standards of scientific and clinical merit; and ``(2) the Secretary determines that such facility has, or may reasonably be anticipated to develop, the following: ``(A) An arrangement with an accredited medical school to provide residents with education and training in health services for veterans in rural areas.
The ability to attract the participation of scientists who are capable of ingenuity and creativity in health care research efforts.
A policymaking advisory committee, composed of appropriate health care and research representatives of the facility and of the affiliated school or schools, to advise the directors of such facility and such center on policy matters pertaining to the activities of such center during the period of the operation of such center.
The capability to conduct effectively evaluations of the activities of such center.
Panel To Evaluate Proposals.--(1) The Director of the Office of Rural Health shall establish a panel-- ``(A) to evaluate the scientific and clinical merit of proposals submitted to establish centers under this section; and ``(B) to provide advice to the Director regarding the implementation of this section.
The panel shall review each proposal received from the Secretary and shall submit its views on the relative scientific and clinical merit of each such proposal to the Secretary.
The panel established under paragraph (1) shall be comprised of experts in the fields of public health research, education, and clinical care.
Members of the panel shall serve as consultants to the Department for a period not to exceed two years.
The panel shall not be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Reports.--Not later than April 1 of each year, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the centers established under this section.
Such report shall include-- ``(1) the results of research conducted under subsection (a)(1); ``(2) an evaluation of models related to furnishing health services to veterans in rural areas developed under subsection (a)(2); ``(3) an evaluation of the education and training provided under subsection (a)(3); and ``(4) an evaluation of clinical activities or systems of care related to furnishing health services to veterans in rural areas developed under subsection (a)(4).
Funding.--(1) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Medical Care Account and the Medical and Prosthetics Research Account of the Department of Veterans Affairs such sums as may be necessary for the support of the research and education activities of the centers operated under this section.
There shall be allocated to the centers operated under this section, from amounts authorized to be appropriated to the Medical Care Account and the Medical and Prosthetics Research Account by paragraph (1), such amounts as the Under Secretary of health considers appropriate for such centers.
Such amounts shall be allocated through the Director of the Office of Rural Health.
Activities of clinical and scientific investigation at each center operated under this section-- ``(A) shall be eligible to compete for the award of funding from funds appropriated for the Medical and Prosthetics Research Account; and ``(B) shall receive priority in the award of funding from such account to the extent that funds are awarded to projects for research in the care of rural veterans.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 73 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7330A the following new item: ``7330B.
Centers of excellence for rural health research, education, and clinical activities.