This Act may be cited as the ``Cigars Are Not a Safe Smoking Alternative Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Available scientific evidence demonstrates that regular cigar smoking causes cancer, including cancers of the lip, tongue, mouth, throat, esophagus, larynx, and lung.
That same evidence demonstrates that cigar smokers increase their risk of pulmonary heart disease by 27 percent and coronary heart disease by 45 percent.
Cigar use in the United States has risen dramatically by nearly 50 percent over the last 5 years.
Premium cigar sales have tripled in the same time period.
Data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 1997 Youth Risk Behavior Survey indicates that among high school students over 30 percent of the males and 10 percent of the females are current cigar smokers.
Smoking cigars is not a safe alternative to smoking cigarettes.
Compared to a cigarette, a large cigar emits up to 20 times more ammonia, 5 to 10 times more cadmium (cancer causing metal) and methylethylnitrosamine (cancer causing agent), 80 to 90 times more nitrosamines (a highly carcinogenic tobacco-specific agent), 2 to 3 times more tar, and 9 to 12 times more nicotine.
PROHIBITION ON DISTRIBUTION TO YOUTH.
Distribution.-- (1) General rule.--No person may sell or distribute a cigar to any individual who is under the age of 18.
Location of products.--A retailer of cigars shall ensure that all cigars are located in areas where customers do not have direct access to the products.
Face-to-face transactions.--A cigar retailer may sell cigars to the ultimate consumer only in a direct, face-to-face exchange.
Marketing and Advertising.-- (1) General rule.--The Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission shall impose such restrictions on the sale, advertising, distribution, and marketing of cigars directed at youth as may be appropriate to limit the sale of cigars to individuals who are 18 years of age or older.
Electronic media.--Cigars may not be advertised on electronic media, including television, radio, and any other form of electronic communication.
Sponsorship.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission shall encourage manufacturers of cigars to end the practice of paying for, or participating in, the placement of cigars in movies and on television where a substantial segment of the viewing audience is under the age of 18 years.
Definition.--The term ``cigar'' means any roll of tobacco wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco, including small cigars that weigh less than 3 pounds per thousand and large cigars that weigh more than 3 pounds per thousand.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission, shall require such health warnings on the labels of cigars, on cigar boxes or other packaging, and on advertising and marketing materials and messages as may be appropriate to warn cigar users about the health risks presented by cigars.
Secretary's Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall conduct a study-- (A) to determine the health effects of occasional cigar smoking, nicotine dependence demonstrated by cigar smokers, biological uptake of toxic and carcinogenic constituents of cigars, and environmental cigar smoke exposure; and (B) to determine the yields of tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, and any other additive designated by the Secretary in cigar smoke.
Manufacturers of cigars shall report to the Secretary on the yields of tar, nicotine, carbon monoxide, and any other additive designated by the Secretary from cigars when smoked.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall transmit a report to the President and to Congress containing-- (A) findings from the cigar health and constituent yield study required under paragraph (1); and (B) such recommendations for legislation or administrative actions as the Secretary deems appropriate.
FTC Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act and biennially thereafter, the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission shall transmit a report to the President and to Congress containing-- (1) a description of the current sales, advertising, and marketing practices associated with cigars; and (2) such recommendations for legislation or administrative actions as it deems appropriate.
MONITORING TRENDS IN YOUTH ACCESS TO CIGARS.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services, in consultation with the Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission and the Secretary of the Treasury, shall monitor trends in youth access to, and use of, cigars.
If evidence suggests that cigars are inappropriately accessible to children and adolescents, or that smoking cigars is becoming an attractive alternative to smoking cigarettes for children and adolescents as a result of differential tax and regulatory treatment, sales and marketing practices of cigar manufacturers, changes in consumer tastes, or any other reason, the Secretary shall immediately notify Congress and make such recommendations for adjusting tax rates or other legislative or administrative action necessary to ensure that cigars cease to be an attractive alternative to cigarettes for children and adolescents.