This Act may be cited as the ``United States-Pakistan Security and Stability Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Congress supports the following elements outlined in the President's White Paper of the Interagency Policy Group's Report on United States Policy Toward Afghanistan and Pakistan: (A) The core goal of the United States must be to disrupt, dismantle, and defeat al Qaeda and its affiliated networks and their safe havens in Pakistan.
The threat that al Qaeda poses to the United States and its allies in Pakistan--including the possibility of extremists obtaining fissile material-- is all too real.
The United States must overcome its trust deficit with Pakistan and demonstrate that it is a reliable, long-term partner.
The Government of Pakistan is facing significant security and socio-economic challenges that set the conditions for greater radicalization and may threaten Pakistan's viability.
Such challenges include the following: (A) Al Qaeda's and other extremist groups' campaign of violent attacks throughout Pakistan, including the Red Mosque incident, the assassination of Benazir Bhutto, and the bombing of the Marriott Hotel in Islamabad.
Pakistan's population growth at a rate of approximately 2 percent a year, with nearly half of its 172 million residents illiterate, under the age of 20, and living near or below the poverty line.
Security and stability to Pakistan is further complicated given the prevalence of ungoverned spaces between Pakistan and Afghanistan in which state control has not been fully exercised given ethnic and tribal affiliations.
The security and stability of Pakistan is vital to the national security of the United States, and the consequences of failure poses a grave threat to the security of the American people, the region, and United States allies.
The objectives of United States policy toward Pakistan are to empower and enable Pakistan to-- (A) develop into a prosperous and democratic state that is at peace with itself and with its neighbors; (B) actively confront, and deny safe haven to, al Qaeda, the Taliban, and other extremists; (C) implement the economic, legal, and social reforms required to create an environment that discourages violent Islamic extremism; and (D) maintain robust command and control over its nuclear weapons technology.
COMPREHENSIVE INTERAGENCY STRATEGY AND IMPLEMENTATION PLAN FOR PAKISTAN.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of the Supplemental Appropriations Act of 2009, the President shall develop and transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a comprehensive interagency strategy and implementation plan for long- term security and stability in Pakistan which shall be composed of the elements specified in subsection (b).
Elements.--The comprehensive interagency strategy and implementation plan required by subsection (a) shall contain at least the following elements: (1) A description of how United States assistance described in section 4 will be used to achieve the objectives of United States policy toward Pakistan.
Progress toward the following: (A) Assisting efforts to enhance civilian control and a stable constitutional government in Pakistan and promote bilateral and regional trade and economic growth.
Developing and operationally enabling Pakistani security forces so they are capable of succeeding in sustained counter-insurgency and counter-terror operations.
Shutting down Pakistani safe havens for extremists.
Improving Pakistan's capacity and capability to ``hold'' and ``build'' areas cleared of insurgents to prevent their return.
Developing and strengthening mechanisms for Pakistan-Afghanistan cooperation.
A financial plan and description of the resources, programming, and management of United States foreign assistance to Pakistan, including the criteria used to determine their prioritization.
A complete description of both the evaluation process for reviewing and adjusting the strategy and implementation as necessary, and measures of effectiveness for the implementation of the strategy.
Intelligence Support.--The Director of National Intelligence shall provide intelligence support to the development of the comprehensive interagency strategy and implementation plan required by subsection (a).
Updates of Strategy.--The President shall transmit in writing to the appropriate congressional committees any updates of the comprehensive interagency strategy and implementation plan required by subsection (a), as necessary.
AUTHORIZATION OF ASSISTANCE FOR PAKISTAN.
Foreign Assistance Act of 1961.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President, for the purposes of providing assistance to Pakistan under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et seq.
), $1,500,000,000 or such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2010 through 2013.
Pakistan Counterinsurgency Capability Fund.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President, for the purposes of building a more effective counterinsurgency capability in Pakistan's security forces, up to $700,000,000 for the Pakistan Counterinsurgency Capability Fund, for fiscal year 2010.
Use of Funds.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated under this section or otherwise made available to carry out this Act shall be used to the maximum extent practicable as direct expenditures for programs, projects, and activities, subject to existing reporting and notification requirements.
CONGRESSIONAL BRIEFING AND NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS.
Briefing.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the transmission of the comprehensive interagency strategy and implementation plan required by section 3, and quarterly thereafter through December 1, 2013, the President, acting through the Secretary of State and the Secretary of Defense, shall brief the appropriate congressional committees on the status of the comprehensive interagency strategy and implementation plan.
Notification.--The President shall notify the appropriate congressional committees not later than 30 days prior to obligating any assistance described in section 4 as budgetary support to the Government of Pakistan or to any persons, agencies, instrumentalities, or elements of the Government of Pakistan and shall describe the purpose and conditions attached to any such budgetary support assistance.
The President shall notify the appropriate congressional committees not later than 30 days prior to obligating any other type of assistance described in section 4.
In this Act, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, and the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Relations, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.