This Act may be cited as the ``United Arab Emirates Human Rights Accountability Act of 2010''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Sheikh Issa bin Zayed al-Nahyan is the brother of United Arab Emirates (hereinafter in this section referred to as ``UAE'') president and Abu Dhabi Emir Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed al-Nahayan.
On April 22, 2009, ABC Nightline broadcast a few minutes of videotape documenting the severest forms of torture and abuse of an Afghan grain dealer, Mohammed Shah Poor, inflicted by Sheikh Issa assisted by other uniformed individuals acting under color of authority.
During Mr. Poor's ordeal, Sheikh Issa repeatedly insisted that his and his cronies actions be videotaped, reportedly for his later enjoyment of the extreme suffering of his victim, who miraculously survived the attack.
Excerpts of this video have been circulated on YouTube and longer footage was submitted in a United States civil court in 2009.
Around 2004, the matter was brought to the attention of the UAE Ministry of Interior, which is headed by another of Sheikh Issa's brothers.
The Interior Ministry failed to investigate this matter, and when ABC News brought it again to their attention, the Ministry replied that the incidents were not part of a pattern of behavior and that the police had correctly followed procedures.
Human Rights Watch stated, regarding this incident: ``The UAE government's failure to prosecute those involved in this undisputed incident of torture and abuse at the hands of a royal family member and the police is an appalling miscarriage of justice.
What's even more shocking is the government's insistence that it investigated and found no violation of UAE laws.''.
Only after an international outcry regarding the lack of action by UAE law enforcement and legal authorities and a hearing of the Tom Lantos Human Rights Commission in the United States Reports House of Representatives on Wednesday, May 13, 2009, did Sheikh Issa finally have to face charges before a UAE court.
On January 10, 2010, the UAE court acquitted Sheikh Issa of the charges of rape, endangering life and causing bodily harm.
According to Sheikh Issa's attorney, the court accepted their defense that Sheikh Issa had been under the influence of drugs.
In addition, the UAE court convicted Bassam and Ghassan Nabulsi, sentenced in absentia to five years each in prison.
Bassam and Ghassan Nabulsi were former business partners of Sheikh Issa, who had filmed the attack and kept the video tape and ultimately brought a civil suit in the United States against Sheikh Issa during which they submitted the film.
VISA LIMITATIONS ON CERTAIN MEMBERS OF THE ROYAL FAMILIES OF UNITED ARAB EMIRATES.
Ineligible for Visas.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), an alien is ineligible to receive a visa to enter the United States and ineligible to be admitted to the United States who the Secretary of State determines to be-- (A) a member of the royal families of the United Arab Emirates; and (B) an officer or employee of the government of the United Arab Emirates.
Waiver for national interests.--The Secretary of State may waive paragraph (1) in the case of an alien if the Secretary determines that such a waiver would be in the national interests of the United States.
Upon granting such a waiver, the Secretary of State shall provide notice to the Congress.
Termination.--The provisions of this subsection shall cease to be effective on the date that the Secretary of State transmits to the Congress a statement certifying the following: (A) That the Secretary has determined that the government of the United Arab Emirates has established an independent entity within that government that has authority to investigate an individual described in paragraph (1).
That the Secretary has determined that Sheikh Issa bin Zayed al-Nahyan has been tried, in accordance with what the Secretary determines to be appropriate international legal norms and human rights standards, for all offenses described in paragraph (4).
Offenses described.--An offense described in this paragraph is any offense under the law of the United Arab Emirates-- (A) that was committed in connection with the assault on Mohammed Shah Poor; and (B) for which Sheikh Issa bin Zayed al-Nahyan has not been tried as of the date of enactment of this Act.
Current Visas Revoked.--The Secretary of State, in accordance with section 221(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1201(i)), shall revoke the nonimmigrant visa or other documentation of any alien who is rendered ineligible for such visa or documentation under subsection (a).
Terminology.--The terms used in this Act shall have the meanings given such terms in section 101(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101(a)).