RATIFICATION OF CERTAIN CASWELL AND MONTANA CREEK NATIVE ASSOCIATIONS CONVEYANCES.
The conveyance of approximately 11,520 acres to Montana Creek Native Association, Inc., and the conveyance of approximately 11,520 acres to Caswell Native Association, Inc., by Cook Inlet Region, Inc. in fulfillment of the agreement of February 3, 1976, and subsequent letter agreement of March 26, 1982, among the three parties are hereby adopted and ratified as a matter of Federal law.
These conveyances shall be deemed to be conveyances pursuant to section 14(h)(2) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1613(h)(2)).
The group corporations for Montana Creek and Caswell are hereby declared to have received their full entitlement and shall not be entitled to the receipt of any additional lands under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
The ratification of these conveyances shall not have any other effect upon section 14(h) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1613(h)) or upon the duties and obligations of the United States to any Alaska Native Corporation.
This ratification shall not be the basis for any claim to land or money by Caswell or Montana Creek group corporations or any other Alaska Native Corporation against the State of Alaska, the United States, or Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated.
MINING CLAIMS AFTER LANDS CONVEYED TO ALASKA REGIONAL CORPORATION.
Section 22(c) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1621(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) This section shall apply to lands conveyed by interim conveyance or patent to a regional corporation pursuant to this Act which are made subject to a mining claim or claims located under the general mining laws, including lands conveyed prior to enactment of this paragraph.
Effective upon the date of the enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary, acting through the Bureau of Land Management and in a manner consistent with section 14(g) of this Act, shall transfer to the regional corporation administration of all mining claims determined to be entirely within lands conveyed to that corporation.
Any person holding such mining claim or claims shall meet such requirements of the general mining laws and section 314 of the Federal Land Management and Policy Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1744), except that any filings which would have been made with the Bureau of Land Management if the lands were within Federal ownership shall be timely made to the appropriate regional corporation.
The validity of any such mining claim or claims may be contested by the regional corporation, in the place of the United States.
All contest proceedings and appeals by the mining claimants of adverse decisions made by the regional corporation shall be brought in Federal District Court for the District of Alaska.
Neither the United States nor any Federal agency or official shall be named or joined as a party in such proceedings or appeals.
All revenues from such mining claims received after passage of this paragraph shall be remitted to the regional corporation subject to distribution pursuant to section 7(i) of this Act, except that in the event that the mining claim or claims are not totally within the lands conveyed to the regional corporation, the regional corporation shall be entitled only to that proportion of revenues, other than administrative fees, reasonably allocated to the portion of the mining claim or claims so conveyed.''.
SETTLEMENT OF CLAIMS ARISING FROM HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCE CONTAMINATION OF TRANSFERRED LANDS.
The Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``claims arising from contamination of transferred lands ``Sec.
As used in this section: ``(1) The term `contaminant' means hazardous substances harmful to public health or the environment, including asbestos.
The term `lands' means real property transferred to an Alaska Native Corporation pursuant to this Act.
Within 18 months of enactment of this section, and after consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, State of Alaska, and appropriate Alaska Native corporations and organizations, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, a report addressing issues presented by the presence of hazardous substances on lands conveyed or prioritized for conveyance to such corporations pursuant to this Act.
Such report shall consist of-- ``(1) existing information concerning the nature and types of contaminants present on such lands prior to conveyance to Alaska Native corporations; ``(2) existing information identifying the existence and availability of potentially responsible parties for the removal or amelioration of the effects of such contaminants; ``(3) identification of existing remedies; and ``(4) recommendations for any additional legislation that the Secretary concludes is necessary to remedy the problem of contaminants on such lands.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF IMPLEMENTING REQUIRED RECONVEYANCES.
Section 14(c) of Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1613(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the purpose of providing technical assistance to Village Corporations established pursuant to this Act in order that they may fulfill the reconveyance requirements of section 14(c) of this Act.
The Secretary may make funds available as grants to ANCSA or nonprofit corporations that maintain in-house land planning and management capabilities.''.
Section 1431(o) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (94 United States Statutes at Large 2542) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Following the exercise by Arctic Slope Regional Corporation of its option under paragraph (1) to acquire the subsurface estate beneath lands within the National Petroleum Reserve--Alaska selected by Kuukpik Corporation, where such subsurface estate entirely surrounds lands subject to a Native allotment application approved under section 905 of this Act, and the oil and gas in such lands have been reserved to the United States, Arctic Slope Regional Corporation, at its further option, shall be entitled to receive a conveyance of the reserved oil and gas, including all rights and privileges therein reserved to the United States, in such lands.
Upon the receipt of a conveyance of such oil and gas interests, the entitlement of Arctic Slope Regional Corporation to in-lieu subsurface lands under section 12(a)(1) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1611(a)(1)) shall be reduced by the amount of acreage determined by the Secretary to be conveyed to Arctic Slope Regional Corporation pursuant to this paragraph.''.
REPORT CONCERNING OPEN SEASON FOR CERTAIN NATIVE ALASKAN VETERANS FOR ALLOTMENTS.
In General.--No later than six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, the State of Alaska and appropriate Native corporations and organizations, shall submit to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, a report which shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) The number of Vietnam era veterans, as defined in section 101 of title 38, United States Code, who were eligible for but did not apply for an allotment of not to exceed 160 acres under the Act of May 17, 1906 (Chapter 2469; 34 United States Statutes at Large 197), as such Act was in effect before December 18, 1971; (2) an assessment of the potential impacts of additional allotments on conservation system units as such term is defined in section 102(4) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (94 United States Statutes at Large 2375); and (3) recommendations for any additional legislation that the Secretary concludes is necessary.
Requirement.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall release to the Secretary of the Interior information relevant to the report required under subsection (a).
TRANSFER OF WRANGELL INSTITUTE.
Property Transfer.--Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, is authorized to transfer to the United States and the General Services Administration shall accept an approximately 10-acre site of the Wrangell Institute in Wrangell, Alaska, and the structures contained thereon.
Restoration of Property Credits.-- (1) In general.--In exchange for the land and structures transferred under subsection (a), property bidding credits in the total amount of $382,305, shall be restored to the Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, property account in the Treasury established under section 12(b) of the Act of January 2, 1976 (Public Law 94-204; 43 United States Code 1611 note), referred to in such section as the ``Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, property account''.
Such property bidding credits shall be used in the same fiscal year as received by Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated.
Hold harmless.--The United States shall defend and hold harmless Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, and its subsidiaries in any and all claims arising from Federal or Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated, ownership of the land and structures prior to their return to the United States.
The Shishmaref Airport, conveyed to the State of Alaska on January 5, 1967, in Patent No.
1240529, is subject to reversion to the United States, pursuant to the terms of that patent for nonuse as an airport.
The Secretary is authorized to reacquire the interests originally conveyed pursuant to Patent No.
1240529, and, notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall immediately thereafter transfer all right, title, and interest of the United States in the subject lands to the Shishmaref Native Corporation.
Nothing in this section shall relieve the State, the United States, or any other potentially responsible party of liability, if any, under existing law for the cleanup of hazardous or solid wastes on the property, nor shall the United States or Shishmaref Native Corporation become liable for the cleanup of the property solely by virtue of acquiring title from the State or from the United States.
PURCHASE OF SETTLEMENT COMMON STOCK OF COOK INLET REGION.
In General.--Section 7(h) of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1606(h)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4)(A) As used in this paragraph, the term `Cook Inlet Regional Corporation' means Cook Inlet Region, Incorporated.
The Cook Inlet Regional Corporation may, by an amendment to its articles of incorporation made in accordance with the voting standards under section 36(d)(1), purchase Settlement Common Stock of the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation and all rights associated with the stock from the shareholders of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation in accordance with any provisions included in the amendment that relate to the terms, procedures, number of offers to purchase, and timing of offers to purchase.
Subject to subparagraph (D), and notwithstanding paragraph (1)(B), the shareholders of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation may, in accordance with an amendment made pursuant to subparagraph (B), sell the Settlement Common Stock of the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation to itself.
No sale or purchase may be made pursuant to this paragraph without the prior approval of the board of directors of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation.
Except as provided in subparagraph (E), each sale and purchase made under this paragraph shall be made pursuant to an offer made on the same terms to all holders of Settlement Common Stock of the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation.
To recognize the different rights that accrue to any class or series of shares of Settlement Common Stock owned by stockholders who are not residents of a Native village (referred to in this paragraph as `non-village shares'), an amendment made pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall authorize the board of directors (at the option of the board) to offer to purchase-- ``(i) the non-village shares, including the right to share in distributions made to shareholders pursuant to subsections (j) and (m) (referred to in this paragraph as `nonresident distribution rights'), at a price that includes a premium, in addition to the amount that is offered for the purchase of other village shares of Settlement Common Stock of the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation, that reflects the value of the nonresident distribution rights; or ``(ii) non-village shares without the nonresident distribution rights associated with the shares.
Any shareholder who accepts an offer made by the board of directors pursuant to subparagraph (E)(ii) shall receive, with respect to each non-village share sold by the shareholder to the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation-- ``(i) the consideration for a share of Settlement Common Stock offered to shareholders of village shares; and ``(ii) a security for only the nonresident rights that attach to such share that does not have attached voting rights (referred to in this paragraph as a `non-voting security').
An amendment made pursuant to subparagraph (B) shall authorize the issuance of a non-voting security that-- ``(i) shall, for purposes of subsections (j) and (m), be treated as a non-village share with respect to-- ``(I) computing distributions under such subsections; and ``(II) entitling the holder of the share to the proportional share of the distributions made under such subsections; ``(ii) may be sold to Cook Inlet Region, Inc.; and ``(iii) shall otherwise be subject to the restrictions under paragraph (1)(B).
Any shares of Settlement Common Stock purchased pursuant to this paragraph shall be canceled on the conditions that-- ``(i) non-village shares with the nonresident rights that attach to such shares that are purchased pursuant to this paragraph shall be considered to be-- ``(I) outstanding shares; and ``(II) for the purposes of subsection (m), shares of stock registered on the books of the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation in the names of nonresidents of villages; and ``(ii) any amount of funds that would be distributable with respect to non-village shares or non-voting securities pursuant to subsection (j) or (m) shall be distributed by Cook Inlet Regional Corporation to itself; and ``(iii) village shares that are purchased pursuant to this paragraph shall be considered to be-- ``(I) outstanding shares, and ``(II) for the purposes of subsection (k) shares of stock registered on the books of the Cook Inlet Regional Corporation in the names of the residents of villages.
Any offer to purchase Settlement Common Stock made pursuant to this paragraph shall exclude from the offer-- ``(i) any share of Settlement Common Stock held, at the time the offer is made, by an officer (including a member of the board of directors) of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation or a member of the immediate family of the officer; and ``(ii) any share of Settlement Common Stock held by any custodian, guardian, trustee, or attorney representing a shareholder of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation in fact or law, or any other similar person, entity, or representative.
(i) The board of directors of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation, in determining the terms of an offer to purchase made under this paragraph, including the amount of any premium paid with respect to a non-village share, may rely upon the good faith opinion of a recognized firm of investment bankers or valuation experts.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, Cook Inlet Regional Corporation, a member of the board of directors of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation, and any firm or member of a firm of investment bankers or valuation experts who assists in a determination made under this subparagraph shall not be liable for damages resulting from terms made in an offer made in connection with any purchase of Settlement Common Stock if the offer was made-- ``(I) in good faith; ``(II) in reliance on a determination made pursuant to clause (i); and ``(III) otherwise in accordance with this paragraph.
The consideration given for the purchase of Settlement Common Stock made pursuant to an offer to purchase that provides for such consideration may be in the form of cash, securities, or a combination of cash and securities, as determined by the board of directors of Cook Inlet Regional Corporation, in a manner consistent with an amendment made pursuant to subparagraph (B).
Sale of Settlement Common Stock in accordance with this paragraph shall not diminish a shareholder's status as an Alaska Native or descendant of a Native for the purpose of qualifying for those programs, benefits and services or other rights or privileges set out for the benefit of Alaska Natives and Native Americans.
Proceeds from the sale of Settlement Common Stock shall not be excluded in determining eligibility for any needs-based programs that may be provided by Federal, State or local agencies.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 8(c) of such Act (43 United States Code 1607(c)) is amended by striking ``(h)'' and inserting ``(h) (other than paragraph (4))''.
Passed the House of Representatives October 3, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.