This Act may be cited as the ``Paul Wellstone Early Educator Loan Forgiveness Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1)(A) The first 5 years of a child's life are a time of momentous change.
Research shows that a child's brain size doubles between birth and age 3.
New scientific research shows that the electrical activity of the brain cells actually changes the physical structure of the brain, and that without a stimulating environment, a baby's brain suffers.
Research also indicates that there is a connection between the cognitive, social, emotional, and physical stimulation young children receive from their early childhood teachers and caregivers and success in learning, school readiness, and intellectual growth.
There are important short- and long-term effects of that stimulation on cognition and social development.
High quality early childhood education correlates with better language development, mathematics abilities, and social skills.
11,900,000 children younger than age 5 spend part of their time with a child care provider other than a parent.
By 2000, 64 percent of 3- to 5-year-olds were enrolled in some type of preschool program.
Demand for child care is growing as more mothers enter the workforce.
Good quality child care, in a healthy and safe environment, with trained, caring providers who provide age- appropriate, developmentally appropriate, and effective activities, helps children grow and thrive.
Recent research shows that most child care needs significant improvement.
Good quality child care depends largely on the provider, yet providers of child care earn on average $7.86 per hour, or $16,350 per year.
Such earnings cause high annual turnover, up to 31 percent of the staff in some child care programs.
High turnover affects the overall quality of a child care program and causes anxiety for children.
Children attending lower quality child care programs and child care programs with high staff turnover are less competent in language and social development than other children.
The quality of child care is primarily related to high staff-to-child ratios, staff education, professional development, and administrators' prior experience.
In addition, certain characteristics distinguish poor, mediocre, and good quality child care programs, the most important of which are teacher wages, education, and specialized training.
Each State requires kindergarten teachers to hold at least a bachelor's degree and certificate in early childhood education.
Only 20 States and the District of Columbia require teachers in prekindergarten programs to satisfy those requirements.
Thirty States allow caregivers with no previous training to work in child care programs.
LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR CHILD CARE PROVIDERS.
Section 428K of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1078- 11) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
LOAN FORGIVENESS FOR CHILD CARE PROVIDERS.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- ``(1) to bring more highly trained individuals into the early child care profession; and ``(2) to keep more highly trained child care providers in the early child care field for longer periods of time.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Child care facility.--The term `child care facility' means a facility, including a home, that-- ``(A) provides child care services; and ``(B) meets applicable State or local government licensing, certification, approval, or registration requirements, if any.
Child care services.--The term `child care services' means activities and services provided for the education and care of children from birth through age 5 by an individual who has a degree in early childhood education, including a preschool teacher.
Degree.--The term `degree' means an associate's or bachelor's degree awarded by an institution of higher education.
Early childhood education.--The term `early childhood education' means education in the area of early child development and education, or any other educational area related to early child development and education or child care, that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Eligible preschool program provider.--The term `eligible preschool program provider' means a preschool program provider serving children younger than the age of compulsory school attendance in the State that is-- ``(A) a public or private school; ``(B) a provider that is supported, sponsored, supervised, or administered by a local educational agency; ``(C) a Head Start agency designated under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes); ``(D) a nonprofit or community-based organization; or ``(E) a licensed child care center or family child care provider.
Institution of higher education.--Notwithstanding section 102, the term `institution of higher education' has the meaning given the term in section 101.
Preschool teacher.--The term `preschool teacher' means an individual-- ``(A) who has received at least an associate's degree in early childhood education and who is working toward or who has already received a bachelor's degree in early childhood education; and ``(B) who works for an eligible preschool program provider supporting the children's cognitive, social, emotional, and physical development to prepare the children for the transition to kindergarten.
Loan Forgiveness.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may carry out a program of assuming the obligation to repay, pursuant to subsection (d), a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this part, part D (excluding loans made under sections 428B and 428C or comparable loans made under part D), or part E for any new borrower after the date of enactment of the Higher Education Amendments of 1998, who-- ``(A) receives a degree in early childhood education; ``(B) obtains employment in a child care facility, such as employment as a preschool teacher; and ``(C) has been employed full time, for the 2 consecutive years preceding the year for which the determination is made, as a provider of child care services in a child care facility in a low-income community.
Low-income community.--In this subsection, the term `low-income community' means a community in which 70 percent of households earn less than 85 percent of the State median household income.
Award basis; priority.-- ``(A) Award basis.--Subject to subparagraph (B), loan repayment under this section shall be on a first- come, first-served basis and subject to the availability of appropriations.
Priority.--The Secretary shall give priority in providing loan repayment under this section for a fiscal year to student borrowers who received loan repayment under this section for the preceding fiscal year.
Regulations.--The Secretary is authorized to prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this section.
Loan Repayment.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall assume the obligation to repay-- ``(A) after the second consecutive year of employment described in subparagraphs (B) and (C) of subsection (c)(1), 20 percent of the total amount of all loans described in subsection (c)(1) and made after the date of enactment of the Higher Education Amendments of 1998, to a student; ``(B) after the third consecutive year of such employment, 20 percent of the total amount of all such loans; and ``(C) after each of the fourth and fifth consecutive years of such employment, 30 percent of the total amount of all such loans.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the refunding of any repayment of a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under this part, part D, or part E. ``(3) Interest.--If a portion of a loan is repaid by the Secretary under this section for any year, the proportionate amount of interest on such loan that accrues for such year shall be repaid by the Secretary.
Special rule.--In the case in which a student borrower who is not participating in loan repayment pursuant to this section returns to an institution of higher education after graduation from an institution of higher education for the purpose of obtaining a degree in early childhood education, the Secretary is authorized to assume the obligation to repay the total amount of loans described in subsection (c)(1) and incurred for a maximum of 2 academic years in returning to the institution of higher education for the purpose of obtaining the degree in early childhood education.
Such loans shall only be repaid for borrowers who qualify for loan repayment pursuant to the provisions of this section, and shall be repaid in accordance with the provisions of paragraph (1).
Ineligibility of national service award recipients.-- No student borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this section and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12601 et sequentes).
Repayment to Eligible Lenders and Holders.--The Secretary shall pay to each eligible lender or holder for each fiscal year an amount equal to the aggregate amount of the lender's or holder's loans that are subject to repayment pursuant to this section for such year.
Application for Repayment.-- ``(1) In general.--Each eligible individual desiring loan repayment under this section shall submit a complete and accurate application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Conditions.--An eligible individual may apply for loan repayment under this section after completing each of the second through the fifth consecutive years of qualifying employment described in subsection (d)(1).
The borrower shall receive forbearance while engaged in qualifying employment described in subsection (d)(1) unless the borrower is in deferment while so engaged.
Evaluation.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall conduct, by grant or contract, an independent national evaluation of the impact of the program assisted under this section on the field of early childhood education.
Competitive basis.--The grant or contract described in paragraph (1) shall be awarded on a competitive basis.
Contents.--The evaluation described in this subsection shall-- ``(A) determine the number of individuals who were encouraged by the program assisted under this section to pursue early childhood education; ``(B) determine the number of individuals who remain employed in a child care facility as a result of participation in the program; ``(C) identify the barriers to the effectiveness of the program; ``(D) assess the cost-effectiveness of the program in improving the quality of-- ``(i) early childhood education; and ``(ii) child care services; ``(E) identify the reasons why participants in the program have chosen to take part in the program; ``(F) identify the number of individuals participating in the program who received an associate's degree and the number of such individuals who received a bachelor's degree; and ``(G) identify the number of years each individual participated in the program.
Interim and final evaluation reports.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit to the President and Congress such interim reports regarding the evaluation described in this subsection as the Secretary determines to be appropriate, and shall prepare and so submit a final report regarding the evaluation by January 1, 2007.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.