PERMANENT EXTENSION OF RESEARCH CREDIT.
In General.--Section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for increasing research activities) is amended by striking subsection (h).
Conforming Amendment.--Section 45C(b)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking subparagraph (D).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after June 30, 1998.
IMPROVED ALTERNATIVE INCREMENTAL CREDIT.
In General.--Section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as amended by section 1 of this Act) is amended by adding at the end of the following new subsection: ``(h) Election of Alternative Incremental Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--At the election of the taxpayer, the credit under subsection (a)(1) shall be determined under this subsection by taking into account the modifications provided by this subsection.
Determination of base amount.-- ``(A) In general.--In computing the base amount under subsection (c)-- ``(i) notwithstanding subsection (c)(3), the fixed-base percentage shall be equal to 85 percent of the percentage which the aggregate qualified research expenses of the taxpayer for the base period is of the aggregate gross receipts of the taxpayer for the base period, and ``(ii) the minimum base amount under subsection (c)(2) shall not apply.
Start-up and small taxpayer.--In computing the base amount under subsection (c), the gross receipts of a taxpayer for any taxable year in the base period shall be treated as at least equal to $1,000,000.
Base period.--For purposes of this subsection, the base period is the 8-taxable year period preceding the taxable year (or, if shorter, the period the taxpayer (and any predecessor) has been in existence).
Qualified research.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (d), the term `qualified research' means research with respect to which expenditures are treated as research and development costs for the purposes of a report or statement concerning such taxable year-- ``(i) to shareholders, partners, or other proprietors, or to beneficiaries, or ``(ii) for credit purposes.
Such term shall not include any research described in subparagraph (F) or (H) of subsection (d)(4).
Financial accounting standards.-- ``(i) In general.--Subparagarph (A) shall only apply to the extent that the treatment of expenditures as research and development costs is consistent with the Statement of Financial Standards No.
2 Accounting for Research and Development Costs.
Significant changes.--If the Secretary determines that there is any significant change in the accounting standards described in clause (i) after the date of enactment of this subsection-- ``(I) the Secretary shall notify the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate of such change, and ``(II) such change shall not be taken into account for any taxable year beginning before the date which is 1 year after the date of notice under subclause (I).
Transition rule.--At the election of the taxpayer, this paragraph shall not apply in computing the base amount for any taxable year in the base period beginning before January 1, 1999.
Election.--An election under this subsection shall apply to the taxable year for which made and all succeeding taxable year unless revoked with the consent of the Secretary.''
Assistance of Small and Start-Up Businesses.--The Secretary of the Treasury of his delegate shall take such actions as are appropriate to-- (1) provide assistance to small and start-up businesses in complying with the requirements of section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, and (2) reduce the costs of such compliance.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 41(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking paragraph (4) and redesignating paragraphs (5) and (6) as paragraphs (4) and (5), respectively.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.
MODIFICATIONS TO CREDIT FOR BASIC RESEARCH.
Elimination of Incremental Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 41(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--The amount of basic research payments taken into account under subsection (a)(2) shall be determined in accordance with this subsection.''
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 41(a)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``determined under subsection (e)(1)(A)'' and inserting ``for the taxable year''.
Section 41(e) of such Code is amended by striking paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) and by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (3) and (4), respectively.
Section 41(e)(4) of such Code (as redesignated) is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and by redesignating subparagraphs (C), (D), and (E) as subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D), respectively.
Clause (i) of section 170(e)(4)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 41(e)(6)'' and inserting ``section 41(e)(3)''.
Basic Research.-- (1) Specific commercial objective.--Section 41(e)(4) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 relating to definitions and special rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Specific commercial objective.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), research shall not be treated as having a specific commercial objective if all results of such research are to be published in such a manner as to be available to the general public prior to their use for a commercial purpose.''
Exclusions from basic research.--Section 41(e)(4)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as redesignated by subsection (a)) is amended by striking clause (ii) and inserting the following: ``(ii) basic research in the arts or humanities.''
Expansion of Credit to Research at Federal Laboratories.-- Section 41(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as redesignated by subsection (a)(2)(C) of this section) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(E) Federal laboratories.--Any organization which is a federal laboratory within the meaning of that term is section 4(6) of the Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 United States Code 3703(6)).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.
CREDIT FOR EXPENSES ATTRIBUTABLE TO CERTAIN COLLABORATIVE RESEARCH CONSORTIA.
Credit for Expenses Attributable to Certain Collaborative Research Consortia.--Subsection (a) of section 41 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit for increasing research activities) is amended by-- (1) striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (1); (2) striking the period at the end of paragraph (2) and inserting ``, and ''; and (3) adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) 20 percent of the amounts paid or incurred during the taxable year (including as contributions) to a qualified research consortium.''
Qualified Research Consortium Defined.--Subsection (f) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Qualified research consortium.--The term `qualified research consortium' means any organization which-- ``(A) is described in section 501(c)(3) and is exempt from tax under section 501(a), ``(B) is organized and operated primarily to conduct scientific or engineering research, ``(C) is not a private foundation, ``(D) to which at least 15 unrelated persons paid or incurred (including as contributions), during the calendar year in which the taxable year of the organization begins, amounts to such organization for scientific or engineering research, ``(E) to which no 3 unrelated persons paid or incurred (including as contributions) during such calendar year more than 50 percent of the total amounts received by such organization during such calendar year for scientific or engineering research, and ``(F) to which no single person paid or incurred (including as contributions) more than 25 percent of such total amounts.
All persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as related persons for purposes of subparagraphs (D) and (E), and as a single person for purposes of subparagraph (F).''
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (3) of section 41(b) of such Code is amended by striking subparagraph (C).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1998.