This Act may be cited as the ``Homeland Emergency Responders Organization Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Federal Government must enhance the ability of first responders to coordinate and respond to incidents of terrorism, including incidents involving weapons of mass destruction; and (2) as a result of the events of September 11, 2001, it is necessary to empower the Federal Emergency Management Agency (in this section referred to as ``FEMA'') to distribute Federal grant monies to States and local communities and, define and clarify the terms and conditions under which such funds will be dispersed, spent, matched, and reported.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to establish within FEMA the Office of National Preparedness; (2) to establish a program, with criteria and guidelines, for first responders to utilize Federal grants to enhance their ability to respond to incidents of terrorism, including incidents involving weapons of mass destruction; and (3) to establish a program, with criteria and guidelines, for States to utilize Federal grant dollars in establishing coordinated interstate and intrastate antiterrorism programs, establishing mutual aid programs, planning, developing, and executing terrorism response exercises, and establishing or upgrading statewide emergency notification capabilities, such as the ``Amber Alert project'' in California and Texas, and such other purposes as the Director of FEMA determines.
Major Disaster.--Section 102(2) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5122(2)) is amended by inserting ``incident of terrorism,'' after ``drought),''.
Weapon of Mass Destruction.--Section 602(a) of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5165a(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(11) Weapon of mass destruction.--The term `weapon of mass destruction' means any weapon or device that is intended, or has the capability, to cause death or serious bodily injury to a significant number of people through the release, dissemination, or impact of toxic or poisonous chemicals or their precursors, disease organisms, or radiation or radioactivity.''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF NATIONAL PREPAREDNESS.
Subtitle A of title VI of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5196 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF NATIONAL PREPAREDNESS.
In General.--There is established in the Federal Emergency Management Agency an office to be known as the `Office of National Preparedness' (referred to in this section as the `Office').
Deputy Director.--The Office shall be headed by a Deputy Director.
Duties.-- ``(1) Points of contact.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall designate a national preparedness point of contact in each of the 10 regional offices of the Agency.
Eligibility criteria.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall establish criteria to determine eligibility of local first responders to receive grants under section 630.
Distribution of funds.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall establish an expeditious method of distributing grant funds under section 630 to first responders through the regional points of contact designated under paragraph (1).
Emergency communications equipment standards.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall establish standards for emergency communications equipment to ensure interoperability and deny grants under section 630 to State and first responders that do not comply with those standards.
Response equipment standards.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall establish standards for equipment to be used by personnel that have responsibilities relating to homeland preparedness or security, or both, and that are under the jurisdiction of a first responder to respond to incidents of terrorism, including incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
Standards for terrorism preparedness.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall establish clearly defined standards and guidelines for terrorism preparedness and response by State governments to ensure interstate and intrastate response capabilities.
Web site.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall create a Web site for use by States and local first responders for purposes of sharing information on homeland security preparedness.
Progress report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Director shall transmit to Congress a report on the progress of the Office in carrying out its duties under paragraphs (1) through (7).
Response capability.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the establishment of the Office, the Deputy Director shall lead a coordinated and integrated effort to build a nationwide viable terrorism preparedness and response capability.
Training standards.--The Deputy Director shall establish standards for the training of personnel that have responsibilities relating to homeland preparedness or security, or both, and that are under the jurisdiction of a first responder.
Miscellaneous.--The Office and Deputy Director shall carry out such other duties as the Director may delegate.
Use of Existing Resources.--In carrying out this section, the Deputy Director shall-- ``(1) use existing resources, including personnel of the Agency and, when appropriate, planning documents, equipment lists, program inventories, and plans of the Department of Agriculture, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Health and Human Services; and ``(2) consult with and use-- ``(A) existing Federal interagency boards and committees; ``(B) existing Government agencies; and ``(C) nongovernmental organizations.''.
PREPAREDNESS ASSISTANCE FOR FIRST RESPONDERS.
Subtitle B of title VI of the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5197 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PREPAREDNESS ASSISTANCE FOR FIRST RESPONDERS.
Definitions.--In this section and section 616, the following definitions apply: ``(1) State.--The term `State' means the 50 States.
First responder.--The term `first responder' means any local governmental entity, Indian tribe (as defined in section 4 of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450(b)), Indian tribe organization, or Native village (as defined in section 3 of the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1602)) that has jurisdiction over 1 or more of the following: ``(A) Law enforcement officers.
Public and environmental health personnel.
Such other personnel with duties related to homeland preparedness or security, or both, as the Director may determine.
Grant Program.--The Deputy Director of the Office of National Preparedness shall establish a program to make grants to first responders and States to prepare for and respond to incidents of terrorism, including incidents involving weapons of mass destruction.
Maintenance of Effort.-- ``(1) In general.--No first responder or State shall be eligible to receive a grant under this section unless the aggregate expenditures of the first responder or State for homeland preparedness and security (as defined by the Deputy Director) are maintained at a level which does not fall below the average level of such expenditures for its 2 fiscal years preceding the date of receipt of the grant.
Enforcement.--If a first responder or State does not meet the aggregate expenditure for homeland preparedness and security required under paragraph (1) in a fiscal year, the Director shall withhold the amount of a grant from the first responder or State until the first responder or State makes such expenditure.
Uses of Grants.--Grants made under this section-- ``(1) may be used by a first responder only-- ``(A) to purchase interoperable equipment in compliance with Federal standards established by the Federal Emergency Management Agency section 616(c)(4); ``(B) to train personnel that have responsibilities relating to homeland preparedness or security, or both, and that are under the jurisdiction of the first responder; ``(C) to upgrade emergency operating centers; ``(D) to conduct terrorism response exercises; ``(E) to compensate for overtime costs incurred in carrying out activities under subparagraphs (B) and (D) or as approved by the Deputy Director; and ``(F) to carry out such other related activities or to purchase materials or equipment as are approved by the Deputy Director; and ``(2) may be used by States only-- ``(A) to establish coordinated interstate and intrastate antiterrorism programs; ``(B) to establish mutual aid programs; ``(C) to plan and develop and execute terrorism response exercises; ``(D) to establish or upgrade statewide emergency notification systems; and ``(E) to carry out such other related activities, or to purchase such materials and equipment, as are approved by the Deputy Director.
Allocation of Funds.--Subject to advance appropriations, the Deputy Director shall make-- ``(1) a grant under this section to each State in each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007 of $10,000,000; ``(2) grants to first responders under this section, through the regional points of contact of the Agency designated under section 616(c)(1), in an amount not to exceed $50,000,000 per Agency region in each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007 based on-- ``(A) the likelihood of a terrorism attack as determined by the appropriate Federal agency responsible for making terrorism threat assessments; ``(B) the location of the population for which the first responders have responsibility; ``(C) the proximity to vital infrastructure, including-- ``(i) military installations; ``(ii) public buildings (as defined in section 13 of the Public Buildings Act of 1959 (40 United States Code 612)); ``(iii) nuclear power plants; ``(iv) chemical plants; and ``(v) national landmarks; and ``(D) the proximity to international borders; ``(3) grants in such amounts to first responders in rural, nonurban areas as the Director determines appropriate; and ``(4) grants in such amounts to such other first responders having responsibility for homeland preparedness or security, or both, as the Deputy Director determines appropriate.
Administrative Expenses.-- ``(1) States.--Not more than 2 percent of a grant made to a State under this section may be used for administrative expenses of carrying out its responsibilities under this section.
Local first responders.--Not more than 2 percent of a grant made to a first responder under this section may be used for administrative expenses of carrying out its responsibilities under this section.
Accountability and Oversight.-- ``(1) Agency objectives and reports.-- ``(A) Objectives.--The Deputy Director shall develop quantifiable, measurable objectives for achieving improved homeland preparedness and security at the regional level.
Reports.--The Deputy Director shall require each regional point of contact of the Agency designated under section 616(c)(1) to make annual reports to the Deputy Director on improvements in homeland preparedness and security within the region and to report failures to meet the quantifiable objectives developed under subparagraph (A) to the Inspector General of the Agency.
State objectives and reports.-- ``(A) Reports.--Each State, as a condition of receipt of a grant under this section, shall develop quantifiable, measurable objectives for achieving improved homeland preparedness and security at the State level.
Objectives.--Within 1 year of the date of receipt of a grant under this section, a State shall report to the Deputy Director on progress made in meeting the objectives it developed under subparagraph (A), how grant funds were used to meet such objectives, and any failures to meet such objectives.
Repayment.--If the Deputy Director determines that a first responder or State has improperly used Federal funds made available under this section, the first responder or State shall be liable to repay to the United States the amount determined by the Deputy Director to have been used improperly.
Administrative Expenses.--The Deputy Director may use not more than 5 percent of the amounts appropriated to carry out this section for a fiscal year to establish and maintain the Office of National Preparedness under section 616 and for administrative expenses of carrying out this section in such fiscal year.
Coordination.--The Director shall establish working relationships with other Federal agencies to prevent duplication of assistance to first responders and States for purposes of homeland preparedness and security.