This Act may be cited as the ``Tsunami Early Warning and Relief Act of 2005''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) A tremendous undersea earthquake near Sumatra, Indonesia, created a tsunami whose devastation spread throughout South Asia, Southeast Asia, and East Africa, leading to the death of more than 160,000 people on December 26, 2004.
As of February 4, 2005, more than 140,000 people are still missing.
The tsunami-affected countries include Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, Thailand, Maldives, Seychelles, Bangladesh, Burma, Malaysia, Somalia, Kenya, and Tanzania.
The tsunami resulted in massive destruction affecting millions of people who now require a great amount of short-term survival assistance and long-term rehabilitation and reconstruction assistance.
Compared to past disasters, the Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami led to historic destruction of the social service infrastructure, businesses, and livelihoods.
The devastation caused by the tsunami has resulted in many separated families and countless unaccompanied and orphaned children.
An effective global tsunami warning system is critical for preventing future humanitarian disasters and for protecting national security, since tsunamis occurring anywhere around the globe could impact the United States at home and United States national interests abroad.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has already built a system of tsunami buoys in the Pacific Ocean which has been proven to provide critical information and enhance the Nation's response to tsunamis.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has the technical capability to upgrade and expand this system so that it covers the entire globe and is integrated into larger ocean observing efforts.
Consistent funding and international cooperation would be needed to deploy a broader global tsunami warning system.
Effective local emergency management capabilities are needed to relay tsunami warning information to coastal communities and their residents.
TITLE I--TSUNAMI WARNING SYSTEMS SEC.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Commerce shall establish a Global Tsunami Disaster Reduction Program within the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration for the establishment of a tsunami warning system to protect vulnerable areas around the world, including Atlantic Ocean, Carribean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Indian Ocean, Mediterranean Sea, and European areas.
International Cooperation.--The Secretary of State, in consultation with the Director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, shall work with foreign countries that would benefit from the warning system described in subsection (a), and through international organizations, for the purposes of-- (1) sharing costs; (2) sharing relevant data; (3) sharing technical advice for the implementation of dissemination and evacuation plans; and (4) ensuring that the Global Earth Observation System of Systems program has access to and shares openly all relevant information worldwide.
EXPANSION OF UNITED STATES TSUNAMI READY PROGRAM.
The Director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall work with coastal communities throughout the United States to build upon local coastal and ocean observing capabilities, improve abilities to disseminate tsunami information and prepare evacuation plans according to the requirements of the Tsunami Ready program of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and encourage more communities to participate in the program.
The Director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall coordinate with the United States Geological Survey and the Department of State to work with other countries to enhance the monitoring, through the Global Seismic Network (GSN), of seismic activities that could lead to tsunamis, to support the programs described in sections 101 and 102.
The Director of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall transmit an annual report to Congress on progress in carrying out this title.
For purposes of this title, the term ``United States'' means the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce for carrying out this title-- (1) $38,000,000 for fiscal year 2006; and (2) $32,000,000 for fiscal year 2007 and for each subsequent fiscal year.
TITLE II--RELIEF, REHABILITATION, AND RECONSTRUCTION ASSISTANCE RELATING TO INDIAN OCEAN TSUNAMI SEC.
Authorization.--The President, acting through the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development, is authorized to provide assistance for-- (1) the relief and rehabilitation of individuals who are victims of the Indian Ocean tsunami; and (2) the reconstruction of the infrastructures of countries affected by the Indian Ocean tsunami, including Indonesia, Sri Lanka, India, Thailand, Maldives, Seychelles, Bangladesh, Burma, Malaysia, Somalia, Kenya, and Tanzania.
Terms and Conditions.--Assistance under this section may be provided on such terms and conditions as the President may determine.
The President shall transmit to Congress, on a quarterly basis in 2005, on a biannual basis in 2006, and as determined to be appropriate by the President thereafter, a report on progress in carrying out this title.
In this title, the term ``Indian Ocean tsunami'' means the tsunami that resulted from the earthquake that occurred off the west coast of northern Sumatra, Indonesia, on December 26, 2004.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the President to carry out this title such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2006 and each subsequent fiscal year.