This Act may be cited as the ``Antitrust Procedural Fairness Act of 1993''.
NOTICE OF AND PERIOD FOR COMMENT ON ANTITRUST GUIDELINES.
Notice of Proposed Antitrust Guidelines.--General notice of the proposed issuance of any antitrust guideline shall be published in the Federal Register, unless the persons subject thereto are named and either personally served or otherwise have actual notice thereof in accordance with law.
Such notice shall include-- (1) a statement of the time, place, and nature of public proceedings applicable to the issuance of an antitrust guideline, (2) reference to the legal authority under which such guideline is proposed, and (3) either the terms or substance of the proposed antitrust guideline or a description of the subjects and issues involved.
Exceptions.--Subsection (a) shall not apply-- (1) to any antitrust guideline relating only to agency organization or personnel, (2) to any antitrust guideline when the agency for good cause-- (A) finds that notice and public procedure with respect to such guidelines are impracticable, unnecessary, or contrary to the public interest, and (B) publishes, at the time of publication of the adopted antitrust guideline, such finding and a brief statement of the reasons therefor, or (3) to any antitrust guideline issued after a hearing required by statute.
Period for Public Comment.--An agency shall provide a public comment period of not less than sixty days after notice of the proposed issuance of an antitrust guideline with respect to which subsection (a) applies.
Procedure for Public Comment.--During the public comment period required by subsection (c), any interested person may submit written data, views, or arguments.
The agency may provide an opportunity for oral presentations concerning the proposed antitrust guideline.
ISSUANCE OF ANTITRUST GUIDELINE.
Basis for Adoption of Antitrust Guideline.--After consideration of the relevant matter submitted or presented with respect to a proposed antitrust guideline, the agency shall incorporate in the antitrust guideline adopted a concise general statement of basis and purpose of such guideline.
Effective Date of Antitrust Guideline.--The required publication or service of an antitrust guideline shall be made not less than sixty days before its effective date, except as otherwise provided by the agency for good cause (as described in subsection (b)(2)(A)) found and published with the guideline.
MAINTENANCE OF FILES REGARDING ISSUANCE OF ANTITRUST GUIDELINES.
File of Proceeding Regarding Issuance of Antitrust Guideline.-- Beginning not later than the date on which the agency provides notice of the proposed issuance of an antitrust guideline, the agency shall maintain a file of each proceeding relating to the issuance of such guideline, conducted in accordance with this Act.
Except as provided in subsection (b), such file shall include-- (1) the notice of the proposed issuance of such guideline and any supplemental notice concerning such issuance, (2) copies of, or identification of, all studies and documentary material upon which the agency substantially relied in formulating the proposed or final guideline, (3) copies of all written comments on the proposed guideline, or area of inquiry, which were submitted pursuant to any agency notice of the proposed issuance of such guideline published in the Federal Register, (4) all material which the agency by statute is required to make public in connection with the issuance of such guideline or which the agency wishes to make part of the record, and (5) the statements required of the agency in formulating the guideline.
Exclusion of Certain Matters.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to any matter which is exempt under section 552(b) of title 5, United States Code, from disclosure under section 552(a) of such title.
AMENDMENTS TO ANTITRUST GUIDELINES.
For purposes of this Act, any amendment made, or proposed to be made, by the agency to an existing antitrust guideline shall be deemed to be an antitrust guideline, or a proposed antitrust guideline, respectively.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``agency'' means the Department of Justice or the Federal Trade Commission, (2) the term ``antitrust guideline'' means an agency statement of general applicability designed-- (A) to implement or interpret any of the antitrust laws, or (B) to implement, interpret, or prescribe any policy relating to the enforcement of any of the antitrust laws, (3) the term ``antitrust laws'' has the meaning given it in subsection (a) of the first section of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 12(a)), except that such term includes section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45) to the extent that such section 5 relates to unfair methods of competition, and (4) the term ``person'' has the meaning given it in section 551(a) of title 5, United States Code.