This Act may be cited as the ``Sarah Weber Home Infusion Consumer Protection Act of 1994''.
LICENSING OF PROVIDERS OF HOME INFUSION THERAPY SERVICES.
Requirement.--No person shall provide (or arrange for the provision of) home infusion therapy services in a State unless the person is licensed by the State in accordance with this section to provide (or arrange for the provision of) such services.
No State shall license such a person unless the State finds that the person meets the standards for licensing established under this section.
Standards.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish standards for the licensing of persons providing (or arranging for the provision of) home infusion therapy services consistent with this subsection.
Supervision.--A person licensed under this section shall only provide (or arrange for the provision of) home infusion therapy services to an individual who is under the care of a physician and under a plan established and periodically reviewed by a physician.
Provider qualifications.--A person shall not be licensed consistent with this section unless the person-- (A) has been determined to be capable of providing, or arranging for the provision of, home infusion therapy services; (B) maintains clinical records on all individuals for whom the person provides (or arranges for the provision of) such services; (C) adheres to written protocols and policies with respect to the provision (or arrangement for the provision) of services; (D) makes services available (as needed) 7 days a week on a 24-hour basis; (E) coordinates all home infusion therapy services with the patient's physician; (F) conducts a quality assessment and assurance program, including drug regimen review and coordination of patient care; (G) assures that only trained (or licensed if necessary) personnel provide infusion products (and any other service for which training is required to safely provide the service); (H) assumes responsibility for the quality of services provided by others under arrangements with such person; (I) establishes appropriate protocols and explains such protocols clearly to patients before the initiation of a treatment plan; and (J) meets such other requirements as the Secretary may determine are necessary (A) to assure the safe and effective provision of home infusion therapy services, and (B) respecting the quality of the provision of such services and the charges for such services.
A protocol referred to in subparagraph (I) shall include a provision for appropriate notification of individuals receiving home infusion therapy services in the event of the cancellation of the provision of those services.
Fee.--A person shall not be licensed consistent with this section unless the person assures that charges for the provision of home infusion therapy services by the person (or under arrangements made by the person) shall not exceed such a fee as the Secretary by regulation may establish to assure that the charge for such services is reasonably related to the services actually provided.
Enforcement.--Compliance with the requirements of subsection (a) shall be enforced under the Federal Trade Commission Act by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
A violation of any such requirement shall constitute an unfair or deceptive act or practice in commerce in violation of section 5(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act and shall be subject to enforcement under section 5(b) of such Act irrespective of whether the person who committed such violation is engaged in commerce or meets any other jurisdictional test in such Act.
The Secretary shall have such procedural, investigative, and enforcement powers in enforcing compliance with such requirements and may require the filing of reports, the production of documents, and the appearance of witnesses as though the applicable terms of such Act were part of this section.
LIMITATION ON PHYSICIAN REFERRALS.
General Rule.--Except as provided in this section, if a physician (or an immediate family member of such physician) has a financial relationship with an entity described in section 1877(a)(2) of the Social Security Act, then the physician may not make a referral to the entity for the furnishing of home infusion therapy services.
Incorporation of Medicare Physician Ownership and Referral Provisions.--The provisions of subsections (b) through (h) of section 1877 of the Social Security Act (other than subsections (f) and (g)(1)) shall apply with respect to subsection (a) of this section in the same manner as they apply to section 1877(a) of such Act.
In applying the previous sentence, any reference to a ``designated health service'' is deemed to be a reference to home infusion therapy services.
Additional Exception for Compensation Arrangement for Management of Patient and Coordination of Care.--In applying subsection (b), in addition to the exceptions described in section 1877(e) of the Social Security Act, payment of reasonable compensation to a physician for the management of patient and coordination of care shall not be considered to be a compensation arrangement described in section 1877(a)(2)(B) of such Act.
Treatment of Prescription as a Referral.--In applying subsection (b) and in addition to section 1877(h)(5) of the Social Security Act, the prescription of a drug to be administered through home infusion constitutes a ``referral'' by a ``referring physician''.
HOME INFUSION THERAPY SERVICES DEFINED.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``home infusion therapy services'' means the nursing, pharmacy, and related services, including medical supplies, intravenous fluids, delivery, and equipment, required for the provision of therapeutic agents to patients by parenteral administration, including intravenous, intra-arterial, subcutaneous, epidural, intrathecal, intramuscular, and peritoneal infusion, by an enteral feeding tube for the purpose of improving or maintaining an individual's health condition in the individual's residence.
Licensing Requirement.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), section 3(a) shall apply to home infusion therapy services provided on or after the first day of the first month that begins more than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, without regard to whether or not the Secretary of Health and Human Services issues final regulations to carry out such section have been promulgated by such date.
State legislation.--In the case of a State which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in order for the State to provide for the licensing required under section 3(a), section 3(a) shall not apply in the State for home infusion therapy services provided before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
Limitation on Referrals.--Section 4 shall apply to referrals made after December 31, 1994.