Congress finds and declares that-- (1) maintaining and improving the strength and effectiveness of the Commission is essential to the integrity of the Federal election system; (2) the Commission was created in the wake of the Watergate scandal to ensure the integrity of Federal elections by overseeing Federal election disclosure and enforcing Federal campaign finance law; (3) the sharply increasing number of cases and the growing volume of financial activity is making it increasingly difficult for the Commission to fulfill its watchdog role in a timely and effective manner; (4) the Commission finds itself without a sufficient budget and without the basic enforcement powers that would enable the Commission to fulfill its watchdog role in a timely and effective manner; and (5) Congress should provide the Commission with sufficient resources and authority to allow the Commission to carry out its duties.
FILING OF FEDERAL ELECTION CAMPAIGN REPORTS USING COMPUTERS AND FACSIMILE MACHINES.
Section 302(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)) is amended by striking paragraph (11) and inserting at the end the following: ``(11)(A) The Commission may prescribe regulations under which persons required to file designations, statements, and reports under this Act-- ``(i) are required to maintain and file a designation, statement, or report for any calendar year in electronic form accessible by computers if the person has, or has reason to expect to have, aggregate contributions or expenditures in excess of a threshold amount determined by the Commission; and ``(ii) may maintain and file a designation, statement, or report in that manner if not required to do so under regulations prescribed under clause (i).
The Commission shall prescribe regulations which allow persons to file designations, statements, and reports required by this Act through the use of facsimile machines.
In prescribing regulations under this paragraph, the Commission shall provide methods (other than requiring a signature on the document being filed) for verifying designations, statements, and reports covered by the regulations.
Any document verified under any of the methods shall be treated for all purposes (including penalties for perjury) in the same manner as a document verified by signature.''.
AUDITS BY THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION.
Random Audits.--Section 311(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 438(b)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``The Commission''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Random audits.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), the Commission may conduct random audits and investigations to ensure voluntary compliance with this Act.
Selection of subjects.--The aggregate amount of contributions received by an eligible Senate candidate as of the end of each reporting period under section 304 shall meet the requirement of paragraph (1).
Limitation.--The Commission shall not conduct an audit or investigation of a candidate's authorized committee under paragraph (1) until the candidate is no longer a candidate for the office sought by the candidate in an election cycle.
Applicability.--This paragraph does not apply to an authorized committee of a candidate for President or Vice President subject to audit under section 9007 or 9038 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''.
Extension of Period During Which Campaign Audits May Be Begun.--Section 311(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 438(b)) is amended by striking ``6 months'' and inserting ``12 months''.
AUTHORITY OF THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION TO SEEK INJUNCTION.
Section 309(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(a)) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following: ``(13)(A) If, at any time in a proceeding described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4), the Commission believes that-- ``(i) there is a substantial likelihood that a violation of this Act is occurring or is about to occur; ``(ii) the failure to act expeditiously will result in irreparable harm to a party affected by the potential violation; ``(iii) expeditious action will not cause undue harm or prejudice to the interests of others; and ``(iv) the public interest would be best served by the issuance of an injunction; the Commission may initiate a civil action for a temporary restraining order or a preliminary injunction pending the outcome of the proceedings described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4).
An action under subparagraph (A) shall be brought in the United States district court for the district in which the defendant resides, transacts business, or may be found, or in which the violation is occurring, has occurred, or is about to occur.
''; (2) in paragraph (7), by striking ``(5) or (6)'' and inserting ``(5), (6), or (13)''; and (3) in paragraph (11), by striking ``(6)'' and inserting ``(6) or (13)''.
INCREASE IN PENALTY FOR KNOWING AND WILLFUL VIOLATIONS.
Section 309(a)(5)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(a)(5)(B)) is amended by striking ``the greater of $10,000 or an amount equal to 200 percent'' and inserting ``the greater of $15,000 or an amount equal to 300 percent''.
CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MINOR REPORTING VIOLATIONS.
Section 309(a)(4)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 437g(a)(4)(A)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence of clause (i) by striking ``clause (ii)'' and inserting ``clauses (ii) and (iii)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(iii) Minor reporting violations.-- ``(I) Definition of minor reporting violation.--The Commission shall by regulation establish a definition of the term `minor reporting violation' for the purposes of this clause.
Assessment by the commission.--After notice and hearing, the Commission may, without following the procedure of subparagraph (A) or paragraph (5) or (6), assess a civil penalty against a person that commits a minor reporting violation.
Schedule of amounts of civil penalties.-- The Commission shall by regulation establish a schedule of the amounts (or ranges of amounts) of civil penalties (not to exceed $5,000 or an amount equal to the amount of any contribution or expenditure involved in the violation) that shall be assessed for different categories of minor reporting violations.
Considerations.--In determining the amounts of civil penalties, the Commission shall consider the effect that a violation could be expected to have on the conduct of an election campaign or on the outcome of an election, the previous compliance record of the violator, and other appropriate factors.
Limitation.--The Commission shall not assess a civil penalty under this clause within 30 days before the date of an election.
Enforcement and judicial review.--The Commission, acting through its own attorneys, may bring a civil action in United States district court for payment of, and a person against whom a civil penalty has been assessed may bring a civil action in United State district court to review, a civil penalty under subclause (II).
Paragraph (7) shall apply to a civil action under this subclause.
Election of remedy.--If the Commission elects to proceed under this clause against a person for a minor reporting violation, the Commission shall be precluded from seeking enforcement with respect to that violation under any other provision of this Act or other law.''.
FILING OF SENATE ELECTION REPORTS WITH THE FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION, RATHER THAN WITH THE SECRETARY OF THE SENATE.
Section 302 Amendments.--Section 302 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432) is amended by striking subsection (g) and inserting the following: ``(g) Place of Filing.--All designations, statements, and reports required to be filed under this Act shall be filed with the Commission.''.
Section 304 Amendments.--Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(6)(A), by striking ``Secretary or the Commission'' through ``as appropriate'' and inserting ``Commission and Secretary of State''; and (2) in the third sentence of subsection (c)(2), by striking ``the Secretary or''.
Section 311 Amendments.--Section 311(a)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 438(a)(4)) is amended by striking ``Secretary or the''.
The Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 is amended-- (1) by striking section 314 (2 United States Code 439c) and inserting the following: ``SEC.
''; and (2) by inserting after section 406 the following: ``SEC.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act and chapters 95 and 96 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986-- ``(1) $1,700,000 for fiscal year 1997 (in addition to appropriations made before the date of enactment of this section, to be used in the investigation of the extraordinary problems associated with the 1996 elections such as the making of contributions by nonresident foreign nationals and the acceptance of such contributions by candidates, the use of funds not reported as contributions or expenditures to circumvent expenditure limits applicable to political party committees, coordination with candidates in the making of expenditures claimed to be independent expenditures, and expenditures on advertisements claimed to be purely issue- oriented that clearly suggested support of or opposition to particular candidates) ; and ``(2) $34,200,000 for fiscal year 1998.