This Act may be cited as the ``Investing in Our Children's Health Act of 1998''.
EXCLUSION FROM GROSS INCOME FOR DIVIDENDS FROM TOBACCO COMPANIES WHICH MEET YOUTH SMOKING REDUCTION TARGETS.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by inserting after section 115 the following new section: ``SEC.
DIVIDENDS FROM TOBACCO COMPANIES WHICH ACHIEVE YOUTH SMOKING REDUCTION TARGETS.
In General.--In the case of an individual, gross income does not include any dividend paid by a corporation to the extent such dividend is attributable to qualifying earnings and profits.
Qualifying Earnings and Profits.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualifying earnings and profits' means earnings and profits-- ``(A) which are from the manufacture in, or the importation into, the United States of any tobacco product, and ``(B) which are for any taxable year beginning in a calendar year with respect to which there has been a reduction in the underage use of such product of not less than the applicable percentage of the baseline level.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable percentage for any taxable year is the applicable percentage determined under the following table for the calendar year in which such taxable year begins.
Applicable Calendar year: percentage: 2002.......................................... 10 2003.......................................... 20 2004.......................................... 30 2005.......................................... 40 2006.......................................... 50 2007.......................................... 60 2008.......................................... 70 2009.......................................... 80 2010 or thereafter............................ 90.
Youth Smoking Reduction Target.--For purposes of this section, the baseline level for any tobacco product manufactured or imported by any corporation, and whether the requirement of subsection (b)(2) has been met, shall be determined by the Secretary of Health and Human Services in accordance with section 3 of the Investing in Our Children's Health Act of 1998.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) A dividend from a regulated investment company shall be subject to the limitation prescribed in section 854(c).
The amount of dividends properly allocable to a beneficiary under section 652 or 662 shall be deemed to have been received by the beneficiary ratably on the same date that the dividends were received by the estate or trust.
Certain Nonresident Aliens Ineligible for Exclusion.--In the case of a nonresident alien individual, subsection (a) shall apply only-- ``(1) in determining the tax imposed for the taxable year pursuant to section 871(b)(1) and only in respect of dividends which are effectively connected with the conduct of a trade or business within the United States, or ``(2) in determining the tax imposed for the taxable year pursuant to section 877(b).''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (c) of section 584 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The proportionate share of each participant in the amount of dividends received by the common trust fund and to which section 116 applies shall be considered for purposes of such section as having been received by such participant.''
Subsection (a) of section 643 of such Code is amended by inserting after paragraph (7) the following new paragraph: ``(8) Dividends.--There shall be included the amount of any dividends excluded from gross income pursuant to section 116.''
Section 854 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Treatment Under Section 116.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 116, in the case of any dividend (other than a dividend described in subsection (a)) received from a regulated investment company which meets the requirements of section 852 for the taxable year in which it paid the dividend, a portion of such dividend shall be treated as excludable under section 116 based on the portion of the company's gross income (determined without regard to gain from the sale or other disposition of stock or securities) which consists of dividends which are so excludable.
Notice to shareholders.--The amount of any distribution by a regulated investment company which may be taken into account as a dividend for purposes of the exclusion under section 116 shall not exceed the amount so designated by the company in a written notice to its shareholders mailed not later than 45 days after the close of its taxable year.''
The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 115 the following new item: ``Sec.
Dividends from tobacco companies which achieve youth smoking reduction targets.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CHILD TOBACCO USE SURVEYS.
Annual Performance Survey.--Not later than October 1, 1999, and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct a survey to determine-- (1) the percentage of all young individuals who used a type of tobacco product within the 30-day period prior to the conduct of the survey; and (2) the percentage of young individuals who identify each brand of each type of tobacco product as the usual brand smoked or used within such 30-day period.
Young Individuals.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``young individuals'' means individuals who are under 18 years of age.
Baseline Level.-- (1) In general.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``baseline level'' means, with respect to each type of tobacco product, the percentage of young individuals determined to have used such tobacco products in the annual performance survey described in subsection (a) completed by October 1, 1999.
Manufacturer's baseline level.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``manufacturer's baseline level'' means, with respect to each type of tobacco product, the percentage of young individuals determined to have identified a brand of each such tobacco product of such manufacturer as the usual brand smoked or used in the annual performance survey described in subsection (a) completed by October 1, 1999.
Use of certain data or methodology.-- (A) In general.--For purposes of determining the percentages under paragraphs (1) and (2), the Secretary may use the data collected through national surveys of young individuals.
Such surveys shall-- (i) be based on a nationally representative sample of at least 20,000 completed interviews of young individuals; (ii) be on a household-based in person survey; (iii) measure the use of tobacco product within the past 30 days; (iv) identify the usual brand of each type of tobacco product used within the past 30 days; and (v) calculate the actual percentage reductions in the underage use of a type of tobacco product (or, in the case of the manufacturer-specific surcharge, the use of a type of tobacco product of a manufacturer) based on the point estimates from the annual performance survey.
For purposes of clause (iv), point estimates shall be deemed acceptable for measuring compliance with percentage reduction targets and for calculating surcharges if the precision of estimates of the proportion of young individuals reporting the use of a type of tobacco product (or, in the case of the manufacturer-specific surcharge, the use of a type of tobacco product of a manufacturer) for the purpose of measuring compliance with percentage reduction targets and calculating surcharges without regard to the 95 percent confidence interval around such point estimates if the precision of estimates of the percentage of young individuals reporting use of a type of tobacco product (or, in the case of the manufacturer-specific surcharge, the use of a type of tobacco product of a manufacturer) is such that the 95 percent confidence interval around such point estimates is no more than plus or minus 1 percent.
Conclusive accurateness.--A survey using the methodology described in subparagraph (A) shall be deemed conclusively proper, correct, and accurate for purposes of this Act.
The Secretary may, by notice and comment rulemaking, subsequently adopt a different survey methodology.
Final determination.--The determination of the Secretary as to the amount and allocation of the surcharge under this section shall be final and the manufacturer shall pay such surcharge within 30 days of the date on which the manufacturer is assessed.
Such payment shall be retained by the Secretary pending final judicial review of what, if any, change in the surcharge is appropriate.
Review.--The amount of any surcharge paid under this section shall be subject to judicial review by the United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit, based on the arbitrary and capricious standard of section 706 of title 5, United States Code.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no court shall have the authority to stay any surcharge payment due to the Secretary under this section pending judicial review until the Secretary has made or failed to make a compliance determination, as described under this section, that has adversely affected the person seeking the review.
Nonapplicability.--Chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code, shall not apply to information required for the purposes of carrying out this subsection.
Amendment to public health service act.-- Section 308(d) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 242m(d)) is amended-- (i) by inserting after ``or 307'' the following: ``, or a survey conducted under section 132 of the KIDS Act,''; and (ii) by inserting after ``or 306'' the following: ``, or in the course of a survey conducted under section 132 of the KIDS Act,''.
Administration.-- (1) Technical adjustments.--The Secretary may make technical changes in the manner in which the surveys are conducted under this section to reflect improved methodology so long as adjustments are made to ensure that the results of the surveys are comparable from year to year.
Participation in survey.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may conduct a survey under this section involving minors if the results of such survey with respect to such minors are kept confidential and not disclosed.
Tobacco Product.--For the purposes of this section, cigarettes, cigars, little cigars, snuff, chewing tobacco, pipe tobacco, and roll- your-own tobacco shall each be considered as a separate type of tobacco product.