This Act may be cited as the ``Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander Health Data Act of 2009''.
NATIVE HAWAIIANS AND OTHER PACIFIC ISLANDER HEALTH DATA.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 317T the following: ``SEC.
NATIVE HAWAIIAN AND OTHER PACIFIC ISLANDER HEALTH DATA.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Community group.--The term `community group' means a group of NHOPI who are organized at the community level, and may include a church group, social service group, national advocacy organization, or cultural group.
Nonprofit, nongovernmental organization.--The term `nonprofit, nongovernmental organization' means a group of NHOPI with a demonstrated history of addressing NHOPI issues, including a NHOPI coalition.
Designated organization.--The term `designated organization' means an entity established to represent NHOPI populations and which has statutory responsibilities to provide, or has community support for providing, health care.
Government representatives.--The term `government representatives' means representatives from Hawai`i, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of Palau, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
Native hawaiians and other pacific islanders or nhopi.--The term `Native Hawaiians and Other Pacific Islanders' or `NHOPI' means people having origins in any of the original peoples of American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, Hawai`i, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Republic of Palau, or any other Pacific Island.
Insular area.--The term `insular area' means Guam, the Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, the United States Virgin Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Palau, or the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
National Strategy.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Center for Health Statistics (referred to in this section as `NCHS') of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and other agencies within the Department of Health and Human Services as the Secretary determines appropriate, shall develop and implement an ongoing and sustainable national strategy for identifying and evaluating the health status and health care needs of NHOPI populations living in the continental United States, Hawai`i, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of Palau, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
Consultation.--In developing and implementing a national strategy, as described in paragraph (1), not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander Health Data Act of 2009, the Secretary-- ``(A) shall consult with representatives of community groups, designated organizations, and nonprofit, nongovernmental organizations and with government representatives of NHOPI populations; and ``(B) may solicit the participation of representatives from other Federal departments.
Preliminary Health Survey.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of NCHS, shall conduct a preliminary health survey in order to identify the major areas and regions in the continental United States, Hawai`i, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Guam, the Republic of Palau, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands in which NHOPI people reside.
Contents.--The health survey described in paragraph (1) shall include health data and any other data the Secretary determines to be-- ``(A) useful in determining health status and health care needs; or ``(B) required for developing or implementing a national strategy.
Methodology.--Methodology for the health survey described in paragraph (1), including plans for designing questions, implementation, sampling, and analysis, shall be developed in consultation with community groups, designated organizations, nonprofit, nongovernmental organizations, and government representatives of NHOPI populations, as determined by the Secretary.
Timeframe.--The survey required under this subsection shall be completed not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of the Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander Health Data Act of 2009.
Progress Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander Health Data Act of 2009, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a progress report, which shall include the national strategy described in subsection (b)(1).
Study and Report by the IOM.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall enter into an agreement with the Institute of Medicine to conduct a study, with input from stakeholders in insular areas, on the following: ``(A) The standards and definitions of health care applied to health care systems in insular areas and the appropriateness of such standards and definitions.
The status and performance of health care systems in insular areas, evaluated based upon standards and definitions, as the Secretary determines.
The effectiveness of donor aid in addressing health care needs and priorities in insular areas.
The progress toward implementation of recommendations of the Committee on Health Care Services in the United States-Associated Pacific Basin of the Institute of Medicine that are set forth in the 1998 report, `Pacific Partnerships for Health: Charting a New Course for the 21st Century'.
Report.--An agreement described in paragraph (1) shall require the Institute of Medicine to submit to the Secretary and to Congress, not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of the Native Hawaiian and Other Pacific Islander Health Data Act of 2009, a report containing a description of the results of the study conducted under paragraph (1), including the conclusions and recommendations of the Institute of Medicine for each of the items described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of such paragraph.
Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal years 2010 through 2015.