This Act may be cited as the ``Higher Education for Freedom Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Given the increased threat to American ideals in the trying times in which we live, it is important to preserve and defend our common heritage of freedom and civilization and to ensure that future generations of Americans understand the importance of traditional American history and the principles of free government on which this Nation was founded in order to provide the basic knowledge that is essential to full and informed participation in civic life and to the larger vibrancy of the American experiment in self-government, binding together a diverse people into a single Nation with a common purposes.
However, despite its importance, most of the Nation's colleges and universities no longer require United States history or systematic study of Western civilization and free institutions as a prerequisite to graduation.
In addition, too many of our Nation's elementary and secondary history teachers lack the training necessary to effectively teach these subjects--due largely to the inadequacy of their teacher preparation.
Distinguished historians and intellectuals fear that without a common civic memory and a common understanding of the remarkable individuals, events, and ideals that have shaped our Nation and its free institutions, the people in the United States risk losing much of what it means to be an American, as well as the ability to fulfill the fundamental responsibilities of citizens in a democracy.
Purposes.--The purpose of this act is to promote and sustain post-secondary academic centers, institutes, and programs that offer undergraduate and graduate courses, support research, and develop teaching materials for the purpose of developing and imparting a knowledge of traditional American history, the American Founding, the history and nature of, and threats to, free institutions, or of the nature, history and achievements of Western Civilization, particularly for-- (1) undergraduate students enrolled in teacher education programs, or who may consider becoming school teachers, or who wish to enhance their civic competence; (2) elementary, middle, and high school teachers in need of additional training in order to effectively teach in these subject area; and (3) graduate students and post-secondary faculty who wish to teach about these subject areas with greater knowledge and effectiveness.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Eligible institution.--For the purposes of this Act: (A) In general.--The term ``eligible institution'' means-- (i) an institution of higher education; (ii) a specific program within an institution of higher education; and (iii) a non-profit history or academic organization associated with higher education whose mission is consistent with the purposes of this Act.
Special rule.--An eligible institution within the meaning of subparagraph (A) may apply to award subgrants to other such eligible institutions at the discretion of, and subject to the oversight of, the Secretary.
Free institution.--The term ``free institution'' means institutions that emerged out of Western Civilization, such as democracy, individual rights, market economics, religious freedom and tolerance, and freedom of thought and inquiry.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the same meaning given that term under section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Traditional american history.--The term ``traditional American history'' means the significant constitutional, political, intellectual, economic, and foreign policy trends and issues that have shaped the course of American history; and the key episodes, turning points and leading figures, involved in the constitutional, political, intellectual, diplomatic, and economic history of the United States.
GRANTS TO ELIGIBLE INSTITUTIONS.
In General.--From amounts appropriated to carry out this Act, the Secretary shall provide, on a competitive basis, grants to eligible institutions, which shall be used for-- (1) History Teacher Preparation Initiatives, that-- (A) stress content mastery in traditional American history and the principals on which the American political system is based, including the history and philosophy of free institutions, and the study of Western civilization; and (B) provide for grantees to carry out research, planning, and coordination activities devoted to the purposes of this Act.
Grants to Strengthen Post-Secondary Programs in fields related to the American founding, free institutions, and Western civilization, particularly through-- (A) the design and implementation of courses, lecture series and symposia, the development and publication of instructional materials, and the development of new, and supporting of existing, academic centers; (B) research supporting the development of relevant course materials; (C) the support of faculty teaching in undergraduate and graduate programs; and (D) the support of graduate and postgraduate fellowships and courses for scholars related to such fields.
Selection Criteria.--In selecting eligible institutions for grants under this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall establish criteria by regulation, which shall, at a minimum, consider the education value and relevance of the institution's programming to carrying out the purposes of this Act and the expertise of key personnel in the area of traditional American history and the principals on which the American political system is based, including the political and intellectual history and philosophy of free institutions, the American Founding, and other key events that have contributed to American freedom and the study of Western civilization.
Grant Application.--An eligible institution that desires to receive a grant under this Act shall submit to the Secretary an application therefor at such time or times, or in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may prescribe by regulation.
Grant Review.--The Secretary shall establish procedures for reviewing and evaluating grants and contracts made or entered into under such programs.
Grant Awards.-- (1) Maximum and minimum grants.--For the purposes of this Act, the Secretary shall award grants of not less than $400,000 and not more than $6,000,000 to eligible institutions.
Exception.--A subgrant by an eligible institution to another eligible institution is not subject to the minimum amount specified in paragraph (1).
Multiple Awards.--For the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may award more than one grant to an eligible institution.
For the purpose of carrying out this Act, there are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) $140,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; and (2) such sums as may be necessary for each of the succeeding 5 fiscal years.
This Act shall take effect on September 1, 2003.