This Act may be cited as the ``Violence Prevention Training for Early Childhood Educators Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to provide grants to institutions that carry out early childhood education training programs to enable the institutions to include violence prevention training as part of the preparation of individuals pursuing careers in early childhood development and education.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Aggressive behavior in early childhood is the single best predictor of aggression in later life.
Aggressive and defiant behavior predictive of later delinquency is increasing among our Nation's youngest children.
Without prevention efforts, higher percentages of juveniles are likely to become violent juvenile offenders.
Research has demonstrated that aggression is primarily a learned behavior that develops through observation, imitation, and direct experience.
Therefore, children who experience violence as victims or as witnesses are at increased risk of becoming violent themselves.
In a study at a Boston city hospital, 1 out of every 10 children seen in the primary care clinic had witnessed a shooting or a stabbing before the age of 6, with 50 percent of the children witnessing in the home and 50 percent of the children witnessing in the streets.
A study in New York found that children who had been victims of violence within their families were 24 percent more likely to report violent behavior as adolescents, and adolescents who had grown up in families where partner violence occurred were 21 percent more likely to report violent delinquency than individuals not exposed to violence.
Aggression can become well-learned and difficult to change by the time a child reaches adolescence.
Early childhood offers a critical period for overcoming risk for violent behavior and providing support for prosocial behavior.
Violence prevention programs for very young children yield economic benefits.
By providing health and stability to the individual child and the child's family, the programs may reduce expenditures for medical care, special education, and involvement with the judicial system.
Primary prevention can be effective.
When preschool teachers teach young children interpersonal problem-solving skills and other forms of conflict resolution, children are less likely to demonstrate problem behaviors.
There is evidence that family support programs in families with children from birth through 5 years of age are effective in preventing delinquency.
At-Risk Child.--The term ``at-risk child'' means a child who has been affected by violence through direct exposure to child abuse, other domestic violence, or violence in the community.
Early Childhood Education Training Program.--The term ``early childhood education training program'' means a program that-- (1)(A) trains individuals to work with young children in early child development programs or elementary schools; or (B) provides professional development to individuals working in early child development programs or elementary schools; (2) provides training to become an early childhood education teacher, an elementary school teacher, a school counselor, or a child care provider; and (3) leads to a bachelor's degree or an associate's degree, a certificate for working with young children (such as a Child Development Associate's degree or an equivalent credential), or, in the case of an individual with such a degree, certificate, or credential, provides professional development.
Elementary School.--The term ``elementary school'' has the meaning given the term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Violence Prevention.--The term ``violence prevention'' means-- (1) preventing violent behavior in children; (2) identifying and preventing violent behavior in at-risk children; or (3) identifying and ameliorating violent behavior in children who act out violently.
Grant Authority.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to institutions that carry out early childhood education training programs and have applications approved under section 6 to enable the institutions to provide violence prevention training as part of the early childhood education training program.
Amount.--The Secretary shall award a grant under this Act in an amount that is not less than $500,000 and not more than $1,000,000.
Duration.--The Secretary shall award a grant under this Act for a period of not less than 3 years and not more than 5 years.
Application Required.--Each institution desiring a grant under this Act shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Contents.--Each application shall-- (1) describe the violence prevention training activities and services for which assistance is sought; (2) contain a comprehensive plan for the activities and services, including a description of-- (A) the goals of the violence prevention training program; (B) the curriculum and training that will prepare students for careers which are described in the plan; (C) the recruitment, retention, and training of students; (D) the methods used to help students find employment in their fields; (E) the methods for assessing the success of the violence prevention training program; and (F) the sources of financial aid for qualified students; (3) contain an assurance that the institution has the capacity to implement the plan; and (4) contain an assurance that the plan was developed in consultation with agencies and organizations that will assist the institution in carrying out the plan.
The Secretary shall give priority to awarding grants to institutions carrying out violence prevention programs that include 1 or more of the following components: (1) Preparation to engage in family support (such as parent education, service referral, and literacy training).
Preparation to engage in community outreach or collaboration with other services in the community.
Preparation to use conflict resolution training with children.
Preparation to work in economically disadvantaged communities.
Recruitment of economically disadvantaged students.
Carrying out programs of demonstrated effectiveness in the type of training for which assistance is sought, including programs funded under section 596 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (as such section was in effect prior to October 7, 1998).
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $35,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.