This Act may be cited as the ``Health Insurance Protection Act of 1993''.
PROTECTION FROM INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS.
Section 510 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1140) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' after ``Sec.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Discrimination Based on Benefit Claims Under Group Health Plans.-- ``(1) In general.--It shall be unlawful discrimination for purposes of subsection (a) to take any action to cancel or reduce a benefit of a participant or beneficiary under a group health plan (by plan amendment or plan termination, change in insured status of the plan, change of insurer under the plan, or any other means), if-- ``(A) such action is specifically related to one or more particular diseases or medical conditions, ``(B) such participant or beneficiary is undergoing, at the time such action is taken, a course of treatment related to any such disease or medical condition, and ``(C) a valid claim under the plan reasonably related to such course of treatment has been submitted to the plan by or on behalf of such participant or beneficiary prior to the taking of such action.
Special rule related to plan terminations.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any cancellation or reduction of a benefit by termination of a group health plan unless the employer replaces the plan.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Group health plan.--The term `group health plan' has the meaning provided in section 607(1).
Change in insured status.--The term `change in insured status' of a plan means a change to self- insured status or a change in the extent to which benefits provided under the plan are provided under a contract or policy of insurance issued by an insurer under the plan.
Insurer.--The term `insurer' under a plan means a person licensed by a State to engage in the business of insurance who provides benefits under the plan under a contract or policy of insurance issued by such person.
Valid claim.--The term `valid claim' under a group health plan means a claim which, at the time of its submission by or on behalf of a participant or beneficiary, would have entitled the participant or beneficiary to benefits under the plan.''.
NONDISCRIMINATION IN LIFETIME BENEFIT COVERAGE UNDER A GROUP HEALTH PLAN.
In General.--Part 5 of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``nondiscrimination in lifetime benefit coverage under a group health plan ``Sec.
In General.-- ``(1) Unlawful discrimination.--It shall be unlawful for a group health plan to discriminate among diseases or medical conditions with respect to levels of lifetime benefit coverage provided to similarly situated participants and beneficiaries under the plan.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `lifetime benefit coverage' provided to any participant or beneficiary under a plan means the maximum benefit available under the plan in the aggregate to such participant or beneficiary.
Limitation.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to participants and their beneficiaries under a group health plan if the requirements of paragraph (1) or (2) are met as follows: ``(1) Collective bargaining.--The requirements of this paragraph are met if-- ``(A) the participants consist of employees covered by a collective bargaining agreement between employee representatives and one or more employers, ``(B) there is evidence that benefits provided under the group health plan established or maintained pursuant to such collective bargaining agreement were the subject of good faith bargaining between such employee representatives and such employer or employers, and ``(C) the discrimination consists of a lack of uniformity based solely on-- ``(i) variations in the required terms of the collective bargaining agreement as applied to separate geographically located facilities of the same employer, or ``(ii) different levels of contributions to such plan negotiated between such employee representatives and more than 1 employer, as set forth in applicable collective bargaining agreements.
Exemption procedure.--The requirements of this paragraph are met if the sponsor of such group health plan demonstrates to the Secretary by a preponderance of the evidence that such sponsor will be unable to continue such plan unless granted relief from the applicable requirements of subsection (a), pursuant to an exemption procedure which-- ``(A) shall be established by the Secretary by regulation for purposes of this subsection, and ``(B) shall be subject to standards and procedures similar to those applicable under section 408(a) with respect to exemptions granted under such section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 514 the following new items: ``Sec.
Nondiscrimination in lifetime benefit coverage under a group health plan.''.
REPORTING AND DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.
Notice of Modifications and Changes.--Section 104(b)(1) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1024(b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In the case of a group health plan (as defined in section 607(1)), the adoption of any material coverage restriction which constitutes a modification described in section 102(a)(1) or which is represented by any change in the information required under section 102(b), may not take effect until 60 days after such a summary description of such modification or change is furnished to each participant and to each spouse of a participant who is a beneficiary under the plan in language calculated to be easily understood by the typical participant or beneficiary.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `material coverage restriction' means any change in the terms of a group health plan that results in elimination of, or increased restrictions on, any form of benefit coverage which was provided by the plan prior to the change, including the establishment of, or increases in the amount of, deductibles or coinsurance payments required of participants and beneficiaries under the plan, except that the Secretary may by regulation exclude from such term any such change of a type which the Secretary finds to be de minimis.''.
Special Requirements for Self-Insured Plans.--Section 102(b) of such Act (29 United States Code 1022(b)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(b)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) In the case of a self-insured group health plan, in addition to the information required under paragraph (1), the plan description and summary plan description shall contain a statement-- ``(i) indicating that the plan is a self-insured group health plan and is not a policy of insurance, ``(ii) identifying the person who is responsible for claim determinations and processing, and ``(iii) indicating that the plan is not subject to State guarantee fund protection and that, if the plan does not pay all benefits for which participants or beneficiaries are eligible under the plan, responsibility for payment for medical care may to some extent remain with the participant or beneficiary.
For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) the term `group health plan' has the meaning provided in section 607(1); and ``(ii) a group health plan is `self-insured' unless all benefits provided under the plan are provided under a contract or policy of insurance issued by a person licensed by a State to engage in the business of insurance.''.
LEGAL RELIEF FROM DAMAGES FOR INTERFERENCE WITH RIGHTS UNDER PLAN.
Damages.--Section 502(c) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1132(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4)(A) Any person who violates section 510 or 516 with respect to any participant or beneficiary under a group health plan shall be liable to such participant or beneficiary for actual and consequential damages.
Subject to subparagraph (B), damages for such violation shall not include punitive damages.
In any case in which the violation constitutes willful, fraudulent, or malicious conduct, bad faith, or gross negligence, each person liable under subparagraph (A) may, in the court's discretion, be liable to such participant or beneficiary for punitive damages in an amount up to 200 percent of the amount of actual damages awarded, but not less than $50,000.
Any such punitive damages shall be in addition to any actual damages under subparagraph (A).
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `group health plan' has the meaning provided in section 607(1).''.
Attorney's Fees.--Section 502(g) of such Act (29 United States Code 1132(g)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) In any action for damages under subsection (c)(4) in which the plaintiff prevails or substantially prevails, the court shall award the plaintiff reasonable attorney's fees and other costs of the action, including reasonable expert witness fees and costs, to be paid by the defendant.
Fees awarded under this paragraph shall be at generally prevailing hourly rates.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to changes in group health plan coverage adopted on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.