Congress makes the following findings: (1) Saudi Arabia is the center of Wahabbism, the ultra- purist, jihadist form of Islam followed by members of Al Qaeda.
More than 50 percent of the funding of Hamas, a Palestinian terrorist organization, comes from Saudi Arabia, and support for Hamas by Saudi Arabia is increasing despite President Bush's request to the Government of Saudi Arabia to discontinue the provision of assistance to Palestinian terrorist groups.
Prince Nayef bin Abdel Aziz, the Saudi Interior Minister and a brother of King Fahd, oversees the Saudi Committee for the Support of Al Quds Intifada, which provides assistance to the families of Palestinian suicide bombers through specially designated bank accounts.
According to Arab News, a Saudi daily, a single telethon early last year raised approximately $112,000,000 for Al Quds.
The Government of Saudi Arabia provided cash payments of $5,333 to each family of ``martyrs'' killed while trying to murder Israelis.
In June 2003, a senior Saudi official, Dr. Abdul Wahid Al-Humaid, published the following quote in a series of Saudi periodicals: ``The Jews .
have succeeded in [winning] world sympathy by playing on the Holocaust and Nazi atrocities.
The result has been a world that gradually shifted from disliking Jews to sympathizing with them.
The Jews are masters at manipulating the media, money, world organizations and pressure groups.''.
In the spring of 2002, United States Armed Forces in Sarajevo discovered in the office of the Saudi High Commission for Relief of Bosnia and Herzegovina documents that proved that Saudi Arabia provided funding to Hamas to enable it to produce a short-range missile called the ``Qassam''.
During the summer of 2000 in San Diego, a known Saudi intelligence agent, Omar al-Bayoumi, hosted Khalid Almihdhar and Nawaf Alhazmi, two of the individuals who subsequently hijacked commercial aircraft on September 11, 2001, and crashed the aircraft into the twin towers of the World Trade Center in New York City and into the Pentagon.
Al-Bayoumi met Almihdhar and Alhazmi in Los Angeles, directed them to a Muslim community in San Diego, and even wrote a check for their apartment deposit.
The wife of the Saudi Ambassador to the United States, Princess Haifa al-Faisal, transferred $15,000 in 1998, and then $2,000 a month thereafter, to a Saudi resident of San Diego, Osama Bassnan.
During the same period, Bassnan and another man who apparently also received Saudi financial support helped two other individuals who subsequently committed the terrorist attacks on September 11, 2001.
For more than a month after the terrorist attacks that occurred on September 11, 2001, the Government of Saudi Arabia refused to freeze the financial assets of Osama bin Laden, the individual who masterminded the terrorist attacks.
Assistant Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation Robert M. Bryant stated that the Government of Saudi Arabia has prevented FBI investigators from interviewing any civilians who witnessed or may have been involved in the bombing in 1996 of Khobar Towers, a United States military housing installation in Saudi Arabia, in which 19 United States servicemen were killed.
In April 1995, the Government of Saudi Arabia prevented the United States Government from apprehending Imad Mighniyah, the head of the Palestinian terrorist organization Hezbollah, and who had planned the bombing in 1983 of the United States Marine barracks in Beirut, Lebanon, in which 241 Marines were killed.
The Government of Saudi Arabia ignored the request of United States National Security Advisor Anthony Lake to allow the aircraft that was carrying Mighniyah to land in a location where Mighniyah could be apprehended.
During the first Gulf War, Saudi officials would not allow United States troops to hold formal Christmas services on Saudi territory, even as the United States was protecting Saudi Arabia from Iraqi invasion.
PROHIBITION AGAINST DIRECT FUNDING FOR CERTAIN COUNTRIES.
No funds appropriated or otherwise made available pursuant to an Act making appropriations for foreign operations, export financing, and related programs may be obligated or expended to finance directly any assistance or reparations to Cuba, Libya, North Korea, Iran, Saudi Arabia, or Syria.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the prohibition on obligations or expenditures shall include direct loans, credits, insurance, and guarantees of the Export-Import Bank of the United States or its agents.