This Act may be cited as the ``Arizona Land Preservation and Management Act of 1996''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) As Arizona growth patterns have emerged and various public uses of unique land resource values have been established, the existing Federal and State land ownership patterns present the Federal Government and the government of Arizona with difficult land management situations.
Federal land management programs in Arizona require the use of State trust lands in many areas, and there are Federal lands in other areas in Arizona that are suitable for the revenue generation mission of the State trust lands.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to assist implementation of the Arizona Preserve Initiative plan and improve manageability of Federal public lands and State trust lands in Arizona, by-- (1) directing the Secretary of the Interior to acquire certain State trust lands in Arizona by eminent domain, with the consent of the State, and to compensate the State for the State trust lands so acquired with certain Federal public lands of equal value which are acceptable to the State; and (2) providing for management of the acquired lands as part of other existing areas of Federal lands.
In this Act: (1) Arizona preserve initiative plan.--The term ``Arizona Preserve Initiative plan'' means the project undertaken by the State of Arizona in 1995 to find ways to preserve and protect environmentally sensitive State trust lands through conservation leases and sales to State and local governments and conservation organizations and through eminent domain transfers to the Federal Government.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Arizona.
State trust lands.--The term ``State trust lands'' means lands granted to the State of Arizona under sections 24 and 25 of the Act of June 20, 1910 (chapter 310; 36 United States Statutes at Large 572 et sequentes).
ACQUISITION OF STATE TRUST LANDS IN ARIZONA BY EMINENT DOMAIN.
In General.--The Secretary shall-- (1) by eminent domain, with the consent of the State, acquire the State trust lands described in subsection (b); and (2) manage the lands acquired from the State of Arizona in accordance with this Act.
State Trust Lands Described.--The State trust lands referred to in subsection (a) are the following, as generally depicted on the map described in subsection (c): (1) All State trust lands in the Lake Mead National Recreation Area, Saguaro National Park, and Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, which shall be managed by the National Park Service.
All State trust lands and reserved mineral estate in designated Wilderness Areas, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
All State trust lands in the Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge, which shall be managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
State trust lands in the McDowell Mountains in Maricopa County, Arizona, which shall be managed under programs of the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the vicinity of the Petrified Forest National Park, if the Congress authorizes the expansion of the Petrified Forest National Park to include these State trust lands.
State trust lands in the Coconino National Forest and in the vicinity of the Walnut Canyon National Monument that are suitable for management by the Forest Service.
State trust lands in the Baboquivari Mountain-Coyote Mountains area in Pima County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Lake Pleasant-Black Canyon City-Wickenburg area in Maricopa County and Yavapai County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Empire Cienega Resource Conservation Area and Mustang Mountains in Pima County and Santa Cruz County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Newman Peak area in Pinal County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Burro Creek area in Yavapai County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Larned Landing and Parker Strip areas in Mohave County and La Paz County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Gila Box and San Pedro Riparian National Conservation Areas, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Mohave Mountains area in Mohave County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Arizona Strip in Mohave County and Coconino County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Aguila area of Maricopa County and La Paz County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
State trust lands in the Rogers Lake area in the Coconino National Forest, which shall be managed by the Forest Service in accordance with section 9(a).
State trust lands in the Superstition Mountain area of Pinal County, Arizona, if the Congress authorizes the expansion of the Tonto National Forest to include these State trust lands.
State trust lands needed for the existing facilities at the Arizona National Memorial Cemetery, which shall be managed by the Veterans Administration in accordance with section 10.
State trust lands needed for the Kingman Burro Corral in Mohave County, Arizona, which shall be managed by the Bureau of Land Management.
Any other State trust lands the acquisition of which by the Secretary will-- (A) improve government land management by both the Federal Government and the State of Arizona; and (B) be consistent with Federal land management planning and the mission of the State trust lands.
Map Described.--The map referred to in subsection (b) is the map entitled ``Arizona Land Management Improvement'', dated February 1996.
The Secretary shall keep such map on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Arizona State Bureau of Land Management in Phoenix, Arizona, and of the Bureau of Land Management in the District of Columbia.
In General.--As compensation for State trust lands acquired under this Act, the Secretary shall transfer to the State such areas of Federal lands described in subsection (b) as may be agreed to by the State and which are of equal value to the State trust lands acquired.
Federal Lands Described.--The Federal lands referred to in subsection (a) are the following, as generally depicted in the map described in subsection (d): (1) Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Bullhead City, Mohave Valley, Larned Landing, Havasu Springs, Kingman, Golden Valley, and Colorado City areas and the Interstate 40 and Interstate 5 corridors, in Mohave County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Butler Valley and Parker Strip areas and the Interstate 10 corridor, in La Paz County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Interstate 8 corridor in Yuma County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Phoenix, Buckeye, Rainbow Valley, Lake Pleasant, New River, and Wickenburg areas and the Interstate 8, 10, and 17 corridors, in Maricopa County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Lake Pleasant, Black Canyon City, and Prescott areas and Interstate 17 corridor, in Yavapai County, Arizona.
Federal lands in the Coconino National Forest under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture, in Coconino County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the checkerboard land area of Navajo County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in checkerboard land area of Apache County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Tucson and Sasabe areas of Pima County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Sonoita area of Santa Cruz County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Interstate 8 corridor and other lands in Pinal County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Safford area of Graham County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary in the Clifton, Morenci, and Duncan areas of Greenlee County, Arizona.
Federal lands under the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary south of Interstate 10 in Cochise County, Arizona.
Any other Federal lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary, the transfer of which to the State will-- (A) improve government land management by both the Federal Government and the State of Arizona; and (B) be consistent with Federal land management planning and the mission of the State trust lands.
Map Described.--The map referred to in subsection (b) is the map entitled ``Arizona Land Management Improvement--Possible Areas for Consideration'', dated February 1996.
The Secretary shall keep such map on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Arizona State Bureau of Land Management and of the Bureau of Land Management in the District of Columbia.
Value of Compensation.-- (1) In general.--The total value of Federal lands transferred to the State by the Secretary in acquiring lands from the State under this Act may not exceed the fair market value of the lands acquired.
Appraisals.--Notwithstanding any other law, the value of lands shall be determined for purposes of this Act in accordance with the Uniform Appraisal Standards for Federal Land Acquisitions, as published by the Department of Justice in 1992.
MANAGEMENT OF ACQUIRED LANDS BY BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT.
Lands acquired by the Secretary under this Act that are required by this Act to be managed by the Bureau of Land Management shall be managed in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
ADDITION OF LANDS TO NATIONAL PARK SYSTEM.
Lands acquired by the Secretary under this Act within the Saguaro National Park, Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, and Lake Mead National Recreation Area that are required by this Act to be managed by the National Park Service shall be added to the National Park System and managed in accordance with the Act of August 25, 1916 (chapter 408; 16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), popularly known as the National Park Service Organic Act, and other laws and regulations applicable to the National Park System.
ADDITION OF LANDS TO NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE SYSTEM.
Lands acquired by the Secretary under this Act that are required by this Act to be managed by the United States Fish and Wildlife Service shall be added to the National Wildlife Refuge System and managed in accordance with the National Wildlife Refuge System Administration Act of 1966.
ADDITION OF LANDS TO NATIONAL FOREST SYSTEM.
Lands acquired by the Secretary under this Act that are in the Rogers Lake area shall be-- (1) transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture; and (2) added to the Coconino National Forest and managed by the Secretary of Agriculture under the laws and regulations applicable to National Forest System lands.
ADDITION OF LANDS TO ARIZONA NATIONAL MEMORIAL CEMETERY.
Lands acquired by the Secretary under this Act under section 4(b)(19) shall be-- (1) transferred to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs; (2) added to the Arizona National Memorial Cemetery, located in Phoenix, Arizona; and (3) managed by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs in accordance with chapter 24 of title 38, United States Code, and other laws and regulations applicable to national cemeteries.
AUTHORIZATION FOR EXISTING USES OF ACQUIRED LANDS TO CONTINUE.
Any use of lands acquired by the United States under this Act that was authorized to occur immediately before the enactment of this Act may continue until such time as the use is determined to be incompatible with the purposes for which the lands are required to be used under this Act.
REVOCATION OF RECLAMATION WITHDRAWALS WITH RESPECT TO BULLHEAD CITY PARCEL.
In General.--The order of the Secretary dated October 16, 1931, withdrawing lands for the Colorado River Storage Project, and the order of the Secretary dated May 29, 1933, withdrawing lands for Power Site Classification 272, are hereby revoked on the following lands under the administration of the National Park Service in Arizona in Township 21 North, Range 21 West, Gila and Salt River Base and Meridian: (1) In section 19, lot 4, SESW, S2SE.
In section 20, that portion of the S2 lying south of the centerline of State Highway 68.
In section 30, lots 1-3, W2NE, E2NW, NESW, NWSE.
Effective Date.--The revocation under subsection (a) shall take effect for a parcel of land on the date on which the parcel is transferred to the State under this Act.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS OF TRANSFER OF LANDS ON LOWER COLORADO RIVER AND LAKE HAVASU.
In transferring to the State under this Act lands that front on the Lower Colorado River or Lake Havasu (or both), the Secretary shall include such terms and conditions as are necessary to protect the needs of the Bureau of Reclamation to have access to those lands for flowage easements and bank line protection.