This Act may be cited as the ``Commission for Comprehensive Review of the Federal Aviation Administration Act''.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Commission for Comprehensive Review of the Federal Aviation Administration (referred to in this section as the ``Commission'').
Functions.--The functions of the Commission shall be-- (1) to review existing and alternative options for organizational structure of air traffic services, including a government corporation and incentive based fees for services; (2) to provide recommendations for any necessary changes in structure of the Federal Aviation Administration so that it will be able to support the future growth in the national aviation and airport system; except that the Commission may only recommend changes to the structure and organization of the Federal Aviation Administration that are within the existing structure of the Federal Government; (3) to review air traffic management system performance and to identify appropriate levels of cost accountability for air traffic management services; (4) to review aviation safety and make recommendations for the long-term improvement of safety; and (5) to make additional recommendations that would advance more efficient and effective Federal Aviation Administration for the benefit of the general traveling public and the aviation transportation industry.
Membership.-- (1) Appointments.--The Commission shall be composed of 24 members appointed by the President as follows: (A) 8 individuals with no personal or business financial interest in the airline or aerospace industry to represent the traveling public.
Of these, 1 shall be a nationally recognized expert in finance, 1 in corporate management and 1 in human resources management.
6 individuals from the airline industry.
Of these, 1 shall be from a major national air carrier, 1 from an unaffiliated regional air carrier, 1 from a cargo air carrier, 1 from the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, and 1 from the National Association of State Aviation Officials.
3 individuals representing labor and professional associations.
Of these, 1 shall be from National Air Traffic Controllers Association, 1 from the Air Line Pilots Association, and 1 from the Professional Airways Systems Specialists.
2 individuals representing airports and airport authorities.
Of these, 1 shall be represent a large hub airport.
1 individual representing the aerospace and aircraft manufacturers industries.
1 individual from the Department of Defense.
1 individual from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
2 individuals from the Department of Transportation.
Of these, 1 shall be from the Federal Aviation Administration and 1 from the Office of the Secretary of Transportation.
Terms.--Each member shall be appointed for a term of 18 months.
First Meeting.--The Commission may conduct its first meeting as soon as a majority of the members of the Commission are appointed.
Hearings and Consultation.-- (1) Hearings.--The Commission shall take such testimony and solicit and receive such comments from the public and other interested parties as it considers appropriate, shall conduct at least 2 public hearings after affording adequate notice to the public thereof, and may conduct such additional hearings as may be necessary.
Consultation.--The Commission shall consult on a regular and frequent basis with the Secretary of Transportation, the Secretary of Defense, the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on Finance of the Senate, and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure, the Committee on Appropriations and the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.
FACA not to apply.--The Commission shall not be considered an advisory committee for purposes of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Access to Documents and Staff.--The Federal Aviation Administration may give the Commission appropriate access to relevant documents and personnel and shall make available, consistent with the authority to withhold commercial and other proprietary information under section 552 of title 5, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Freedom of Information Act''), cost data associated with the acquisition and operation of air traffic service systems.
Any member of the Commission who receives commercial or other proprietary data from the Federal Aviation Administration shall be subject to the provisions of section 1905 of title 18, United States Code, pertaining to unauthorized disclosure of such information.
Travel and Per Diem.--Each member of the Commission shall be paid actual travel expenses, and per diem in lieu of subsistence expenses when away from such member's usual place of residence, in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Detail of Personnel From the Federal Aviation Administration.-- The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration shall make available to the Commission such staff, administrative services, and other personnel assistance as may reasonably be required to enable the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this section.
REPORT OF THE COMMISSION.
Report to Congress.--Not later than 30 days after receiving the final report of the Commission and in no event more than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation, after consulting the Secretary of Defense, shall transmit a report to the Committees on Commerce, Science, and Transportation, Appropriations, and Finance of the Senate and the Committees on Transportation and Infrastructure, Appropriations, and Ways and Means of the House of Representatives.
Contents.--The Secretary shall include in the report to Congress under subsection (a) a final report of findings and recommendations of the Commission under section 2(b), including any necessary changes to current law to carry out these recommendations in the form of proposed legislation.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.