EXCLUSION OF WATER CONSERVATION SUBSIDIES PROVIDED BY WATER UTILITIES.
General Rule.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amounts specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
WATER CONSERVATION SUBSIDIES PROVIDED BY WATER UTILITIES.
Exclusion.--Gross income shall not include the value of any subsidy provided (directly or indirectly) by a water utility to a customer for the purchase or installation of any water conservation measure.
Denial of Double Benefit.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, no deduction or credit shall be allowed for, or by reason of, any expenditure to the extent of the amount excluded under subsection (a) for any subsidy which was provided with respect to such expenditure.
The adjusted basis of any property shall be reduced by the amount excluded under subsection (a) which was provided with respect to such property.
Water Conservation Measure.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `water conservation measure' means any installation or modification primarily designed to reduce consumption of water or to improve the management of water demand with respect to any property.
The purchase and installation of specially defined water property shall be treated as a water conservation measure.
Specially defined water property.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `specially defined water property' means-- ``(A) a toilet using 1.6 gallons or less per flush for gravity designs and 2.5 gallons or less per flush for flush valve style pressure-assisted designs, ``(B) a urinal using 1.0 gallons or less per flush, ``(C) a laundry machine using 11.0 gallons or less per cubic foot of capacity per complete washing cycle, ``(D) a dishwasher using 2.0 gallons or less per cubic foot of capacity per complete washing cycle, ``(E) a faucet equipped with an aerator or flow control which restricts the flow to 2.5 gallons or less per minute at 65 psi, and ``(F) a shower head which restricts the flow to 2.5 gallons or less per minute at 65 psi.
Certain other property treated as specially defined water property.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `specially defined water property' includes-- ``(A) equipment which automatically reduces the pressure (or controls the flow) of water, ``(B) water recycling, recirculation, and reuse equipment, ``(C) cooling equipment, ``(D) equipment using treatment processes which optimize water cycling, ``(E) equipment and facilities which use treated municipal effluent (instead of drinking quality water) for non-potable applications, thereby reducing the demand for drinking quality water, ``(F) evapotranspiration stations, software, and controllers, ``(G) tank and reservoir covers and liners, ``(H) sub-metering, overflow and other monitoring control systems which improve operating efficiencies and identify water loss or equipment maintenance needs directly associated with inefficient water use, ``(I) equipment to identify and repair water leaks, and ``(J) any other property of a kind specified by the Secretary by regulations, the principal purpose of which is reducing water consumption.
Water efficiency of property must exceed local code requirements.--The term `specially defined water property' does not include any property if-- ``(A) such property is required under local building standards or codes to meet water efficiency standards, and ``(B) the water efficiency rating of such property does not exceed such standards.
Leak identification and repair services included.-- The term `water conservation measure' includes services to identify and repair water leaks.
Certain landscape measures included.--The term `water conservation measure' includes landscape measures that improve soil moisture retention by reducing water lost to evaporation.
Water Utility.--For purposes of this section, the term `water utility' means any person engaged in the furnishing or sale of water if the rates for such furnishing or sale have been established or approved by a State or political subdivision thereof, by any agency or instrumentality of the United States, or by a public utility or public service commission or other similar body of any State or political subdivision thereof or of the District of Columbia.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `person' includes the Federal Government, a State or local government or any political subdivision thereof, and any instrumentality of any of the foregoing.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 137 and inserting: ``Sec.
Water conservation subsidies provided by water utilities.
Cross reference to other Acts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts received after December 31, 1993.
WATER CONSERVATION EXPENDITURES BY WATER UTILITIES.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by inserting after section 197 the following new section: ``SEC.
WATER CONSERVATION EXPENDITURES BY WATER UTILITIES.
General Rule.--In the case of a water utility (as defined in section 137(d)), there shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year an amount equal to the water conservation expenditures paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Water Conservation Expenditures.--For purposes of this section, the term `water conservation expenditures' means expenditures for subsidies provided directly or indirectly to customers for the purchase, installation, or modification of any device or service primarily designed to reduce consumption of water or to improve the management of water demand.
Such term shall not include any expenditure taken into account in determining the basis of any tangible property which is owned by the taxpayer and which is of a character subject to the allowance for depreciation.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Paragraph (1) of section 263(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``; or'' at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting a comma, by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (G) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(H) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed under section 198.''
The table of sections for part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Water conservation expenditures by water utilities.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures paid or incurred in taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.