This Act may be cited as the ``Bosnia and Herzegovina Self-Defense Act of 1994''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) For the reasons stated in the conference report on the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1994 and 1995 (H.R.
2333), the Congress has found that continued application of an international arms embargo to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina contravenes that Government's inherent right of individual or collective self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter and therefore is inconsistent with international law.
Before deploying United States Armed Forces to defend the territorial integrity and political independence of Bosnia and Herzegovina, or to enforce United Nations mandates in Bosnia and Herzegovina, the United States should seek to provide the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina with the means necessary to exercise its inherent right of self-defense.
TERMINATION OF ARMS EMBARGO.
Termination.--The President shall terminate the United States arms embargo of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina upon receipt from that Government of a request for assistance in exercising its right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term ``United States arms embargo of the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina'' means the application to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina of-- (1) the policy adopted July 10, 1991, and published in the Federal Register of July 19, 1991 (58 F.R.
33322) under the heading ``Suspension of Munitions Export Licenses to Yugoslavia''; and (2) any similar policy being applied by the United States Government as of the date of receipt of the request described in subsection (a) pursuant to which approval is denied for transfers of defense articles and defense services to the former Yugoslavia.
PROVISION OF UNITED STATES MILITARY ASSISTANCE.
Policy.--The President should provide appropriate military assistance to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina upon receipt from that Government of a request for assistance in exercising its right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter.
Authorization of Military Assistance.-- (1) Drawdown authority.--If the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina requests United States assistance in exercising its right of self-defense under Article 51 of the United Nations Charter, the President is authorized to direct the drawdown of defense articles from the stocks of the Department of Defense, defense services of the Department of Defense, and military education and training in order to provide assistance to the Government of Bosnia and Herzegovina.
Such assistance shall be provided on such terms and conditions as the President may determine.
Limitation on value of transfers.--The aggregate value (as defined in section 664(m) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961) of defense articles, defense services, and military education and training provided under this subsection may not exceed $200,000,000.
Expiration of authorization.--The authority provided to the President in paragraph (1) expires at the end of fiscal year 1995.
Limitation on activities.--Members of the United States Armed Forces who perform defense services or provide military education and training outside the United States under this subsection may not perform any duties of a combatant nature, including any duties related to training and advising that may engage them in combat activities.
Reports to congress.--Within sixty days after any exercise of the authority of paragraph (1) and every sixty days thereafter, the President shall report in writing to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate concerning the defense articles, defense services, and military education and training being provided and the use made of such articles, services, and education and training.
Reimbursement.--(A) Defense articles, defense services, and military education and training provided under this subsection shall be made available without reimbursement to the Department of Defense except to the extent that funds are appropriated pursuant to subparagraph (B).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the President such sums as may be necessary to reimburse the applicable appropriation, fund, or account for the value (as defined in section 664(m) of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961) of defense articles, defense services, or military education and training provided under this subsection.