Described.--In this section, the term ``joint resolution'' means a joint resolution-- (1) entitled ``A joint resolution proposing an amendment to the Constitution of the United States to repeal the 23rd article of amendment''; and (2) the matter after the resolving clause of which consists solely of text to amend the Constitution of the United States to repeal the 23rd article of amendment to the Constitution.
Expedited Consideration in House of Representatives.-- (1) Placement on calendar.--Upon introduction in the House of Representatives, the joint resolution shall be placed immediately on the appropriate calendar.
Proceeding to consideration.-- (A) In general.--It shall be in order, not later than 30 legislative days after the date the joint resolution is introduced in the House of Representatives, to move to proceed to consider the joint resolution in the House of Representatives.
Procedure.--For a motion to proceed to consider the joint resolution-- (i) all points of order against the motion are waived; (ii) such a motion shall not be in order after the House of Representatives has disposed of a motion to proceed on the joint resolution; (iii) the previous question shall be considered as ordered on the motion to its adoption without intervening motion; (iv) the motion shall not be debatable; and (v) a motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is disposed of shall not be in order.
Consideration.--When the House of Representatives proceeds to consideration of the joint resolution-- (A) the joint resolution shall be considered as read; (B) all points of order against the joint resolution and against its consideration are waived; (C) the previous question shall be considered as ordered on the joint resolution to its passage without intervening motion except 10 hours of debate equally divided and controlled by the proponent and an opponent; (D) an amendment to the joint resolution shall not be in order; and (E) a motion to reconsider the vote on passage of the joint resolution shall not be in order.
Expedited Consideration in Senate.-- (1) Placement on calendar.--Upon introduction in the Senate, the joint resolution shall be placed immediately on the calendar.
Proceeding to consideration.-- (A) In general.--Notwithstanding rule XXII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, it is in order, not later than 30 legislative days after the date the joint resolution is introduced in the Senate (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) to move to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution.
Procedure.--For a motion to proceed to the consideration of the joint resolution-- (i) all points of order against the motion are waived; (ii) the motion is not debatable; (iii) the motion is not subject to a motion to postpone; (iv) a motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order; and (v) if the motion is agreed to, the joint resolution shall remain the unfinished business until disposed of.
Floor consideration.-- (A) In general.--If the Senate proceeds to consideration of the joint resolution-- (i) all points of order against the joint resolution (and against consideration of the joint resolution) are waived; (ii) consideration of the joint resolution, and all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 30 hours, which shall be divided equally between the majority and minority leaders or their designees; (iii) a motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable; (iv) an amendment to, a motion to postpone, or a motion to commit the joint resolution is not in order; and (v) a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business is not in order.
Vote on passage.--In the Senate the vote on passage shall occur immediately following the conclusion of the consideration of the joint resolution, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the Senate.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of this subsection or the rules of the Senate, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to the joint resolution shall be decided without debate.
Rules Relating to Senate and House of Representatives.-- (1) Coordination with action by other house.--If, before the passage by one House of the joint resolution of that House, that House receives from the other House the joint resolution-- (A) the joint resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee; and (B) with respect to the joint resolution of the House receiving the resolution-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no joint resolution had been received from the other House; and (ii) the vote on passage shall be on the joint resolution of the other House.
Treatment of joint resolution of other house.--If one House fails to introduce or consider the joint resolution under this section, the joint resolution of the other House shall be entitled to expedited floor procedures under this section.
Treatment of companion measures.--If, following passage of the joint resolution in the Senate, the Senate receives the companion measure from the House of Representatives, the companion measure shall not be debatable.
Vetoes.--If the President vetoes the joint resolution, consideration of a veto message in the Senate under this section shall be not more than 10 hours equally divided between the majority and minority leaders or their designees.
Rules of House of Representatives and Senate.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of the joint resolution, and supersede other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
TITLE III--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
In this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) The term ``Council'' means the Council of the District of Columbia.
The term ``Governor'' means the Governor of the State of Washington, D.C. (3) The term ``Mayor'' means the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
Except as otherwise provided, the term ``State'' means the State of Washington, D.C. (5) The term ``State Constitution'' means the proposed Constitution of the State of Washington, D.C., as approved by the Council of the District of Columbia on October 18, 2016, pursuant to the Constitution and Boundaries for the State of Washington, D.C. Approval Resolution of 2016 (D.C.
Resolution R21-621), and ratified by District of Columbia voters in Advisory Referendum B approved on November 8, 2016, and certified by the District of Columbia Board of Elections on November 18, 2016.
The term ``Washington, D.C.'' means Washington, Douglass Commonwealth.
CERTIFICATION OF ENACTMENT BY PRESIDENT.
Not more than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President shall certify such enactment to the Mayor of the District of Columbia.