This Act may be referred to as the ``Big Thicket National Preserve Addition Act of 1993''.
ADDITIONS TO THE BIG THICKET NATIONAL PRESERVE.
Additions.--Subsection (b) of the first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize the establishment of the Big Thicket National Preserve in the State of Texas, and for other purposes'', approved October 11, 1974 (16 United States Code 698), hereafter referred to as the ``Act'', is amended as follows: (1) Strike out ``map entitled `Big Thicket National Preserve''' and all that follows through ``Secretary of the Interior (hereafter referred to as the `Secretary')'' and insert in lieu thereof ``map entitled `Big Thicket National Preserve', dated October 1992, and numbered 175-80008, which shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior, and the offices of the Superintendent of the preserve.
After advising the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives, in writing, the Secretary of the Interior (hereafter referred to as the `Secretary') may make minor revisions of the boundaries of the preserve when necessary by publication of a revised drawing or other boundary description in the Federal Register.
Strike out ``and'' at the end of the penultimate undesignated paragraph relating to Little Pine Island-Pine Island Bayou corridor unit.
Strike out the period in the ultimate undesignated paragraph relating to Lance Rosier unit and insert in lieu thereof ``;''.
Add at the end thereof the following: ``Village Creek Corridor unit, Hardin County, Texas, comprising approximately four thousand seven hundred and ninety-three acres; ``Big Sandy Corridor unit, Hardin, Polk, and Tyler Counties, Texas, comprising approximately four thousand four hundred and ninety-seven acres; and ``Canyonlands unit, Tyler County, Texas, comprising approximately one thousand four hundred and seventy-six acres.''.
Acquisition.--(1) Subsection (c) of the first section of such Act is amended by striking out the first sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``The Secretary is authorized to acquire by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, transfer from any other Federal agency, or exchange, any lands, waters, or interests therein which are located within the boundaries of the preserve: Provided, That privately owned lands located within the Village Creek Corridor, Big Sandy Corridor, and Canyonlands units may be acquired only with the consent of the owner: Provided further, That the Secretary may acquire lands owned by commercial timber companies only by donation or exchange: Provided further, That any lands owned by the State of Texas, or any political subdivisions thereof may be acquired by donation only.''.
Add at the end of the first section of such Act the following new subsections: ``(d) Within sixty days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture shall identify lands within their jurisdiction located within the vicinity of the preserve which may be suitable for exchange for commercial timber lands within the preserve.
In so doing, the Secretary of Agriculture shall seek to identify for exchange National Forest lands that are near or adjacent to private lands that are already owned by the commercial timber companies.
Such National Forest lands shall be located in the Sabine National Forest in Sabine County, Texas, in the Davy Crockett National Forest south of Texas State Highway 7, or in other sites deemed mutually agreeable, and within reasonable distance of the timber companies' existing mills.
In exercising this exchange authority, the Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture may utilize any authorities or procedures otherwise available to them in connection with land exchanges, and which are not inconsistent with the purposes of this Act.
Land exchanges authorized pursuant to this subsection shall be of equal value and shall be completed as soon as possible, but no later than two years after date of enactment of this subsection.
With respect to the thirty-seven-acre area owned by the Louisiana-Pacific Corporation or its subsidiary, Kirby Forest Industries, Inc., on Big Sandy Creek in Hardin County, Texas, and now utilized as part of the Indian Springs Youth Camp (H.G.
King Abstract 822), the Secretary shall not acquire such area without the consent of the owner so long as the area is used exclusively as a youth camp.''.
Publication of Boundary Description.--Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a detailed description of the boundary of the Village Creek Corridor unit, the Big Sandy Corridor unit, and the Canyonlands unit of the Big Thicket National Preserve.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 6 of such Act is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``Effective upon date of enactment of this sentence, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of subsections (c) and (d) of the first section.''.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.