This Act may be cited as the ``Common Sense Marriage Tax Relief Act of 2000''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) According to a 1999 Department of the Treasury study, of the 51,400,000 joint returns filed in 1999, approximately-- (A) 48 percent will incur a marriage tax penalty, (B) 41 percent will incur a marriage tax bonus, and (C) 11 percent will generally be unaffected.
The average marriage tax penalty in 1999 will reach $1,141 per couple, according to the Department of the Treasury study.
At least 66 provisions in the existing tax code treat married couples differently from single filers, according to the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants.
Married working women, on average, earn approximately 60 percent of their husband's salary, according to the Bureau of the Census.
The wage gap between women and men is 73 percent for Caucasian women, 63 percent for African-American women, and 53 percent for Hispanic women, according to the National Committee on Pay Equity.
Approximately 40 percent of married mothers in the United States stay at home to raise their young children full time while almost no fathers do, according to the Bureau of the Census.
Although the United States tax code is neutral, it is biased against secondary earners, who are overwhelmingly women.
Because of the progressive marginal rates in the tax code, one spouse earning $25,000 per year would be taxed entirely at the 15 percent rate; but if the other spouse also earns $25,000, a portion of the other spouse's income would be taxed at the 28 percent rate.
Regardless of marital status, once an individual's reported income level reaches beyond the earned income tax credit threshold, she or he automatically loses this benefit.
As a result, newly married couples struggling to escape poverty suddenly lose this vital tax benefit simply because they are no longer single.
Standard Deduction.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (2) of section 63(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to standard deduction) is amended-- (A) by striking ``$5,000'' in subparagraph (A) and inserting ``twice the dollar amount in effect under subparagraph (C) for the taxable year'', (B) by adding ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (B), (C) by striking ``in the case of'' and all that follows in subparagraph (C) and inserting ``in any other case.
'', and (D) by striking subparagraph (D).
Increase allowed as deduction in determining minimum tax.--Subparagraph (E) of section 56(b)(1) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply to so much of the standard deduction under subparagraph (A) of section 63(c)(2) as exceeds the amount which would be such deduction but for the amendment made by section 2(a)(1) of the Penalty Relief From Marriage Tax Act of 2000.''
Technical amendments.-- (A) Subparagraph (B) of section 1(f)(6) of such Code is amended by striking ``(other than with'' and all that follows through ``shall be applied'' and inserting ``(other than with respect to sections 63(c)(4) and 151(d)(4)(A)) shall be applied''.
Paragraph (4) of section 63(c) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following flush sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply to the amount referred to in paragraph (2)(A).''
Earned Income Credit.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 32 of such Code (relating to credit for earned income) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Reduction of marriage penalty.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a joint return, the phaseout amount under this section shall be such amount (determined without regard to this paragraph) increased by $2,500 ($2,000 in the case of taxable years beginning during 2001).
Inflation adjustment.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 2002, the $2,500 amount contained in subparagraph (A) shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of-- ``(i) such dollar amount, and ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, determined by substituting `calendar year 2001' for `calendar year 1992' in subparagraph (B) thereof.
If any increase determined under the preceding sentence is not a multiple of $50, such increase shall be rounded to the next lowest multiple of $50.''
Repeal of reduction of refundable tax credits.-- (A) Subsection (d) of section 24 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (2) and redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
Section 32 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (h).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2000.
TAX REDUCTIONS CONTINGENT ON SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE SOLVENCY CERTIFICATIONS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no provision of this Act (or amendment made thereby) shall take effect until there is-- (1) a social security certification, (2) a medicare certification, and (3) a public debt elimination certification.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- (1) Social security solvency certification.--The term ``social security solvency certification'' means a certification by the Board of Trustees of the Social Security Trust Funds that the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund are in actuarial balance until the year 2050.
Medicare solvency certification.--The term ``medicare solvency certification'' means a certification by the Board of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund that such Trust Fund is in actuarial balance until the year 2030.
Public debt elimination certification.--There is a public debt elimination certification if the Director of the Office of Management and Budget certifies that, taking into account the tax reductions made by this Act and other legislation enacted during calendar year 2000, the national debt held by the public is projected to be eliminated by the year 2013.