This Act may be cited as the ``The Veterans Certification and Licensure Act of 2006''.
VETERANS ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON CERTIFICATION, CREDENTIALING, AND LICENSURE.
Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Labor a committee to be known as the Veterans Advisory Committee on Certification, Credentialing, and Licensure (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Committee'').
Duties.--The Committee shall establish and carry out a national program to do the following: (1) To facilitate the seamless transition of members of the Armed Forces from serving on active duty to employment in the private sector through credentialing.
To collect and disseminate data on certification, licensing, and credentialing programs of the Department of Defense, the Department of Labor, the Department of Veterans Affairs, and of States.
To advise the Secretary of Labor on all matters relating to certification, licensing, and credentialing issues related to converting the skills acquired by veterans while serving in the Armed Forces to skills relevant to civilian occupations.
Membership.-- (1) The Committee shall be composed of nine members, as follows: (A) The Secretary of Defense.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
The Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment and Training.
Six members appointed by the Secretary of Labor of whom one shall be appointed from among representatives nominated by each of the following organizations: (i) Veterans' service organizations that have a national employment program.
The Coalition for Professional Certification.
A nationally-recognized organization in the area of human resources management.
Nationally-recognized labor unions and organizations.
A nationally-recognized organization that advocates on behalf of United States businesses and industry.
The American National Standards Institute.
A vacancy on the Committee shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Administrative Matters.-- (1) Meetings.--The Committee shall meet not less frequently than once each fiscal year quarter.
Chair.--The Secretary of Labor shall appoint the chair of the Committee.
Compensation.-- (A) No compensation.--Members of the Committee shall serve without additional compensation by reason of their service on the Committee.
Travel expenses.--Members of the Committee shall be allowed reasonable and necessary travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for persons serving intermittently in the Government service in accordance with the provisions of subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5 while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of the responsibilities of the Committee.
Staff.--The Secretary of Labor shall provide staff and administrative support to the Committee to assist it in carrying out its duties under this section.
The Secretary shall assure positions on the staff of the Committee include positions that are filled by individuals that are not now, or have ever been, employed as one of the following: (A) Staff of the Assistant Secretary of Labor for Veterans' Employment and Training under section 4102A of title 38, United States Code, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Directors for Veterans' Employment and Training under section 4103 of such title as in effect on such date.
Assistant Director for Veterans' Employment and Training under such section as in effect on such date.
Detail of personnel.--Upon request of the Committee, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Committee to assist it in carrying out its duties.
Contract with private sector entity.--The Committee may enter into a contract with a private sector entity that has a demonstrated level of achievement with respect to issues pertaining to certification, if the Committee determines that entering into such a contract is necessary to carry out the duties of the Committee under subsection (b).
Reports.-- (1) Quarterly reports to congress.--Not later than 30 days after the last day of a fiscal year quarter, the Secretary of Labor shall submit to Congress a report on the activities of the Committee under this section during that quarter.
Committee report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Committee shall submit to the Secretary of Labor a report containing the following: (A) A description of any area of employment in which a credentialing or certification system for veterans exists, an evaluation of the effectiveness of each such system, and information on the number of eligible individuals who took advantage of each such system.
An identification of any area of employment in which a credentialing or certification system for veterans could be established or improved during the 18-month period beginning on the date on which the report under this paragraph is submitted.
A description of the areas of employment the Committee determines are the most difficult such areas for which to establish a credentialing or certification system for veterans and the recommendations of the Committee with respect to methods of establishing such a system for each such area.
Termination.--The Committee shall terminate on the date that is 60 days after the date on which it submits the report for the last fiscal quarter of fiscal year 2011.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Labor from the employment security administration account (established in section 901 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1101)) in the Unemployment Trust Fund $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2011 to carry out this section.