This Act may be cited as the ``National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Coin Act''.
Five Dollar Gold Coins.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall issue not more than 200,000 five dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 8.859 grams; (2) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
One Dollar Silver Coins.--The Secretary shall issue not more than 750,000 one dollar coins which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of coins authorized to be minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial.
On each such coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1994'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5132(a)(1) of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under existing law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Minerals Stock Piling Act.
The design for each coin authorized by this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Fund, Inc., the Secretary of the Interior, and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Advisory Committee.
Sale Price.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price at least equal to the cost of bullion, plus the cost of designing and issuing such coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins prior to the issuance of such coins.
Sales under this subsection shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharge Required.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin for the five dollar coins and $7 per coin for the one dollar coins.
ISSUANCE OF THE COINS.
Period for Issuance.--The coins authorized under this Act shall be issued only through the end of calendar year 1994.
Proof and Uncirculated Coins.--The coins authorized under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities, and not more than 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this title.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this title from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
The total amount of surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Fund established under section 11.
The Comptroller General shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the National Park Service as may be related to the expenditure of amounts paid under section 8.
No Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins under this Act shall not result in any net cost to the Federal Government.
Payment.--No coin shall be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration.
NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS MEMORIAL MAINTENANCE FUND.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Maintenance Fund (hereafter referred to as the ``Fund''), which shall be a revolving fund, to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior.
Monies for the Fund shall be raised through surcharges paid to the Fund pursuant to section 8.
The Secretary of the Interior may accept donations for the Fund.
The Fund shall be maintained in an interest bearing account within the Department of the Treasury.
Purposes.--The Fund shall be used-- (1) for maintenance and repair of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial; (2) to add to the Memorial the names of law enforcement officers who have died in the line of duty; (3) for security of the Memorial site, to include the posting of National Park Service rangers and United States Park Police, as appropriate; (4) at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior and in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury and the Attorney General of the United States, who shall establish an equitable procedure between the Fund and such other organizations as may be appropriate, to provide educational scholarships to the immediate family members of law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty whose names appear on the Memorial, the total amount of such scholarships not to exceed 10 percent of the Fund's annual income; (5) for the dissemination of information regarding the Memorial to the general public; and (6) to administer the Fund, including contracting for necessary services, in an amount not to exceed the lesser of-- (A) 10 percent of the Fund's annual income; or (B) $200,000 in any 1-year period.
Budget and Audit Treatment.--The Fund shall be subject to the budget and audit provisions of chapter 91 of title 31, United States Code.