This Act may be cited as the ``The Social Security Reporting Information and Right to Know Act of 2001''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Social Security Advisory Board, the Technical Panel on Assumptions and Methods of the Social Security Advisory Board (in this Act referred to as the ``Panel''), and the Office of the Chief Actuary of the Social Security Administration should be commended for their professional, nonpartisan work to project the future financial operations of the social security program established under title II of the Social Security Act.
The Panel reported its recommendations in November 1999.
The Panel recommended a series of changes to current projections of the financial operations of the social security program which would, if adopted, increase existing estimates of the program's unfunded obligations.
The Panel further recommended the use of standards of comparison that emphasize program sustainability, such as showing the program's projected annual income rates, cost rates, and balances with an emphasis that is equal to 75-year program solvency.
The Panel further recommended that reform proposals be evaluated using standards of comparison that include the proposal's impact on the Federal unified budget, as well as a recognition of the funding shortfalls present under current law.
The Panel made several other recommendations that are worthy of consideration, involving issues that include workforce participation, poverty rates among the elderly, and assumptions regarding equity investment returns.
Adoption of the Panel's recommendations would assist in developing a fiscally responsible reform solution that avoids passing hidden costs to future taxpayers.
EXPANSION OF SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT STATEMENT.
In General.--Section 1143(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320b-13(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting a semicolon, and by adding at the end the following: ``(E) a statement providing information that-- ``(i) while the old age, survivors, and disability insurance program currently collects more in employer, employee, and self-employment contributions than such program pays out in retirement, disability, survivor, and auxiliary benefits each year, such program will begin to run cash flow deficits in 2015, thereafter necessitating the allocation of general tax revenues in order to finance promised benefits; and ``(ii) the trust funds for such program contain claims on future Government resources sufficient to cover the deficit through 2037, but after that date, the trust funds would collect sufficient revenues to pay 72 percent of benefits; and ``(F) a statement explaining the nature of the Federal old age, survivors, and disability insurance trust funds, including the following: `Social Security Trust Fund balances are available to finance future benefit payments and other Trust Fund responsibilities only in a bookkeeping sense.
They do not consist of real economic assets that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits.
Instead, such balances are claims on the United States Treasury that, when redeemed, will have to be financed by raising taxes, borrowing from the public, or reducing benefits or other expenditures.
The existence of large Social Security Trust Fund balances, therefore, does not, by itself, have any impact on the Federal Government's ability to pay benefits.'.
For purposes of subparagraph (E), the dates and percentages described in such subparagraph shall be adjusted annually based on the Alternative II (Intermediate) findings of the Office of the Chief Actuary contained in the most recent report of the Board of Trustees.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to statements provided after the date of enactment of this Act.
EXPANSION OF ANNUAL REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUNDS.
In General.--Section 201(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401(c)) is amended by inserting before the penultimate sentence the following: ``Based on the Alternative II (Intermediate) findings of the Office of the Chief Actuary, such report, including the report's summary and any items that accompany the release of such report, shall include in a clear and simple manner the information described in subsection (n)(1).''.
Additional Contents of Report.--Section 201 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n)(1) For purposes of subsection (c), the information described in this subsection is the following: ``(A) An estimate of the year in which annual outlays from the Trust Funds is first projected, using the Trustees' intermediate estimates, to exceed the annual cash income of the Trust Funds.
For purposes of this paragraph, annual cash income of the Trust Funds shall be determined by including payroll and benefit tax revenues, but not intragovernmental transfers or interest income.
The annual excess of such projected annual outlays from the Trust Funds over the annual cash income of the Trust Funds in each year, beginning with the first year identified in subparagraph (A) and extending through the year of projected program insolvency.
The aggregate amount of the annual excesses identified in subparagraph (B) for the 75-year projection period included in the report and the change in such amount from the previous year's report.
The amount of deficit or surplus that the old-age, survivor, and disability insurance program will run in the last year in the 75-year projection period included in the report and the aggregate assets and unfunded obligations contained in the Trust Funds in that final projected year.
The amount that payroll taxes would have to be raised or benefits be reduced (both in percentage terms) in order to keep the old-age, survivor, and disability insurance program in annual financial balance after any cumulative balances in the Trust Funds are exhausted.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, such program shall be considered to be in annual financial balance when the annual cash income of the Trust Funds and annual outlays from the Trust Funds are approximately equal for each year throughout the 75-year projection period included in the report.
How the annual amounts identified in subparagraph (B) would change if either raising payroll taxes or reducing benefits to keep the program in financial balance is delayed for 5, 10, 25, and 50 years.
A provision explaining the nature of the Trust Funds, including the following statement: `Social Security Trust Fund balances are available to finance future benefit payments and other Trust Fund responsibilities only in a bookkeeping sense.
They do not consist of real economic assets that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits.
Instead, such balances are claims on the United States Treasury that, when redeemed, will have to be financed by raising taxes, borrowing from the public, or reducing benefits or other expenditures.
The existence of large Social Security Trust Fund balances, therefore, does not, by itself, have any impact on the Federal Government's ability to pay benefits.'.
The information described in subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) of paragraph (1) shall be presented in terms of nominal dollars, inflation-adjusted dollars, and present discounted value in the report under subsection (c)(2), and in terms of inflation-adjusted dollars in the summary of such report.
The Board of Trustees shall publish the economic model and all relevant data that are used to make the financial projections included in the report under subsection (c)(2) and to make it available on the Social Security Administration Internet web site.
Annually, the Board of Trustees shall also include in such report any changes made to the model and data in the preceding 12 months.
The information described in paragraph (1) shall also be included in a separate report to Congress to be submitted not later than the first day of April of each year (beginning with 2002).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to reports made after the date of enactment of this Act.
ANNUAL REPORT FROM THE COMMISSIONER OF SOCIAL SECURITY.
In General.--Section 704 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 904) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Annual Report to Congress ``(f) The Commissioner, in conjunction with the Secretary, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall submit an annual report to Congress that includes the following: ``(1) Projections of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program's (in this subsection referred to as the `program') annual income rates, cost rates, and annual balances throughout the 75-year valuation window used by the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund (in this subsection referred to as the `Board of Trustees').
A clear and explicit presentation of the program's financing shortfalls, expressed as the excess in dollars of program outlays over revenues, in years that the sum of payroll tax revenues and revenues resulting from taxes imposed on benefits provided under the program are projected by the Board of Trustees to be less than program outlays.
A presentation of benefit levels under the program and tax rates throughout the long-range valuation period used by the Board of Trustees that reflects the extent to which benefits would need to be reduced to be funded under currently projected program revenues, and the percentage that taxes would need to be increased in order to fund promised benefits.
An evaluation of the effects upon national savings levels and on the fiscal operations of the Federal Government of enacted provisions of law relating to the program.
Estimates of average lifetime values of benefits for different age, income, and gender cohorts, respectively, for recipients of benefits under the program, that are consistent with the estimates of the Board of Trustees of the percentage of benefits that can be funded under such enacted provisions of law.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to reports made for calendar years beginning after the date of enactment of this Act.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING SOCIAL SECURITY REFORM LEGISLATION.
It is the sense of Congress that Congress and the President should not miss a critical opportunity to enact comprehensive bipartisan social security reform legislation that meets the standard of 75-year actuarial solvency and also addresses the following issues: (1) The permanent sustainability of the social security program.
The long-term impact of reform upon the fiscal operations of the Federal Government as a whole.
The need for a clear and explicit presentation of the anticipated reduction in the social security program's unfunded obligations.
Ensured continued solvency under alternative assumptions regarding mortality, fertility, rates of return, and other appropriate economic and demographic assumptions.
The total amount of retirement income provided under proposed reform in comparison to a standard that explicitly recognizes the benefit reductions or tax increases that enacted provisions of law relating to the social security program would require, according to the estimates in the most recent report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund.
The long-term impact of the current projections of insolvency and of alternative reform proposals upon workforce participation, poverty among the elderly, national savings levels, and other issues identified by the Panel.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING IMPLEMENTATION OF RECOMMENDATIONS.
It is the sense of Congress that the recommendations of the Panel should be implemented to the extent deemed reasonable by the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, in consultation with the agencies and offices that have research, estimating, and reporting responsibilities pertinent to the social security program.