SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Forage Improvement Act of 1997''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--MANAGEMENT OF GRAZING ON FEDERAL LANDS Sec.
Cooperative allotment management plans.
Issuance of new regulations.
Limitation on Application.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect grazing in any unit of the National Park System, in any unit of the National Wildlife Refuge System, in any unit of the National Forest System managed as a National Grassland by the Secretary of Agriculture under the Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010 et sequentes), on any lands that are not Federal lands (as defined in section 102), or on any lands that are held by the United States in trust for the benefit of Indians.
Multiple Use Activities Not Affected.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit or preclude the use of Federal lands (as defined in section 102) for hunting, fishing, recreation, or other multiple use activities in accordance with applicable Federal and State laws and the principles of multiple use.
Valid Existing Rights.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect valid existing rights, reservations, agreements, or authorizations under Federal or State law.
Access to Nonfederally Owned Lands.--Section 1323 of Public Law 96-487 (16 United States Code 3210) shall continue to apply with regard to access to nonfederally owned lands.
To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall provide for consistent and coordinated administration of livestock grazing and management of Federal lands (as defined in section 102) consistent with the laws governing such lands.
TITLE I--MANAGEMENT OF GRAZING ON FEDERAL LANDS SEC.
Forest Service Lands.--This title applies to the management of grazing on National Forest System lands, by the Secretary of Agriculture under the following laws: (1) The 11th undesignated paragraph under the heading ``surveying the public lands'' under the heading ``UNDER THE DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR'' in the Act of June 4, 1897 (commonly known as the Organic Administration Act of 1897) (30 United States Statutes at Large 35, second full paragraph on that page; 16 United States Code 551).
Sections 11, 12, and 19 of the Act of April 24, 1950 (commonly known as the Granger-Thye Act of 1950) (64 United States Statutes at Large 85, 88, chapter 97; 16 United States Code 580g, 580h, 580l).
The Multiple-Use Sustained-Yield Act of 1960 (16 United States Code 528 et sequentes).
The Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1600 et sequentes).
The National Forest Management Act of 1976 (16 United States Code 472a et sequentes).
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
The Public Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978 (43 United States Code 1901 et sequentes).
Bureau of Land Management Lands.--This title applies to the management of grazing on Federal lands administered by the Secretary of the Interior under the following laws: (1) The Act of June 28, 1934 (commonly known as the Taylor Grazing Act) (48 United States Statutes at Large 1269, chapter 865; 43 United States Code 315 et seq.).
The Act of August 28, 1937 (commonly known as the Oregon and California Railroad and Coos Bay Wagon Road Grant Lands Act of 1937) (50 United States Statutes at Large 874, chapter 876; 43 United States Code 1181a et sequentes).
The Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes).
The Public Rangelands Improvement Act of 1978 (43 United States Code 1901 et sequentes).
The Bankhead-Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010 et seq.).
Certain Other United States Lands.--This title also applies to the management of grazing by the Secretary concerned on behalf of the head of another department or agency of the Federal Government under a memorandum of understanding.
In this title: (1) Authorized officer.--The term ``authorized officer'' means a person authorized by the Secretary concerned to administer this title, the laws specified in section 101, and regulations issued under this title and such laws.
Federal lands.--The term ``Federal lands'' means lands outside the State of Alaska that are owned by the United States and are-- (A) included in the National Forest System; or (B) administered by the Secretary of the Interior under the laws specified in section 101(b).
Grazing permit or lease.--The term ``grazing permit or lease'' means a document authorizing use of Federal lands for the purpose of grazing livestock-- (A) within a grazing district under section 3 of the Act of June 28, 1934 (commonly known as the Taylor Grazing Act) (48 United States Statutes at Large 1270, chapter 865; 43 United States Code 315b); (B) outside grazing districts under section 15 of the Act of June 28, 1934 (commonly known as the Taylor Grazing Act) (48 United States Statutes at Large 1275, chapter 865; 43 United States Code 315m); or (C) on National Forest System lands under section 19 of the Act of April 24, 1950 (commonly known as the Granger-Thye Act of 1950) (64 United States Statutes at Large 88, chapter 97; 16 United States Code 580l).
Land use plan.--The term ``land use plan'' means-- (A) a land and resource management plan prepared by the Forest Service pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604) for a unit of the National Forest System; or (B) a resource management plan (or a management framework plan that is in effect pending completion of a resource management plan) developed in accordance with the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes) for Federal lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management.
National forest system.--The term ``National Forest System'' has the meaning given such term in section 11(a) of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1609(a)), except that the term does not include any lands managed as a National Grassland under the Bankhead- Jones Farm Tenant Act (7 United States Code 1010 et sequentes).
Secretary concerned.--The term ``Secretary concerned'' means-- (A) the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to the National Forest System; and (B) the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to Federal lands administered by the Secretary of the Interior under the laws specified in section 101(b).
Sixteen contiguous western states.--The term ``sixteen contiguous Western States'' means the States of Arizona, California, Colorado, Idaho, Kansas, Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, Oregon, South Dakota, Utah, Washington, and Wyoming.
Monitoring.--The monitoring of resource conditions and trends on Federal lands within allotments shall be performed only by qualified persons from the following groups: (1) Federal, State, and local government personnel.
Grazing permittees and lessees.
Professional consultants retained by the United States or a permittee or lessee.
Monitoring Criteria and Protocols.--Such monitoring shall be conducted according to regional or state criteria and protocols selected by the Secretary concerned.
The monitoring protocols shall be site specific, scientifically valid, and subject to peer review.
Monitoring data shall be periodically verified.
Types and Use of Data Collected.-- (1) Use of previously collected data and information.--In addition to using data collected from monitoring conducted under the authority of this section, the Secretary concerned shall consider data and information collected before the date of the enactment of this Act, if available, so long as the historical data and information is objective and reliable.
Application of criteria and protocols.--The Secretary concerned shall not accept monitoring data that does not meet the requirements of subsection (a) or (b).
Use of data.--The data and information collected from such monitoring shall be used to evaluate-- (A) the effects of ecological changes and management actions on resources over time; (B) the effectiveness of actions in meeting management objectives contained in applicable land use plans; and (C) the appropriateness of resource management objectives.
Notice.--In conducting such monitoring, the Secretary concerned shall provide reasonable notice of the monitoring to affected permittees or lessees, including prior notice to the extent practicable of not less than 48 hours.
A person issued a grazing permit or lease may not enter into an agreement with another person to allow grazing on the Federal lands covered by the grazing permit or lease by livestock that are neither owned nor controlled by the person issued the grazing permit or lease.
COOPERATIVE ALLOTMENT MANAGEMENT PLANS.
Written Agreements for Outcome-Based Standards.--An allotment management plan or a grazing permit or lease under section 402(d) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1752(d)) may include a written agreement with a qualified grazing permittee or lessee described in subsection (b) (or a group of qualified grazing permittees or lessees) that provides for outcome-based standards, rather than prescriptive terms and conditions, for managing grazing activities in a specified geographic area.
At the request of a qualified grazing permittee or lessee, the Secretary concerned shall consider including such a written agreement in an allotment management plan or a grazing permit or lease.
Qualified Grazing Permittee or Lessee Described.--A qualified grazing permittee or lessee referred to in subsection (a) is a person issued a grazing permit or lease who has demonstrated sound stewardship by meeting or exceeding the forage and rangeland goals contained in applicable land use plans and in that person's grazing permit or lease for the previous five-year period.
Inclusion of Performance Goals.--A written agreement authorized under subsection (a) shall contain performance goals that-- (1) are expressed in objective, quantifiable, and measurable terms; (2) establish performance indicators to be used in measuring or assessing the relevant outcomes; (3) provide a basis for comparing management results with the established performance goals; and (4) describe the means to be used to verify and validate measured values.
Application of Other Laws.--All requirements of law applicable to an allotment management plan and a grazing permit or lease under section 402(d) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1752(d)), including the prohibition against extending the term of an existing grazing permit or lease, shall apply to a written agreement entered into under subsection (a).
Federal Advisory Committee Act.--Activities under this section shall be exempt from the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Grazing Fees.-- (1) Calculation.--The fee for each animal unit month in a grazing fee year for livestock grazing on Federal lands in the sixteen contiguous western States shall be equal to the 12-year average of the total gross value of production for beef cattle for the 12 years preceding the grazing fee year, multiplied by the 12-year average of the United States Treasury Securities six-month bill ``new issue'' rate, and divided by 12.
The gross value of production for beef cattle shall be determined by the Economic Research Service of the Department of Agriculture in accordance with subsection (d)(1).
Fee for foreign-owned or controlled grazing permits or leases.--In the case of a grazing permit or lease held or otherwise controlled in whole or in part by a foreign corporation or a foreign individual, the fee shall be equal to the higher of the following: (A) The average grazing fee (weighted by animal unit months) charged by the State during the previous grazing year for grazing on State lands in the State in which the lands covered by the grazing permit or lease are located.
The average grazing fee (weighted by animal unit months) charged for grazing on private lands in the State in which the lands covered by the grazing permit or lease are located.
Definition of Animal Unit Month.--For the purposes of billing only, the term ``animal unit month'' means one month's use and occupancy of range by-- (1) one cow, bull, steer, heifer, horse, burro, or mule, seven sheep, or seven goats, each of which is six months of age or older on the date on which the animal begins grazing on Federal lands; (2) any such animal regardless of age if the animal is weaned on the date on which the animal begins grazing on Federal lands; and (3) any such animal that will become 12 months of age during the period of use authorized under a grazing permit.
Livestock Not Counted.--There shall not be counted as an animal unit month the use of Federal lands for grazing by an animal that is less than six months of age on the date on which the animal begins grazing on such lands and is the progeny of an animal on which a grazing fee is paid if the animal is removed from such lands before becoming 12 months of age.
Criteria for Economic Research Service.-- (1) Gross value of production of beef cattle.--The Economic Research Service of the Department of Agriculture shall continue to compile and report the gross value of production of beef cattle, on a dollars-per-bred-cow basis for the United States, as is currently published by the Service in: ``Economic Indicators of the Farm Sector: Cost of Production--Major Field Crops and Livestock and Dairy'' (Cow-calf production cash costs and returns).
Availability.--For the purposes of determining the grazing fee for a given grazing fee year, the gross value of production (as described above) for the previous calendar year shall be made available to the Secretary concerned, and published in the Federal Register, on or before February 15 of each year.
Treatment of Other Fees and Charges.-- (1) Amount of flpma fees and charges.--The fees and charges under section 304(a) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1734(a)) shall reflect processing costs and shall be adjusted periodically as such costs change, but in no case shall such fees and charges exceed the actual administrative and processing costs incurred by the Secretary concerned.
Notice of changes.--Notice of a change in a service charge shall be published in the Federal Register.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the first day of the first grazing season beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ISSUANCE OF NEW REGULATIONS.
The Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) coordinate the promulgation of new regulations to carry out this Act; and (2) publish such regulations simultaneously not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives October 30, 1997.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.