This Act may be cited as the ``George C. Marshall Commemorative Coin Act of 1993''.
GEORGE C. MARSHALL COMMEMORATIVE COINS.
One-Dollar Silver Coins.-- (1) Issuance.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins in commemoration of the end of World War II and General George C. Marshall's participation in service during World War II.
Specifications and design of coins.--The coins issued under this Act shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under this Act shall have the likeness of George C. Marshall on obverse side of such coin.
On each coin there shall be a designation of the value of the coin, an inscription of the year ``1995'', and inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Legal Tender.--The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5132(a)(1) of title 31, United States Code, the coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for the coins minted under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
The design for the coins authorized by this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Friends of George C. Marshall and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Advisory Committee.
MINTING AND ISSUANCE OF COINS.
Uncirculated and Proof Qualities.--The Secretary may mint and issue the coins authorized under this Act in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Use of the United States Mint.--The Secretary may not use more than 1 facility of the United States Mint to strike each quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Commencement of Authority To Sell Coins.--The Secretary may begin selling the coins minted under this Act on January 1, 1995.
Termination of Authority To Mint Coins.--The Secretary may not mint the coins authorized under this Act after December 31, 1995.
Sale Price.--The coins authorized under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of the face value of the coins, the surcharge provided in subsection (c) with respect to such coins, and the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make any bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins authorized under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Sale prices with respect to such repaid orders shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $7 per coin.
All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Friends of George C. Marshall to be used solely for the construction of the George C. Marshall Memorial and Visitor Center in Uniontown, Pennsylvania.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an annual audit of such books, records, documents, and other data of the Friends of George C. Marshall, as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under section 7 until all amounts have been received by the Friends of George C. Marshall and the expenditures of such amounts have been audited.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that the minting and issuance of the coins authorized under this Act shall result in no net costs to the Federal Government.
Payments for the Coins.--The Secretary may not sell a coin minted under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for such coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the Federal Government for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.