This Act may be cited as the ``California Missions Preservation Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The California missions represent some of our Nation's oldest historical treasures.
The first of the California missions was founded in 1769, and eventually a chain of 21 missions and various sub- missions extended along the coast of California on El Camino Real.
The California missions contribute greatly to the rich historical, cultural, and architectural heritage of California and the American West.
The knowledge and cultural influence of native California Indians made a lasting contribution to the early settlement of California and the development of the California missions.
More than 5,300,000 people visit the California missions annually, and the historical importance of the California missions extends worldwide as they have become a frequent destination for foreign visitors to the United States.
The history of the California missions is an important educational component in California schools, and the study of the California missions is part of the Statewide fourth grade curricula on California history.
Restoration and repair of the California missions, and the preservation of the Spanish colonial and mission-era artworks and artifacts of the California missions, for the public enjoyment will ensure that future generations also have the benefit of experiencing and appreciating these great symbols of the spirit of exploration and discovery in the American West.
SUPPORT FOR THE RESTORATION AND PRESERVATION OF THE CALIFORNIA MISSIONS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) California missions.--The term ``California missions'' means the following historic Spanish missions located in the State of California and designated as California Registered Historical Landmarks: (A) Mission La Purisima Concepcion, Lompoc.
Mission La Soledad, Soledad.
Mission San Antonio de Padua, Jolon.
Mission San Buenaventura, Ventura.
Mission San Carlos Borromeo del Rio Carmelo, Carmel.
Mission San Diego Alcala, San Diego.
Mission San Fernando Rey de Espana, Mission Hills.
Mission San Francisco de Asis, San Francisco.
Mission San Francisco Solano, Sonoma.
Mission San Gabriel Arcangel, San Gabriel.
Mission San Jose, Fremont.
Mission San Juan Bautista, San Juan Bautista.
Mission San Juan Capistrano, San Juan Capistrano.
Mission San Luis Obispo de Tolosa and its Asistencia (sub-mission) of Santa Margarita de Cortona, San Luis Obispo.
Mission San Luis Rey de Francia and its Asistencia (sub-mission), Oceanside.
Mission San Miguel Arcangel, San Miguel.
Mission San Rafael Arcangel, San Rafael.
Mission Santa Barbara Virgen y Martir, Santa Barbara.
Mission Santa Clara de Asis, Santa Clara.
Mission Santa Cruz, Santa Cruz.
Mission Santa Ines Virgen y Martir, Solvang.
Asistencia San Antonio de Pala, Pala.
California missions foundation.--The term ``California Missions Foundation'' means the charitable corporation established in the State of California in 1998 to fund the restoration and repair of the California missions and the preservation of the Spanish colonial and mission-era artworks and artifacts of the California missions.
The Foundation is exempt from State franchise and income tax and is organized and operated exclusively for charitable purposes under section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary of the Interior may make grants to the California Missions Foundation to support the efforts of the California Missions Foundation to restore and repair the California missions and to preserve the artworks and artifacts associated with the California missions.
As provided in section 101(e)(4) of the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470a(e)(4)), the Secretary shall ensure that the purpose of a grant under this section is secular, does not promote religion, and seeks to protect those qualities that are historically significant.
Application.--In order to receive a grant under this section for the preservation of the California missions, the California Missions Foundation shall submit to the Secretary an application that includes-- (1) a status report on the condition of the infrastructure and artifacts for each of the California missions; and (2) a comprehensive program for restoration, repair, and preservation of such infrastructure and artifacts, including prioritized preservation efforts to be conducted over a 5-year period and the estimated costs of such preservation efforts.
Matching Fund Requirement.--The Secretary shall require the California Missions Foundation to match grant funds provided under this section.
Report.--As a condition of a grant under this section, the California Missions Foundation shall submit to the Secretary an annual report on the status of the preservation efforts undertaken using grant funds provided under this section.
The Secretary shall submit a copy of each report to Congress.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary a total of $10,000,000 during the five- fiscal year period beginning October 1, 2003, to make grants under this section.
Funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in this section shall be in addition to any funds made available for preservation efforts in the State of California under the National Historic Preservation Act.