``The State Administrator shall establish a Problem Resolution Office.
Problem Resolution Officers shall have the authority to investigate taxpayer complaints and enjoin collection activity if, in the opinion of the Problem Resolution Officer, said collection activity is reasonably likely to not be in compliance with law.
Said administrative injunction may only be reversed by the highest official in the relevant State or Federal taxing authority or by its General Counsel upon a finding that the collection activity is justified by clear and convincing evidence.
The authority to reverse this administrative injunction may not be delegated.
Problem Resolution Officers shall not be disciplined or adversely affected for the issuance of administrative injunctions unless a pattern or issuing injunctions that are manifestly unreasonable is proven in an administrative hearing.
Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the State Administrators or the taxpayer to pursue any legal remedy in any court with jurisdiction over the dispute at issue.
JURISDICTION AND INTERSTATE ALLOCATION.
Allocation Rules.--For purposes of allocating revenue between or among administering states from taxes imposed by this subtitle, the revenue shall be allocated to those states that are the destination of the taxable property or services.
The destination of the purchase of taxable property and services shall be determined in accordance with this section.
Federal Office of Revenue Allocation.--The Secretary shall establish an Office of Revenue Allocation to arbitrate any claims or disputes among administering states as to the destination of taxable property and services for purposes of allocating revenue between or among the states from taxes imposed by this subtitle.
The determination of the Administrator of the Office of Revenue Allocation shall be subject to judicial review in any federal court with competent jurisdiction provided, however, that the standard of review shall be abuse of discretion.
Tangible Personal Property.--The destination of tangible personal property shall be the state or territory in which the property was first delivered to the purchaser.
Tangible personal property shipped by means of the mail or common carrier shall be deemed delivered to the location of the purchaser for purposes of this subsection upon shipment by mail or common carrier.
Real Property.--The destination of real property or rents or leaseholds on real property shall be state or territory in which the real property is located.
Other Property.--The destination of other property shall be residence of the purchaser.
Services.-- ``(1) General rule.--The destination of services shall be state or territory in which the use, consumption or enjoyment of the services occurred.
Allocation of service invoices relating to more than one jurisdiction shall be on the basis of time.
Telecommunications services.--The destination of telecommunications services shall be the residence of the purchaser.
Telecommunications services shall include telephone, telegraph, cable television, satellite and computer on-line or network services.
Domestic transportation services.--For transportation services where all of the final destinations are within the United States, the destination of transportation services shall be the final destination of the trip (in the case of round or multiple trip fares, the services amount shall be equally allocated among the final destinations).
International transportation services.--For transportation services where the final destination or origin of the trip is without the United States, the service amount shall be deemed 50 percent attributable to the United States destination or origin.
Financial Intermediation Services.--The destination of financial intermediation services shall be the residence of the purchase.
A State Tax Administrator shall have jurisdiction over any gross payments made which have a destination (as determined in accordance with this section) within the state of said State Tax Administrator.
This grant of jurisdiction is not exclusive of other jurisdiction that said State Tax Administrator may have.
Rents and Royalties Paid for the Lease of Tangible Property.-- ``(1) General rule.--The destination of rents and royalties paid for the lease of tangible property shall be where the property is located.
Vehicles.--The destination of rent and lease payments on vehicles shall be-- ``(A) in the case of rentals and leases of a term one month or less, the location where the vehicle was originally delivered to the lessee; and ``(B) in the case of rentals and leases of a term greater than one month, the residence of the lessee.
TAX TO BE STATED AND CHARGED SEPARATELY.
In General.--For each purchase of taxable property or services for which a tax is imposed pursuant to section 1, the sales tax shall be charged separately from the purchase price by the vendor or seller.
For purchase of taxable property or services for which a tax is imposed pursuant to section 1, the vendor shall provide to the purchaser a receipt that sets forth at least the following information: ``(1) The property or services price exclusive of tax.
The amount of tax paid.
The property or service price inclusive of tax.
The tax rate (the amount of tax paid (per subparagraph 2) divided by the property or service price inclusive of tax (per subparagraph 3)).
The date that the good or service was sold.
The name of the vendor.
The vendor registration number.
Vending Machine Exception.--The requirements of subsection (a) shall be inapplicable in the case of sales by vending machines.
Vending machines for purposes of this subsection shall mean machines-- ``(1) that dispense taxable property in exchange for coins, one, five, ten or twenty dollar bills, and ``(2) that sell no single item exceeding ten dollars per unit in price.
``The State Administrator or the Secretary, as the case may be, is authorized to enter into written agreements with any person under which the person is allowed to satisfy liability for payment of any tax in installment payments if he determines that such agreement will facilitate the collection of such liability.
The agreement shall remain in effect for the term of the agreement unless the information that the person provided to the Secretary or the State Administrator was materially inaccurate or incomplete.
The Secretary and the State Administrator may compromise any amounts alleged to be due.
Cash Method To Be Used Generally.--Vendors and other persons shall remit taxes and report transactions with respect to the month for which payment was received or the tax imposed by this chapter otherwise becomes due.
Election To Use Accrual Method.--A person may elect with respect to a calendar year, in a form prescribed by the Secretary, to remit taxes and report transactions with respect to the month where a sale was invoiced and accrued.
Cross Reference.-- ``For rules relating to bad debts for vendors electing the accrual method, see section 11(g).
The exemption afforded by section 2(a)(1) shall not be available for any taxable property or service used by a trade or business if that trade or business is not engaged in for profit.
If the trade or business has received gross payments for the sale of taxable property or services that exceed the sum of-- ``(1) taxable property and services purchased, ``(2) wages paid, and ``(3) taxes paid, in 2 or more of the most recent 4 calendar years during which it operated, then the business activity shall be conclusively deemed to be engaged in for profit.''.
PHASE-OUT OF THE INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE.
In General.--Appropriations for any expenses of the Internal Revenue Service including processing income tax returns for years prior to the repeal of the income tax, revenue accounting, management, transfer of payroll tax data to the Social Security Administration and otherwise for years after fiscal year 2007 are not authorized.
Excise and Sales Tax Bureaus.--Section 7801 is amended by adding the following new subsections: ``(d) Excise Tax Bureau.--There shall be in the Department of Treasury an Excise Tax Bureau to administer those excise taxes not repealed by this Act.
Sales Tax Bureau.--There shall be in the Department of Treasury a Sales Tax Bureau to administer the national sales tax in those States where it is required pursuant to section 31(g), and to discharge other Federal duties and powers relating to the national sales tax (including those required by sections 32, 33, and 53(b)).
The Office of Revenue Allocation shall be within the Sales Tax Bureau.''.
Assistant General Counsels.--Section 7801(b)(2) is amended to read as follows: ``(2) Assistant general counsels.--The Secretary of the Treasury may appoint, without regard to the provisions of the civil service laws, and fix the duties of not more than 5 Assistant General Counsels.''.
Short Year.-- (1) For purposes of the Federal income tax, the tax imposed by section 1 and section 11 for taxable years ending June 30, 2006, shall be modified as set forth in this subsection.
For calendar year taxpayers, the dollar figures in section 1 and section 11 shall be reduced by dividing by 2 all dollar figures that would be applicable but for this subsection.
For fiscal year taxpayers, the dollar figures in section 1 and section 11 shall be equal to the product of-- (A) the dollar amount that would be applicable but for this subsection, and (B) the ratio that has as its numerator the number of months in the taxpayer's taxable year ending June 30, 2006, and as its denominator 12.
The Secretary shall publish tax rate schedules in accordance with this subsection.
SOCIAL SECURITY ADMINISTRATION TO COLLECT PAYROLL TAXES.
In General.--Commencing January 1, 2006, the Social Security Administration shall collect and administer the taxes imposed pursuant to chapter 2 of subtitle A (relating to self employment income taxes) and subtitle C (relating to employment taxes) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Cross References.-- For revised rules relating to the self- employment tax, see section 7 of this Act.
For rules relating to revised withholding tax schedules and family consumption refund, see section 13.
In General.--Subsection 1402(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(a) In General.--`Self employment income' shall mean gross payments received in a calendar year from the sale of taxable property or services (without regard to exemption) less the sum in a calendar year of-- ``(1) purchases of taxable property or services (without regard to exemption) in furtherance of a business purpose, ``(2) any wages paid (whether to the self-employed person or others) in furtherance of a business purpose, ``(3) unused transition amounts, and ``(4) undeducted negative self employment income amounts from prior periods.
Transition Amounts.-- ``(1) General rule.--The transition amount for the ten calendar years commencing in 2006 shall be the unrecovered basis amount as of the end of December 31, 2005, divided by ten.
Unrecovered basis amount.--The unrecovered basis amount shall be remaining income tax basis relating to-- ``(A) prior law section 167 property placed in service prior to January 1, 2006, and ``(B) inventory held as of the end of 2005 (including any amounts capitalized in accordance with prior law section 263A).''.
Conforming Amendments.--Subsections 1402(b) and 1402(c) are hereby repealed.
Subsections 1402(d) et sequentes are hereby renumbered as subsections 1402(b) et sequentes SEC.
SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS INDEXED ON SALES TAX INCLUSIVE BASIS.
Subparagraph (D) of paragraph (1) of subsection (i) of section 215 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 415) (relating to cost-of-living increases in Social Security benefits) is amended to read as follows: ``(D)(i) the term `CPI increase percentage', with respect to a base quarter or cost-of-living quarter in any calendar year, means the percentage (rounded to the nearest one-tenth of 1 percent) by which the Consumer Price Index for that quarter (as prepared by the Department of Labor) exceeds such index for the most recent prior calendar quarter which was a base quarter under subparagraph (A)(ii) or, if later, the most recent cost- of-living computation quarter under subparagraph (B); ``(ii) if the Consumer Price Index (as prepared by the Department of Labor) does not include the national sales tax paid, then the term `CPI increase percentage' with respect to a base quarter or cost-of-living quarter in any calendar year, means the percentage (rounded to the nearest one-tenth of 1 percent) by which the product of-- ``(I) the Consumer Price Index for that quarter (as prepared by the Department of Labor); and ``(II) the national sales tax factor, exceeds such index for the most recent prior calendar quarter which was a base quarter under subparagraph (A)(ii) or, if later, the most recent cost-of-living computation quarter under subparagraph (B); and ``(iii) for purposes of clause (ii), the `national sales tax factor' is equal to one plus the quotient that is-- ``(I) the sales tax rate (as defined in section 1 of title 26), divided by ``(II) the quantity that is one minus the sales tax rate.''.
COMPENSATING PAYMENTS TO CERTAIN PERSONS ON FIXED INCOME.
Compensating Payment.--Eligible persons (as defined in subsection (c)) shall receive a compensating payment (as defined in subsection (b)) provided that they comply with subsection (g) (relating to applications).
Compensating Payment Defined.--The term ``compensating payment'' means the product of the qualified fixed income payment amount (as defined in subsection (e)) and the excess inflation rate (as defined in subsection (f)).
Eligible Person Defined.--An eligible person is any person with respect to any calendar year who is entitled to-- (1) Social Security benefits; and (2) qualified fixed income payments (as defined in subsection (d)).
Qualified Fixed Income Payment Defined.--A qualified fixed income payment is a payment received by-- (1) a beneficiary under a defined benefit plan (within the meaning of section 414(j) of the Internal Revenue Code as in effect prior to the enactment of this Act) whether sponsored by a private or Government employer; or (2) by an annuitant pursuant to an annuity contract between the annuitant and a bona fide insurance company.
A payment pursuant to a plan or annuity contract is not a qualified fixed income payment if the payment varies with investment performance, interest rates, or inflation.
Payments pursuant to an annuity contract entered into after June 30, 2006, shall not be qualified fixed income payments.
Payments pursuant to a defined benefit plan to a beneficiary that had been a participant in said defined benefit plan (within the meaning of section 410 of the Internal Revenue Code as in effect prior to the enactment of this Act) for less than 5 years shall not be qualified fixed income payments.
Qualified Fixed Income Payment Amount.--The qualified fixed income payment amount is \1/12\ of qualified fixed income payments that an eligible person is entitled to receive during the calendar year subsequent to the year for which the compensating payment is calculated, provided, however, that the qualified fixed income payment amount shall not exceed $5,000.
Excess Inflation Rate Defined.--The term ``excess inflation rate'' shall mean the excess, if any, of the consumer price index (all urban) during the 18-month period ending December 31, 2006, over the increase projected for the consumer price index (all urban) in the Office of Management and Budget baseline reported in the Budget of the United States for Fiscal Year 2006 for said 18-month period.
The baseline assumption for the 6 months in 2006 shall be \1/2\ of the assumed increase for the entire calendar year 2006.
Application Required.--In order to receive compensating payments, each eligible person must apply in a form prescribed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services and provide such documentation as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Means of Payment.--Each person entitled to a compensating payment shall receive the compensating payment with their Social Security benefit payment.
The compensating payment shall be separately indicated but may be included in one check.
The funds to make compensating payments shall come from the general fund.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services may require insurers that are parties to annuity contracts and defined benefit plan sponsors to issue a statement to annuitants or plan participants including such information as the Secretary may require to determine the qualified fixed income payment amount.
Section 6621 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last sentence in section 6621(a)(1) and by striking ``3'' in section 6621(a)(2)(B) and substituting in its stead ``2''.
SUPERMAJORITY REQUIRED TO RAISE RATE.
In General.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment thereto, or conference report thereon that includes any provision that-- (1) increases any federal sales tax rate, and (2) provides any exemption, deduction, credit or other benefit which results in a reduction in federal revenues.
Waiver or Suspension.--This section may be waived or suspended in the House of Representatives or the Senate only by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the Members, duly chosen and sworn.