This Act may be cited as the ``Security and Victory in Iraq Act of 2007''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The national security mission of the United States and its coalition partners, having removed Saddam Hussein and his regime from power, is to help establish a sovereign, free, secure, and united Iraq at peace with its neighbors.
The people of Iraq in 2005 went to the polls in great numbers and in an historic democratic process elected an interim government, voted on a new constitution, and elected a permanent democratic government.
Since its inception, Iraq's democratic government has been under continuous attack from extremist insurgents, terrorists, and, more recently, growing sectarian conflict.
The increasing violence is now threatening Iraq's government, endangering regional stability and creating the opportunity for safe havens for terrorists.
The National Intelligence Estimate for Iraq, released February 2, 2007, stated: ``Coalition capabilities, including force levels, resources, and operations, remain an essential stabilizing element in Iraq.''.
The National Intelligence Estimate for Iraq stated further that if Coalition forces were to withdraw rapidly, the intelligence community judges that neighboring countries--invited by Iraqi factions or unilaterally--might intervene openly in the conflict.
There is evidence that the sectarian violence is pulling in neighboring countries, with United States and coalition commanders in Iraq, intelligence sources, and the Iraq Study Group all affirming that Syria and Iran are actively supporting efforts to undermine stability in Iraq, with reporting attesting that Iran has provided arms, financial support, and training for militias within Iraq and may be supplying improvised explosive devices to groups that attack United States forces.
Israeli Prime Minister Olmert underscored the regional consequences of a United States withdrawal from Iraq in a December 11, 2006, interview with the Washington Post and Newsweek saying: ``If there is a premature pullout before Iraq has a robust government with a strong authority that can keep the country from collapsing into an internal civil war, America will have to think about the possible ramifications on neighbouring Arab countries with moderate governments.
How will it affect the stability of these countries against the radical forces that might flourish as a result of a premature pullout of America?''.
Ayman al-Zawahiri has repeatedly stated the need to extend the jihad beyond Iraq and wrote in an October 2005 letter to the late al-Qaeda leader al-Zarqawi, that the Islamist militant extremists ``must not have their mission end with the expulsion of the Americans from Iraq, and then lay down their weapons.
Instead, their ongoing mission is to establish an Islamic state, and defend it, and for every generation to hand over the banner to the one after it .
This commitment to imposing militant extremist Islam throughout the world was recently echoed by Iranian leader Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, who was quoted as saying on January 5, 2007: ``We don't shy away from declaring that Islam is ready to rule the world.
We must prepare ourselves to rule the world.''.
The failure to secure Iraq would threaten America's vital national security interests, in a strategically important region in the world, and our homeland security interests.
Recognizing the investment of troops and resources had outpaced results in Iraq, the President and a congressionally- established commission, the Iraq Study Group, conducted reappraisals of our policies and strategies in Iraq.
The President outlined a new strategy on January 10, 2007, to immediately further United States national security priorities, to provide greater security for the Iraqi population, and to accelerate progress on essential political, social, and economic reforms necessary to the long-term stability of the central government and the country.
On January 26, 2007, the United States Senate unanimously confirmed General David H. Petraeus as the new commander of United States and allied forces in Iraq.
During his confirmation hearings, General Petraeus addressed the negative consequences a premature withdrawal would have on United States interests and regional stability, as well as the positive encouragement a congressionally-passed resolution of disapproval regarding the new strategy would have on United States enemies operating in Iraq.
In addition, General Petraeus, as he himself has stated, cannot accomplish his new mission without the deployment of the additional troops, which would reinforce United States and allied forces.
It is not in the best national security interests of the United States to support unanimously a new commanding general given his mission and then deny him the resources to be successful in that mission.
Despite policy disagreements, all Members of Congress support the members of the United States Armed Forces, who have served honorably in their mission to fight terrorism and to protect the security of the United States.
The members of the Armed Forces and their families have made sacrifices, in many cases the ultimate sacrifice, to protect the security of the United States and the freedom of its citizens.
Failure to fully provide resources to military forces deployed in support of operations in Iraq will negatively impact our troops' morale and result in increasing casualties and make the mission to secure Iraq impossible.
CERTIFICATION RELATING TO EFFORTS BY THE GOVERNMENT OF IRAQ.
Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 30 days thereafter, the President shall transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a certification that contains a determination of the President of the extent to which-- (1) the Government of Iraq is fully cooperating with United States stability efforts in Iraq; and (2) the Government of Iraq has taken effective steps and made demonstrable progress toward-- (A) completing the process of purging from its security services those individuals with ties to insurgents, sectarian militias, and terrorism; (B) developing and implementing a rotation schedule that allows all Iraqi Army battalions to participate in operations in battlefield conditions, such as those combat conditions found in Baghdad and al Anbar Province; (C) denying terrorists and their state-sponsors, particularly Iran and Syria, the use of Iraqi territory as a terrorist sanctuary; (D) developing and implementing a strategy to promote tolerance, peace, and co-existence among Iraqis, which should particularly address how to decrease sectarian tensions and violence; (E) providing and ensuring equal access to resources to all Iraqis and augmenting the capability of reconstruction programs and economic institutions; (F) adopting reforms to promote justice, equality, and the rule of law, and ensuring financial and transparent accountability of all Iraqi Government ministries and operations; and (G) cooperating and coordinating internationally to help stabilize Iraq.
Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, and every 30 days thereafter, the President shall transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that-- (1) details the progress in the implementation of the Iraq strategy, ``A New Way Forward,'' announced by the President on January 10, 2007; (2) details the progress of the Government of Iraq in meeting the benchmarks described in section 3 of this Act; (3) identifies the level of combat experience of all Iraqi Army battalions, provides details on the development and implementation of a rotation schedule to ensure that all Iraqi Army battalions experience combat operations in battlefield conditions, and identifies the extent to which the Iraqi Ministry of Defense has deployed Iraqi military units that are needed to secure Baghdad and al Anbar Province; (4) tracks expenditures of Iraqi funds, which are allocated for the Iraqi Army, for the purpose of equipping the Iraqi Army; (5) measures the effectiveness of the police force in Baghdad using normally accepted crime statistics; (6) assesses the contributions by allies of the United States to provide support to the Government and people of Iraq; and (7) identifies the steps the Government of the United States is taking to hold the Government of Iraq accountable in meeting the benchmarks described in section 3 of this Act and in providing funding for the Provincial Reconstruction Teams in Iraq.
Interagency Assessment Required.--The President shall require all relevant departments and agencies of the Government of the United States to conduct an interagency assessment of the impact that withdrawal of United States Armed Forces from Iraq would have on the national security and homeland security interests of the United States, as well as an assessment on the impact that such a withdrawal would have for United States allies in the region.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall transmit to the appropriate congressional committees a report that contains the results of the interagency assessment conducted under subsection (a).
SELECT BIPARTISAN COMMITTEE TO MONITOR UNITED STATES POLICY AND STRATEGY FOR IRAQ.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the House of Representatives the Select Bipartisan Committee to Monitor United States Policy and Strategy for Iraq (hereinafter referred to as the ``select committee'').
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The select committee shall be composed of 10 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, of whom 5 members shall be appointed upon the recommendation of the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
The Speaker shall designate one member as chairman of the select committee.
Ex officio members.--The Speaker and the minority leader of the House of Representatives shall be ex officio members of the select committee but shall have no vote in the select committee and may not be counted for purposes of determining a quorum.
The Speaker and the minority leader each may designate a leadership staff member to assist in their capacity as ex officio members, with the same access to select committee meetings, hearings, briefings, and materials as employees of the select committee and subject to the same security clearance and confidentiality requirements as staff of the select committee.
Duties.-- (1) In general.--The select committee is authorized and directed to monitor the implementation of this Act and to study proposals from relevant committees of the House of Representatives, the executive branch, and private sector entities and individuals as the select committee considers appropriate concerning the development of United States policy and strategy to assist Iraq to achieve a stable, democratic government and security forces capable of establishing and maintaining security and stability.
Report.--Not later than 180 legislative days after the date on which all members of the select committee have been appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(1), the select committee shall submit to the House of Representatives a report that contains a summary of the activities of the select committee carried out under paragraph (1) and any findings or recommendations relating to such activities.
Procedure.--Rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives, including the items referred to in the following paragraphs, shall apply to the select committee: (1) Clause 2(j)(1) of rule XI (guaranteeing the minority additional witnesses).
Clause 2(m)(3) of rule XI (providing for the authority to subpoena witnesses and documents).
In addition, access by the select committee to classified information and other national security information shall be conducted consistent with the Rules of the House of Representatives.
Joint Operations.--The chairman of the select committee, in carrying out the duties described in subsection (c), shall consult with the chairman of a Senate committee conducting duties similar to the duties described in subsection (c) regarding meeting jointly to receive testimony, the scheduling of hearings or issuance of subpoenas, and joint staff interviews of key witnesses.
Staff; Funding.-- (1) Staff.-- (A) Use of existing house staff.--To the greatest extent practicable, the select committee shall utilize the services of staff of employing entities of the House of Representatives.
At the request of the chairman in consultation with the ranking minority member, staff of employing entities of the House of Representatives or a joint committee may be detailed to the select committee to carry out this section and shall be deemed to be staff of the select committee.
Other staff.--The chairman, upon consultation with the ranking minority member, may employ and fix the compensation of such staff as the chairman considers necessary to carry out this resolution.
Funding.--There shall be paid out of the applicable accounts of the House of Representatives $500,000 for the expenses of the select committee.
Such payments shall be made on vouchers signed by the chairman and approved in the manner directed by the Committee on House Administration.
Amounts made available under this paragraph shall be expended in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Committee on House Administration.
Dissolution and Disposition of Records.-- (1) Dissolution.--The select committee shall cease to exist 30 days after filing the report required under subsection (c)(2).
Disposition of records.--Upon dissolution of the select committee, the records of the select committee shall become the records of any committee of the House of Representatives designated by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
In this Act: (1) Appropriate congressional committees.--The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (A) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Affairs, the Committee on Homeland Security, the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence, and the Select Bipartisan Committee to Monitor United States Policy and Strategy for Iraq (established under section 6 of this Act) of the House of Representatives; and (B) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs, and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
Legislative day.--The term ``legislative day'' means any calendar day during which the House of Representatives is in session.
Terrorist sanctuary.--The term ``terrorist sanctuary'' has the meaning given the term in section 140(d)(5) of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1988 and 1989 (22 United States Code 2656f(d)(5) (as added by section 7102(d)(3) of the Intelligence Reform and Terrorism Prevention Act of 2004 (Public Law 108-458)).