SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES IN ACT.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Nursing Home Staffing and Quality Improvement Act of 2000''.
References.--Except where otherwise specifically provided, references in this Act shall be considered to be made to the Social Security Act, or to a section or other provision thereof, and references to the ``Secretary'' shall be considered to be made to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
GRANTS TO STATES FOR IMPROVEMENTS IN NURSING HOME STAFFING AND QUALITY.
Secretary's Authority To Award Grants.--The Secretary shall establish a program of competitive grants to States, in accordance with the provisions of this section, for the purpose of improving the quality of care furnished in nursing homes operating in the State.
Applications and Eligibility for Grants.-- (1) Initial application.--A State seeking a grant to conduct a project under this section shall submit an application containing such information and assurances as the Secretary may require, including-- (A) a commitment to submit annual reports describing the State's progress in increasing staffing levels and making other quality improvements in nursing homes in the State; and (B) a description of a plan for evaluation of the activities carried out under the grant, including a plan for measurement of progress toward the goals and objectives of the program, consistent with the principles of the Government Performance and Results Act.
Consultation with public.--Before submitting an application for a grant under this section, States shall solicit and consider the views of members of the public, nursing home residents or their representatives, and other persons concerned with the administration of nursing homes within the State with respect to the design of the proposed State program.
Eligibility.-- (A) Initial eligibility.--A State shall not be eligible for a grant award under this section unless it makes assurances satisfactory to the Secretary that the skilled nursing facilities (as defined in section 1819(a)) and nursing facilities (as defined in section 1919(a)) within the State will reach or exceed the minimum staff level described in subsection (d)(2) within two years after enactment of this Act and will maintain such level throughout the remainder of the grant program.
Continuing eligibility.--A State shall not be eligible for the continuation of grant funding under a multi-year grant under this section unless the State demonstrates to the Secretary's satisfaction that it continues to meet the requirement described in subparagraph (A) and has made sufficient progress in meeting the goals described in its grant application.
Use of Grant Funds.--Funds received by a State under this section may be provided to entities including nursing homes, labor management partnerships, and educational institutions, and may be used for any or all of the following purposes: (1) To enable a nursing home to recruit additional nursing staff or to retain existing nursing staff (including through the use of reasonable financial incentives or reasonable benefit enhancements).
To increase education and training of nursing staff (including designing or implementing programs to promote the career advancement of certified nurse aides).
To provide bonuses to nursing homes meeting State quality standards or avoiding serious quality violations for a period of one or more years.
Such other nursing home staffing and quality improvement initiatives as the Secretary may approve.
Distribution of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Subject to subsection (b), in awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall award no more than 25 percent of the funds to States in which, as of the date of the enactment of this section, skilled nursing facilities (as defined in section 1819(a)) and nursing facilities (as defined in section 1919(a)) have reached or exceeded the minimum staff level specified in paragraph (2) (as determined by the Secretary).
Minimum nursing home staff level.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), for purposes of subsection (b) and paragraph (1), the level specified in this paragraph for a skilled nursing facility or nursing facility is a staff level sufficient to ensure that each resident receives from a certified nurse aide at least 2 hours per day of direct care (including repositioning the resident and changing wet clothes, assisting with feeding, exercise, and toileting, and working to enhance a resident's independence with respect to activities of daily living).
Secretary's authority to increase minimum staff level.--The Secretary may establish a minimum staff level that is higher than that specified in subparagraph (A).
Any such revised staff level shall be effective no earlier than six months after the date on which Secretary provides notice to States of the new requirement.
Multi-year grant funds.--The Secretary shall award any multi-year grant under this section from amounts appropriated (or available pursuant to subsection (e)(2)) for the first fiscal year of the grant.
Appropriations and Availability of Civil Money Penalty (CPM) Collections.-- (1) Appropriations.--There are appropriated for all costs to the Secretary for carrying out the program under this section $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2001 through 2005, such funds to remain available to the Secretary through the end of the first succeeding fiscal year.
Availability of cmp collections.--In addition to the amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1), there shall be available to the Secretary for such costs for such fiscal years any amounts deposited in the Nursing Facility Civil Money Penalties Collection Account established under section 4.
ENHANCED NURSING FACILITY REPORTING REQUIREMENTS.
Medicare.-- (1) Submission of nursing staff level data to the secretary.--Section 1819(b) (42 United States Code 1395i-3(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Data on staffing levels.-- ``(A) Submission to secretary.--A skilled nursing facility shall submit to the Secretary, in such form and manner and at such intervals as the Secretary may require, data with respect to nursing staff of the facility.
Such data shall include the total number of nursing staff hours furnished during the period specified by the Secretary (including totals for each shift worked during such period) by the facility to residents for which payment is made under section 1888(e), broken down by total certified nurse aide hours, total licensed practical or vocational nurse hours, and total registered nurse hours, and shall also include the average wage rate for each class of nursing staff employed by the facility.
Publication.--The Secretary shall provide for the publication on the Internet Site of the Department of Health and Human Services known as Nursing Home Compare the facility-specific nursing staff information collected pursuant to subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall update such information periodically.''.
Posting of information on nursing facility staffing.-- Section 1819(b) (42 United States Code 1395i-3(b)), as amended by paragraph (1), is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Information on nurse staffing.-- ``(A) In general.--A skilled nursing facility shall post daily for each nursing unit of the facility and for each shift the current number of licensed and unlicensed nursing staff directly responsible for resident care.
The information shall be displayed in a uniform manner (as specified by the Secretary) and in a clearly visible place.
Publication of data.--A skilled nursing facility shall, upon request, make available to the public the nursing staff data described in subparagraph (A).''.
Information concerning patient classification.--Section 1819(b)(4)(C) (42 United States Code 1395i-3(b)(4)(C)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) Information concerning residents.-- The skilled nursing facility shall provide the Secretary, in such form and manner and at such intervals as the Secretary may require, a classification of all residents of the skilled nursing facility that accords with the patient classification system described in section 1888(e)(3)(B)(ii), or such successor system as the Secretary may identify.''.
Medicaid.-- (1) In general.--Section 1919(b) (42 United States Code 1396r) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Data on staffing levels.-- ``(A) Submission to secretary.--A nursing facility shall submit to the Secretary, in such form and manner and at such intervals as the Secretary may require, data with respect to nursing staff of the facility.
Such data shall include the total number of nursing staff hours furnished during the period specified by the Secretary (including totals for each shift worked during such period) by the facility to residents for which payment is made under this title, broken down by total certified nurse aide hours, total licensed practical or vocational nurse hours, and total registered nurse hours, and shall also include the average wage rate for each class of nursing staff employed by the facility.
Publication.--The Secretary shall provide for the publication on the Internet Site of the Department of Health and Human Services known as Nursing Home Compare the facility-specific nursing staff information collected pursuant to subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall update such information periodically.''.
Posting of information on nursing facility staffing.-- Section 1919(b) (42 United States Code 1395r(b)), as amended by paragraph (1), is further amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Information on nurse staffing.-- ``(A) In general.--A nursing facility shall post daily for each nursing unit of the facility and for each shift the current number of licensed and unlicensed nursing staff directly responsible for resident care.
The information shall be displayed in a uniform manner (as specified by the Secretary) and in a clearly visible place.
Publication of data.--A nursing facility shall, upon request, make available to the public the nursing staff data described in subparagraph (A).''.
Information concerning patient classification.--Section 1919(b)(4)(C) (42 United States Code 1396r(b)(4)(C)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) Information concerning residents.-- The nursing facility shall provide the Secretary, in such form and manner and at such intervals as the Secretary may require, a classification of all residents of the nursing facility that accords with the patient classification system described in section 1888(e)(3)(B)(ii), or such successor system as the Secretary may identify.''.
NURSING FACILITY CIVIL MONEY PENALTY COLLECTIONS.
Establishment of nursing facility civil money penalty collections account.--Section 1128A (42 United States Code 1320a-7a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(o) Establishment of Nursing Facility Civil Money Penalty Collections Account.--There is hereby established an account to be known as the ``Nursing Facility Civil Money Penalties Collection Account'' (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the ``Account'').
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, there shall be deposited into the Account the Secretary's share of any civil monetary penalties collected under sections 1819 and 1919, all such amounts to be available without fiscal year limitation for repaying the Secretary's share of amounts owed to nursing facilities or skilled nursing facilities pursuant to the final sentence of sections 1819(h)(2)(B)(ii) and 1919(h)(2)(B)(ii), and for awarding grants under section 2 of the Nursing Home Staffing and Quality Improvement Act of 2000.''.
Authority To Collect CMPS Immediately.-- (1) Medicare.--Section 1819(h)(2)(B)(ii) (42 United States Code 1395i- 3(h)(2)(B)(ii)) is amended by inserting before the final period ``, except that, notwithstanding section 1128A(c)(2) or any other provision of law, the Secretary, upon determining that a civil money penalty should be imposed against a skilled nursing facility pursuant to this paragraph, shall take immediate action to collect such penalty (except where the Secretary finds that such action could jeopardize the health or welfare of residents of the skilled nursing facility).
In collecting such penalty, the Secretary may deduct the amount of the penalty from amounts otherwise payable to the facility under this title or take such other actions as the Secretary considers appropriate.
If the Secretary's imposition of a penalty under this paragraph is set aside, in whole or in part, as a result of a hearing under section 1128A(c)(2) (or an appeal therefrom) or by a court of competent jurisdiction, and the Secretary elects not to pursue an appeal of such judgment; or has exhausted all appeals, the Secretary shall repay any amount owed to the skilled nursing facility with accrued interest.''
Medicaid.--Section 1919(h)(3)(B)(ii) (42 United States Code 1396r(h)(3)(B)(ii)) is amended by inserting before the final period ``, except that, notwithstanding section 1128A(c)(2) or any other provision of law, the Secretary, upon determining that a civil money penalty should be imposed against a nursing facility pursuant to this paragraph, shall take immediate action to collect the penalty (except where the Secretary finds that such action could jeopardize the health or welfare of residents of the nursing facility).
In collecting such penalty, the Secretary may direct the State to deduct the amount of the penalty from amounts otherwise payable to the nursing facility under this title or take such other actions as the Secretary, in consultation with the State, considers appropriate.
If the Secretary's imposition of a penalty under this paragraph is set aside, in whole or in part, as a result of a hearing under section 1128A(c)(2) (or an appeal therefrom) or by a court of competent jurisdiction, and the Secretary elects not to pursue an appeal of such judgment, or has exhausted all appeals, the Secretary shall repay, or shall direct the State to repay, any amount owed to the nursing facility with accrued interest.''