This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Teacher Retention Act of 2007''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) More than 8,000,000 children, representing 21 percent of all public school children in the United States, attend public schools in rural areas.
There are 24,123 public schools in rural areas of the United States, representing 31 percent of all public schools.
More than 400,000 educators, or 31 percent of all public school teachers, teach in rural schools.
Rural school teachers earn approximately 14 percent less than their counterparts in other regions.
Despite lower salaries, rural school teachers typically teach multiple subjects and perform their jobs with fewer resources than their counterparts in other regions.
One of the most critical challenges facing rural school districts is in attracting and retaining qualified teachers.
Rural school districts tend to have higher teacher turnover rates than school districts in other regions.
High teacher turnover has a negative impact on student performance, school district performance, and the ability of teachers to become highly qualified.
In this Act: (1) Child with a disability.--The term ``child with a disability'' has the meaning given the term in section 602 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1401).
Highly qualified.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the term ``highly qualified'' when used with respect to a teacher, has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
Highly qualified special education teacher.--The term ``highly qualified'' when used with respect to a special education teacher, has the meaning given the term in section 602 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
Limited english proficient.--The term ``limited English proficient'' has the meaning given the term in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Low-income student.--The term ``low-income student'' means a child eligible to be counted under section 1124(c)(1)(A) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6333(c)(1)(A)).
Migratory child.--The term ``migratory child'' has the meaning given the term in section 1309 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6399).
Rural local educational agency.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the term ``rural local educational agency'' means a local educational agency that-- (i)(I) is described in section 6211(b), 6221(b)(1), or 9101(26)(C) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7345(b), 7351(b)(1), 7801(26)(C)); or (II) serves a high number or percentage of children who are Native Hawaiian as defined in section 7207(1) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7517(1)); and (ii) has experienced a teacher turnover rate of not less than 10 percent of all the teachers teaching in the schools served by the local educational agency in any of the 3 academic years preceding the date of enactment of this Act.
County rule.--If a local educational agency serves 2 or more counties in their entirety, then each county shall be treated as if such county were a separate local educational agency for purposes of determinations under subparagraph (A).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Grants.--From amounts appropriated under section 6 for each fiscal year, the Secretary shall carry out a 5-year pilot program under which the Secretary awards grants, on a competitive basis, to not more than 10 States to enable the States to award salary bonuses to highly qualified teachers or highly qualified special education teachers who teach, or commit to teach, for at least 3 academic years, in an elementary school or secondary school served by the same rural local educational agency.
Award Basis.--The Secretary shall award grants under this section on the basis of the needs of rural local educational agencies within a State for recruiting and retaining highly qualified teachers or highly qualified special education teachers.
Consideration of Needs.--In determining the needs of rural local educational agencies for recruiting and retaining highly qualified teachers and highly qualified special education teachers under subsection (b), the Secretary shall consider 1 or more of the following: (1) The eligibility of a rural local educational agency for assistance under part B of title VI of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7341 et sequentes).
The impact on a rural local educational agency of low- income students who are served by the rural local educational agency.
The impact on a rural local educational agency of limited English proficient students who are served by the rural local educational agency.
The impact on a rural local educational agency of migrant students who are served by the rural local educational agency.
The number or percentage of rural local educational agencies described in section 9101(26)(C) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801(26)(C)).
The impact on a rural local educational agency of children with a disability who are served by the rural local educational agency.
The long-term plans of a State to improve the recruitment and retention of highly qualified teachers and highly qualified special education teachers in rural local educational agencies within the State.
Application.--A State that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
The application shall contain a plan for the proposed distribution and use of the grant funds among rural local educational agencies within the State.
Use of Funds.--Grant funds under this section shall be used to provide salary bonuses for highly qualified teachers or highly qualified special education teachers who teach, or commit to teach, for at least 3 academic years, in an elementary school or secondary school served by the same rural local educational agency.
Study.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a study of each project that is funded under this Act.
The study shall track and assess the implementation and effectiveness of each project.
Reservation of funds.--From the amount appropriated under section 6 for fiscal year 2008, the Secretary shall reserve not more than 1 percent or $500,000, whichever is greater, to carry out the study described in paragraph (1).
Reports.-- (1) Annual reports from states.--Each State receiving a grant under this Act shall submit an annual report to the Secretary regarding each project within the State that is funded under this Act.
The report shall contain such information as the Secretary determines necessary to evaluate the project.
Report to congress.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall submit a report on the study described in subsection (a)(1) to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and to the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of Representatives not later than September 30, 2012.
Contents.--The report shall include-- (i) the number of rural local educational agencies assisted under this Act; (ii) the characteristics of such rural local educational agencies with respect to the considerations of needs described in section 4(c); (iii) the number and demographic characteristics of teachers receiving bonuses under this Act; (iv) the impact of the bonuses provided under this Act on the ability of rural local educational agencies assisted under this Act to recruit and retain highly qualified teachers and highly qualified special education teachers; and (v) such other information and analysis as the Secretary determines necessary to evaluate the projects.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2008 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2009 through 2012.