SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``West Virginia Rivers Conservation Act of 1993''.
Table of Contents.-- Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
TITLE I--BOUNDARY MODIFICATIONS Sec.
New River Gorge National River.
Gauley River National Recreation Area.
Bluestone National Scenic River.
TITLE II--UPPER NEW NATIONAL WILD AND SCENIC RIVER Sec.
Designation of upper New River, West Virginia.
TITLE III--ELK RIVER Sec.
Designation of Elk River as a study river.
TITLE IV--GENERAL PROVISIONS Sec.
TITLE I--BOUNDARY MODIFICATIONS SEC.
NEW RIVER GORGE NATIONAL RIVER.
Section 1101 of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 460m-15) is amended by striking out ``NERI-80,023, dated January 1987'' and inserting ``NERI-80,028, dated January 1993''.
GAULEY RIVER NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
Section 201(b) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww(b)) is amended by striking out ``NRA-GR/20,000A and dated July 1987'' and inserting ``GARI-80,001 and dated January 1993''.
BLUESTONE NATIONAL SCENIC RIVER.
Section 3(a)(65) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)(65)) is amended by striking out ``WSR-BLU/20,000, and dated January 1987'' and inserting ``BLUE-80,004, and dated January 1993''.
TITLE II--UPPER NEW NATIONAL WILD AND SCENIC RIVER SEC.
DESIGNATION OF UPPER NEW RIVER, WEST VIRGINIA.
Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end: ``( ) Upper New River, West Virginia.--(A) The segment in Summers County, West Virginia, from the West Virginia-Virginia State line downstream for approximately 14.5 miles as depicted on the boundary map entitled `Upper New Wild and Scenic River', numbered UPNE 80,000 and dated January 1993; to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a wild and scenic river.
The acreage limitation set forth in subsection (b) shall not apply to the segment designated under this paragraph.
Nothing in this Act shall preclude the improvement of any existing road or right-of-way within the boundaries of the segment designated under this paragraph.
Jurisdiction over all lands and improvements on such lands owned by the United States within the boundaries of the segment designated under this paragraph is hereby transferred without reimbursement to the administrative jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Interior, subject to leases in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph (or renewed thereafter) between the United States and the State of West Virginia with respect to the Bluestone Wildlife Management Area.
Nothing in this Act shall affect the management by the State of West Virginia of hunting and fishing within the segment designated under this paragraph.
Nothing in this Act shall affect or impair the management by the State of West Virginia of other wildlife activities in the Bluestone Wildlife Management Area to the extent permitted in the lease agreement as in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph, and such management may be continued pursuant to renewal of such lease agreement.
If requested to do so by the State of West Virginia, the Secretary may terminate or modify such leases and assume administrative authority over all or part of the areas concerned.
Nothing in the designation of the segment referred to in this paragraph shall affect or impair the management of the Bluestone project or the authority of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States to carry out the project purposes of that project.''.
TITLE III--ELK RIVER SEC.
DESIGNATION OF ELK RIVER AS A STUDY RIVER.
The Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a study of the segment of the Elk River, West Virginia, from Slatyfork in Pocahontas County, to Centralia in Braxton County, to determine its eligibility and suitability as either-- (1) a component of the national wild and scenic rivers system, (2) a unit of the National Park System as a national river, or (3) a unit of the National Park System as a national recreation area.
The Secretary shall submit a report containing the results of such study to the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives and to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate within 3 years after the enactment of this Act.
Nothing in this section shall affect or impair the management of the Sutton project or the authority of any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States to carry out the project purposes of that project as of the date of enactment of this section.
TITLE IV--GENERAL PROVISIONS SEC.
In order to achieve the maximum economy and efficiency of operations in the administration of the segment of the New River designated pursuant to title II, the Secretary of the Interior shall consolidate offices and personnel administering such segment with offices and personnel administering the New River Gorge National River, the Gauley River National Recreation Area, and the Bluestone National Scenic River to the extent practicable, and shall utilize facilities of the New River Gorge National River to the extent practicable.
MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS Title XI of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 460m-15 and following) is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
APPLICABLE PROVISIONS OF OTHER LAW.
Cooperative Agreements.--The provisions of section 202(e)(1) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww-1(e)(1)) shall apply to the New River Gorge National River in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to the Gauley River National Recreation Area.
Remnant Lands.--The provisions of the second sentence of section 203(a) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww-2(a)) shall apply to tracts of land partially within the boundaries of the New River Gorge National River in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to tracts of land only partially within the Gauley River National Recreation Area.''.
Section 202(e) of the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 (16 United States Code 460ww-1(e)) is amended by adding the following new paragraph at the end thereof: ``(4) Access to River.--(A) In order to facilitate public safety, use, and enjoyment of the recreation area, and to protect, to the maximum extent feasible, the scenic and natural resources of the area, the Secretary is authorized and directed to acquire such lands or interests in lands and to take such actions as are necessary to provide access by noncommercial entities on the north side of the Gauley River at the area known as Woods Ferry utilizing existing roads and rights- of-way.
Such actions by the Secretary shall include the construction of parking and related facilities in the vicinity of Woods Ferry for noncommercial use on lands acquired pursuant to paragraph (3) or on lands acquired with the consent of the owner thereof within the boundaries of the recreation area.
If necessary, in the discretion of the Secretary, in order to minimize environmental impacts, including visual impacts, within portions of the recreation area immediately adjacent to the river, the Secretary may, by contract or otherwise, provide transportation services for noncommercial visitors, at reasonable cost, between such parking facilities and the river.
Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall affect the rights of any person to continue to utilize, pursuant to a lease in effect on April 1, 1993, any right of way acquired pursuant to such lease which authorizes such person to use an existing road referred to in subparagraph (A).
Except as provided under paragraph (2) relating to access immediately downstream of the Summersville project, until there is compliance with this paragraph the Secretary is prohibited from acquiring or developing any other river access points within the recreation area.''.
The Secretary of the Interior is authorized and directed to construct a visitor center and such other related facilities as may be deemed necessary to facilitate visitor understanding and enjoyment of the New River Gorge National River and the Gauley River National Recreation Area in the vicinity of the confluence of the New and Gauley Rivers at Gauley Bridge, West Virginia.
Such center and related facilities are authorized to be constructed at a site outside of the boundary of the New River Gorge National River or the Gauley River National Recreation Area unless a suitable site is available within the boundaries of either unit.
For a 5-year period following the date of enactment of this Act, the provisions of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act applicable to river segments designated for study for potential addition to the wild and scenic rivers system under section 5(b) of that Act shall apply to those segments of the Bluestone and Meadow Rivers which were found eligible in the studies completed by the National Park Service in August 1983 but which were not designated by the West Virginia National Interest River Conservation Act of 1987 as part of the Bluestone National Scenic River or as part of the Gauley River National Recreation Area, as the case may be.