SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Comprehensive Strategy for Iraq Act of 2007''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Expiration of congressional authorization for use of military force against Iraq.
Prohibition on use of funds to establish or maintain permanent United States military presence in Iraq.
Preparation and submission of United States exit strategy from Iraq and subsequent United States role in Iraq.
Assistance for employment programs and democracy, governance, and related programs in Iraq.
Presidential Special Envoys for Iraq Regional Security.
Congress declares that it is the policy of the United States-- (1) to enhance the national security of the United States by pursuing a strategy that restores United States military readiness, promotes success in the Global War on Terrorism, and contributes to peace and stability in Iraq and the greater Middle East region; (2) to begin withdrawing United States Armed Forces from Iraq and to complete the withdrawal in an orderly manner and at the earliest practicable date, relinquishing to the Government of Iraq full responsibility for maintaining security and public safety; (3) to recognize the elected Government of Iraq as the legitimate government of a fully sovereign country and encourage it to take greater responsibility over its natural resources, security, and public safety within its borders; (4) to support reconstruction efforts by the Government of Iraq and to help involve the international community in those and other stabilization efforts; (5) to promote national reconciliation in Iraq, including constitutional revisions to assure the participation of all Iraqis in the Government of Iraq, equitable sharing of oil revenues, integration of former Baathists into the national life of Iraq, dismantling of sectarian militias, and a dialogue among sectarian communities on the future of Iraq; (6) to provide diplomatic and political support to the Government of Iraq to achieve stability and an enduring democracy; (7) to transfer to Iraqi Security Forces all bases now controlled by United States Armed Forces, and to maintain no permanent bases or other long-term United States military presence in Iraq; (8) to fully support the total control and authority over Iraq's oil assets by the sovereign Government of Iraq; and (9) to vigorously prosecute a war on terrorist organizations and networks around the world through an integrated, comprehensive, and global strategy.
EXPIRATION OF CONGRESSIONAL AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF MILITARY FORCE AGAINST IRAQ.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The sole authority for combat operations by the United States Armed Forces in Iraq is the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107- 243; 50 United States Code 1541 note).
In Public Law 107-243, Congress authorized the use of the Armed Forces as ``necessary and appropriate'' to ``defend the national security of the United States against the continuing threat posed by Iraq,'' and to ``enforce all relevant United Nations Security Council resolutions regarding Iraq''.
Original missions assigned to the Armed Forces in accordance with Public Law 107-243--to identify and destroy Iraqi weapons of mass destruction capabilities, prevent Iraqi Government support for international terrorism, and end the authoritarian rule of Saddam Hussein--are no longer operative, and on December 6, 2006, the Iraq Study Group concluded that ``sectarian violence is now the principle challenge to stability in Iraq''.
If the authority to use the Armed Forces as provided under Public Law 107-243 is terminated, the President does not have authority to continue combat operations in Iraq without specific authorization by Congress in law.
Expiration.--The authority for the President to use the Armed Forces as provided by Public Law 107-243 expires on December 31, 2007.
Rule of Construction.--No provision of law, other than Public Law 107-243, shall be construed as providing authority for combat operations in Iraq.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS TO ESTABLISH OR MAINTAIN PERMANENT UNITED STATES MILITARY PRESENCE IN IRAQ.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, funds appropriated or otherwise made available under any provision of law may not be obligated or expended for the purpose of establishing or maintaining a permanent United States military presence in Iraq through the establishment or use of military installations or facilities in Iraq intended to be under the exclusive control of the Armed Forces rather than under the control of the Government of Iraq.
PREPARATION AND SUBMISSION OF UNITED STATES EXIT STRATEGY FROM IRAQ AND SUBSEQUENT UNITED STATES ROLE IN IRAQ.
Strategy Required.--No later than 30 days after the enactment of this act, the President shall submit to Congress a report outlining a strategy to bring combat operations by the United States Armed Forces in Iraq to an end.
Content of Strategy.--The strategy required by this section shall include the following elements: (1) A plan for phasing out the number of members of the Armed Forces in Iraq so that the use of military force, as authorized by the Authorization for Use of Military Force Against Iraq Resolution of 2002 (Public Law 107-243; 50 United States Code 1541 note), ends no later than December 31, 2007.
A description of the timetable for withdrawing the Armed Forces from Iraq, including a date for the initial withdrawal of the Armed Forces and specific objectives for additional troop reductions before December 31, 2007.
A description of the remaining mission of the Armed Forces in Iraq, including an enumeration of the goals and objectives of that mission and a strategy for achieving these goals and objectives.
An assessment of any need for a military mission to begin after December 31, 2007, except that any such mission shall only be advisory in nature and shall exclude combat operations by Armed Forces personnel.
An assessment of the need to maintain one or more units of the Armed Forces in the region as a regional counterterrorism strike force to rapidly respond to terrorism threats against the United States and its interests.
A plan for turning over authority for all remaining security and government operations in Iraq to the Government of Iraq.
An assessment of remaining needs for the training and fielding of the Iraqi Security Forces.
An assessment of remaining reconstruction needs in Iraq.
ASSISTANCE FOR EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS AND DEMOCRACY, GOVERNANCE, AND RELATED PROGRAMS IN IRAQ.
Assistance for Employment Programs.-- (1) Assistance authorized.--Subject to paragraph (2), the President is authorized to provide assistance for projects designed to provide employment opportunities for the people of Iraq.
Projects funded under this subsection shall be carried out on an equitable basis in all regions of Iraq, as appropriate.
Certification.--Assistance may be provided under paragraph (1) only if the President certifies to Congress that the Government of Iraq has successfully concluded an agreement that will allow for the peaceful sharing of power and resources among major ethnic and sectarian factions in Iraq.
Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $2,000,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2008 through 2010.
Assistance for Democracy, Governance, and Related Programs.-- (1) Assistance authorized.--The President is authorized to provide assistance to strengthen democracy, governance, human rights, the rule of law, and religious freedom in Iraq.
Requirement.--To the maximum extent practicable, not less than 50 percent of amounts made available to carry out this subsection for a fiscal year shall be expended to support the development of democratic institutions at the local and provincial levels in Iraq.
Authorization of appropriations.--To carry out this subsection, there are authorized to be appropriated to the President $300,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2008 through 2010.
PRESIDENTIAL SPECIAL ENVOYS FOR IRAQ REGIONAL SECURITY.
Appointment of Special Envoys.--Not later than 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall appoint two Presidential Special Envoys for Iraq Regional Security.
Duties.--The Presidential Special Envoys appointed pursuant to subsection (a) shall have the following duties: (1) Enter into discussions with the Government of Iraq and governments of neighboring countries to support Iraq's efforts to achieve peace and stability and to take necessary actions to prevent regional instability.
Organize and obtain commitments to participate in a regional conference on Iraq's future, to include representatives of the Government of the United States, the Government of Iraq, the United Nations, the League of Arab States, the European Union, and the governments of neighboring countries, including, at minimum, the Governments of Egypt, Iran, Jordan, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Syria, and Turkey.
Organize an Iraq Support Group, consisting of representatives of the entities described in paragraph (2), to coordinate regional and international policy in support of Iraq's efforts to achieve peace and stability.
Work with officials of the Government of Iraq and other domestic stakeholders to organize a forum for negotiations on national reconciliation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for fiscal year 2008.
Report Required.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on the following: (1) The efforts of the United States to promote regional dialogue on Iraq's future, including efforts by the Presidential Special Envoys for Iraq Regional Security to carry out the duties specified in section 7(b) of this Act.
The status of pledges of financial assistance for the relief and reconstruction of Iraq made by members of the international community at the Madrid International Conference on Reconstruction in Iraq and other international conferences for the relief and reconstruction of Iraq since March 2003.
The efforts of the United States to encourage other countries and international institutions to fulfill the pledges of financial assistance described in paragraph (2).
Definition.--In this section, the term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means-- (1) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives; and (2) the Committee on Appropriations, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate.
It is the sense of Congress that the Government of the United States should redeploy such diplomatic, political, and military assets as are necessary-- (1) to complete Operation Enduring Freedom, including to defeat remaining Taliban and al Qaeda forces threatening the stability of Afghanistan; and (2) to support efforts to dismantle terrorist networks and deny terrorists haven in other regions of the world in which terrorist organizations threaten the interests of the United States.