This Act may be cited as the ``SSI Disability Benefits Reform Act of 1995''.
REAPPLICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR ADULTS RECEIVING SSI BENEFITS BY REASON OF DISABILITY.
In General.--Section 1614(a)(3)(G) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(a)(3)(G)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(G)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following clause: ``(ii) In the case of an individual who has attained 18 years of age and for whom a determination has been made of eligibility for a benefit under this title by reason of disability, the following applies: ``(I) Subject to the provisions of this clause, the determination of eligibility is effective for the 3-year period beginning on the date of the determination, and the eligibility of the individual lapses unless a determination of continuing eligibility is made before the end of such period, and before the end of each subsequent 3-year period.
This subclause ceases to apply to the individual upon the individual attaining 65 years of age.
This subclause does not apply to the individual if the individual has an impairment that is not expected to improve (or a combination of impairments that are not expected to improve).
With respect to a determination under subclause (I) of whether the individual continues to be eligible for the benefit (in this clause referred to as a `redetermination'), the Commissioner may not make the redetermination unless the individual submits to the Commissioner an application requesting the redetermination.
If such an application is submitted, the Commissioner shall make the redetermination.
This subclause is subject to subclause (V).
If as of the date on which this clause takes effect the individual has been receiving the benefit for three years or less, the first period under subclause (I) for the individual is deemed to end on the expiration of the period beginning on the date on which this clause takes effect and continuing through a number of months equal to 12 plus a number equal to 36 minus the number of months the individual has been receiving the benefit.
If as of the date on which this clause takes effect the individual has been receiving the benefit for five years or less, but for more than three years, the first period under subclause (I) for the individual is deemed to end on the expiration of the 1-year period beginning on the date on which this clause takes effect.
If as of the date on which this clause takes effect the individual has been receiving the benefit for more than five years, the Commissioner shall make redeterminations under subclause (I) and may not require the individual to submit applications for the redeterminations.
The first 3-year period under subclause (I) for the individual is deemed to begin upon the expiration of the period beginning on the date on which this clause takes effect and ending upon the termination of a number of years equal to the lowest number (greater than zero) that can be obtained by subtracting the number of years that the individual has been receiving the benefit from a number that is a multiple of three.
If the individual first attains 18 years of age on or after the date on which this clause takes effect, the first 3-year period under subclause (I) for the individual is deemed to end on the date on which the individual attains such age.
Not later than one year prior to the date on which a determination under subclause (I) expires, the Commissioner shall (except in the case of an individual to whom subclause (V) applies) provide to the individual a written notice explaining the applicability of this clause to the individual, including an explanation of the effect of failing to submit the application.
If the individual submits the application not later than 180 days prior to such date and the Commissioner does not make the redetermination before such date, the Commissioner shall continue to provide the benefit pending the redetermination and shall publish in the Federal Register a notice that the Commissioner was unable to make the redetermination by such date.
If the individual fails to submit the application under subclause (II) by the end of the applicable period under subclause (I), the individual may apply for a redetermination.
The Commissioner shall make the redetermination for the individual only after making redeterminations for individuals for whom eligibility has not lapsed pursuant to subclause (I).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) takes effect upon the expiration of the 9-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 207 of the Social Security Independence and Program Improvements Act of 1994 (42 United States Code 1382 note; 108 United States Statutes at Large 1516) is hereby repealed.
STRIKING OF RESTRICTIONS REGARDING DETERMINATION OF INELIGIBILITY.
Section 1614(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(a)) is amended by striking paragraph (4).
NARROWING OF SSI ELIGIBILITY ON BASIS OF MENTAL IMPAIRMENTS.
In General.--Section 1614(a)(3)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(a)(3)(A)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(i)'' after ``(3)(A)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following clause: ``(ii) In making determinations under clause (i) regarding the severity of mental impairments, the Secretary shall revise the regulations under subpart P of part 404 of title 20, Code of Federal Regulations in order to accomplish the result that (relative to such regulations as in effect prior to the date on which this clause takes effect) the growth in the enrollment of the program under this title on the basis of mental impairments is slowed.
The final rule issued pursuant to the preceding sentence applies to individuals without regard to whether the individuals were receiving benefits under this title prior to the effective date of such rule.''.
Final Regulations.--The final rule for the regulations required in subsection (a) shall be issued before the expiration of the 9-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, and shall take effect upon the expiration of such period.