Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness in Tax Collections Act of 2002''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Table of Contents.-- Sec.
Partial payment of tax liability in installment agreements.
Extension of time for return of property.
Individuals held harmless on wrongful levy, etc.
on individual retirement plan.
Seven-day threshold on tolling of statute of limitations during tax review.
Study of liens and levies.
PARTIAL PAYMENT OF TAX LIABILITY IN INSTALLMENT AGREEMENTS.
In General.-- (1) Section 6159(a) (relating to authorization of agreements) is amended-- (A) by striking ``satisfy liability for payment of'' and inserting ``make payment on'', and (B) by inserting ``full or partial'' after ``facilitate''.
Section 6159(c) (relating to Secretary required to enter into installment agreements in certain cases) is amended in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by inserting ``full'' before ``payment''.
Requirement To Review Partial Payment Agreements Every Two Years.--Section 6159 is amended by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (e) and (f), respectively, and inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Secretary Required To Review Installment Agreements for Partial Collection Every Two Years.--In the case of an agreement entered into by the Secretary under subsection (a) for partial collection of a tax liability, the Secretary shall review the agreement at least once every 2 years.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to agreements entered into on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION OF TIME FOR RETURN OF PROPERTY.
Extension of Time for Return of Property Subject to Levy.-- Subsection (b) of section 6343 (relating to return of property) is amended by striking ``9 months'' and inserting ``2 years''.
Period of Limitation on Suits.--Subsection (c) of section 6532 (relating to suits by persons other than taxpayers) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1) by striking ``9 months'' and inserting ``2 years'', and (2) in paragraph (2) by striking ``9-month'' and inserting ``2-year''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to-- (1) levies made after the date of the enactment of this Act, and (2) levies made on or before such date if the 9-month period has not expired under section 6343(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (without regard to this section) as of such date.
INDIVIDUALS HELD HARMLESS ON WRONGFUL LEVY, ETC., ON INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT PLAN.
In General.--Section 6343 (relating to authority to release levy and return property) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Individuals Held Harmless on Wrongful Levy, etc., on Individual Retirement Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--If the Secretary determines that an individual retirement plan has been levied upon in a case to which subsection (b) or (d)(2)(A) applies, an amount equal to the sum of-- ``(A) the amount of money returned by the Secretary on account of such levy, and ``(B) interest paid under subsection (c) on such amount of money, may be deposited into an individual retirement plan (other than an endowment contract) to which a rollover from the plan levied upon is permitted.
Treatment as rollover.--The distribution on account of the levy and any deposit under paragraph (1) with respect to such distribution shall be treated for purposes of this title as if such distribution and deposit were part of a rollover described in section 408(d)(3)(A)(i); except that-- ``(A) interest paid under subsection (c) shall be treated as part of such distribution and as not includible in gross income, ``(B) the 60-day requirement in such section shall be treated as met if the deposit is made not later than the 60th day after the day on which the individual receives an amount under paragraph (1) from the Secretary, and ``(C) such deposit shall not be taken into account under section 408(d)(3)(B).
Refund, etc., of income tax on levy.--If any amount is includible in gross income for a taxable year by reason of a levy referred to in paragraph (1) and any portion of such amount is treated as a rollover under paragraph (2), any tax imposed by chapter 1 on such portion shall not be assessed, and if assessed shall be abated, and if collected shall be credited or refunded as an overpayment made on the due date for filing the return of tax for such taxable year.
Interest.--Notwithstanding subsection (d), interest shall be allowed under subsection (c) in a case in which the Secretary makes a determination described in subsection (d)(2)(A) with respect to a levy upon an individual retirement plan.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to amounts paid under subsections (b), (c), and (d)(2)(A) of section 6343 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 after December 31, 2002.
SEVEN-DAY THRESHOLD ON TOLLING OF STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS DURING TAX REVIEW.
In General.--Section 7811(d)(1) (relating to suspension of running of period of limitation) is amended by inserting after ``application,'' the following: ``but only if the date of such decision is at least 7 days after the date of the taxpayer's application''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to applications filed after the date of the enactment of this Act.
STUDY OF LIENS AND LEVIES.
The Secretary of the Treasury, or the Secretary's delegate, shall conduct a study of the practices of the Internal Revenue Service concerning liens and levies.
The study shall examine-- (1) the declining use of liens and levies by the Internal Revenue Service, and (2) the practicality of recording liens and levying against property in cases in which the cost of such actions exceeds the amount to be realized from such property.
Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit such study to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
Limitation on Amount of Grants.--Paragraph (1) of section 7526(c) (relating to special rules and limitations) is amended by striking ``$6,000,000 per year'' and inserting ``$9,000,000 for 2002, $12,000,000 for 2003, and $15,000,000 for each year thereafter''.
Limitation on Use of Clinics for Tax Return Preparation.-- Subparagraph (A) of section 7526(b)(1) is amended by adding at the end the following flush language: ``The term does not include a clinic that provides routine tax return preparation.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to return preparation in connection with a controversy with the Internal Revenue Service.''.
Promotion of Clinics.--Section 7526(c) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Promotion of clinics.--The Secretary is authorized to promote the benefits of and encourage the use of low-income taxpayer clinics through the use of mass communications, referrals, and other means.