In General.--Not later than July 1, 1996, the Secretary shall, by regulation, develop alternative dispute resolution methods for use by individuals, health information trustees, and other persons in resolving claims under section 151.
Effect on Initiation of Civil Actions.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the regulations established under subsection (a) may provide that an individual alleging that a right of the individual under this Act has been violated shall pursue at least one alternative dispute resolution method developed under such subsection as a condition precedent to commencing a civil action under section 151.
Limitation.--Such regulations may not require an individual to refrain from commencing a civil action to pursue one or more alternative dispute resolution method for a period that is greater than 6 months.
Suspension of statute of limitations.--The regulations established by the Secretary under subsection (a) may provide that a period in which an individual described in paragraph (1) pursues (as defined by the Secretary) an alternative dispute resolution method under this section shall be excluded in computing the period of limitations under section 151(e).
Methods.--The methods under subsection (a) shall include at least the following: (1) Arbitration.--The use of arbitration.
Mediation.--The use of mediation.
Early offers of settlement.--The use of a process under which parties make early offers of settlement.
Standards for Establishing Methods.--In developing alternative dispute resolution methods under subsection (a), the Secretary shall ensure that the methods promote the resolution of claims in a manner that-- (1) is affordable for the parties involved; (2) provides for timely and fair resolution of claims; and (3) provides for reasonably convenient access to dispute resolution for individuals.
AMENDMENTS TO CRIMINAL LAW.
In General.--Title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 89 the following: ``CHAPTER 90--PROTECTED HEALTH INFORMATION ``Sec.
Obtaining protected health information under false pretenses.
Monetary gain from obtaining protected health information under false pretenses.
Knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information.
Knowing and unlawful use or disclosure of protected health information.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful sale, transfer, or use of protected health information.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) the term `health information trustee' has the meaning given such term in section 3(b)(6) of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995; ``(2) the term `protected health information' has the meaning given such term in section 3(a)(3) of such Act; and ``(3) the term `protected individual' has the meaning given such term in section 3(a)(4) of such Act.
Obtaining protected health information under false pretenses ``Whoever under false pretenses-- ``(1) requests or obtains protected health information from a health information trustee; or ``(2) obtains from a protected individual an authorization for the disclosure of protected health information about the individual maintained by a health information trustee; shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Monetary gain from obtaining protected health information under false pretenses ``Whoever under false pretenses-- ``(1) requests or obtains protected health information from a health information trustee with the intent to sell, transfer, or use such information for profit or monetary gain; or ``(2) obtains from a protected individual an authorization for the disclosure of protected health information about the individual maintained by a health information trustee with the intent to sell, transfer, or use such authorization for profit or monetary gain; and knowingly sells, transfers, or uses such information or authorization for profit or monetary gain shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly obtains protected health information from a health information trustee in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, knowing that such obtaining is unlawful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful obtaining of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly-- ``(1) obtains protected health information from a health information trustee in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, knowing that such obtaining is unlawful and with the intent to sell, transfer, or use such information for profit or monetary gain; and ``(2) knowingly sells, transfers, or uses such information for profit or monetary gain; shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.
Knowing and unlawful use or disclosure of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly uses or discloses protected health information in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, knowing that such use or disclosure is unlawful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 5 years, or both.
Monetary gain from knowing and unlawful sale, transfer, or use of protected health information ``Whoever knowingly sells, transfers, or uses protected health information in violation of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995, knowing that such sale, transfer, or use is unlawful, shall be fined under this title or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for part I of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 89 the following: ``90.
Protected health information.......................... 1831''.
TITLE II--AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE SEC.
AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 5, UNITED STATES CODE.
New Subsection.--Section 552a of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(w) Medical Exemptions.--The head of an agency that is a health information trustee (as defined in section 3(b)(6) of the Fair Health Information Practices Act of 1995) shall promulgate rules, in accordance with the requirements (including general notice) of subsections (b)(1), (b)(2), (b)(3), (c), and (e) of section 553 of this title, to exempt a system of records within the agency, to the extent that the system of records contains protected health information (as defined in section 3(a)(3) of such Act), from all provisions of this section except subsections (e)(1), (e)(2), subparagraphs (A) through (C) and (E) through (I) of subsection (e)(4), and subsections (e)(5), (e)(6), (e)(9), (e)(12), (l), (n), (o), (p), (q), (r), and (u).''.
Repeal.--Section 552a(f)(3) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``pertaining to him,'' and all that follows through the semicolon and inserting ``pertaining to the individual;''.
TITLE III--REGULATIONS, RESEARCH, AND EDUCATION; EFFECTIVE DATES; APPLICABILITY; AND RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS SEC.
REGULATIONS; RESEARCH AND EDUCATION.
Regulations.--Not later than July 1, 1996, the Secretary shall prescribe regulations to carry out this Act.
Research and Technical Support.--The Secretary may sponsor-- (1) research relating to the privacy and security of protected health information; (2) the development of consent forms governing disclosure of such information; and (3) the development of technology to implement standards regarding such information.
Education.--The Secretary shall establish education and awareness programs-- (1) to foster adequate security practices by health information trustees; (2) to train personnel of health information trustees respecting the duties of such personnel with respect to protected health information; and (3) to inform individuals and employers who purchase health care respecting their rights with respect to such information.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act, and the amendments made by this Act, shall take effect on January 1, 1997.
Provisions Effective Immediately.--A provision of this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act if the provision-- (1) imposes a duty on the Secretary to develop, establish, or promulgate regulations, guidelines, notices, statements, or education and awareness programs; or (2) authorizes the Secretary to sponsor research or the development of forms or technology.
Protected Health Information.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the provisions of this Act shall apply to any protected health information that is received, created, used, maintained, or disclosed by a health information trustee in a State on or after January 1, 1997, regardless of whether the information existed or was disclosed prior to such date.
Exception.-- (1) In general.--The provisions of this Act shall not apply to a trustee described in paragraph (2), except with respect to protected health information that is received by the trustee on or after January 1, 1997.
Applicability.--A trustee referred to in paragraph (1) is-- (A) a health researcher; or (B) a person who, with respect to specific protected health information, received the information-- (i) pursuant to-- (I) section 117 (relating to emergency circumstances); (II) section 118 (relating to judicial and administrative purposes); (III) section 119 (relating to law enforcement); or (IV) section 120 (relating to subpoenas, warrants, and search warrants); or (ii) while acting in whole or in part in the capacity of an officer or employee of a person described in clause (i).
Authorizations for Disclosures.--An authorization for the disclosure of protected health information about a protected individual that is executed by the individual before January 1, 1997, and is recognized and valid under State law on December 31, 1996, shall remain valid and shall not be subject to the requirements of section 112 until January 1, 1998, or the occurrence of the date or event (if any) specified in the authorization upon which the authorization expires, whichever occurs earlier.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER LAWS.
State Law.--Except as otherwise provided in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (f), a State may not establish, continue in effect, or enforce any State law to the extent that the law is inconsistent with, or imposes additional requirements with respect to, any of the following: (1) A duty of a health information trustee under this Act.
An authority of a health information trustee under this Act to disclose protected health information.
A provision of subtitle C (relating to access procedures and challenge rights), subtitle D (miscellaneous provisions), or subtitle E (relating to enforcement).
Laws Relating to Public Health and Mental Health.--This Act does not preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of any State law regarding public health or mental health to the extent that the law prohibits or regulates a disclosure of protected health information that is permitted under this Act.
Criminal Penalties.--A State may establish and enforce criminal penalties with respect to a failure to comply with a provision of this Act.
Privileges.--A privilege that a person has under law in a court of a State or the United States or under the rules of any agency of a State or the United States may not be diminished, waived, or otherwise affected by-- (1) the execution by a protected individual of an authorization for disclosure of protected health information under this Act, if the authorization is executed for the purpose of receiving health care or providing for the payment for health care; or (2) any provision of this Act that authorizes the disclosure of protected health information for the purpose of receiving health care or providing for the payment for health care.
Department of Veterans Affairs.--The limitations on use and disclosure of protected health information under this Act shall not be construed to prevent any exchange of such information within and among components of the Department of Veterans Affairs that determine eligibility for or entitlement to, or that provide, benefits under laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs.
Certain Duties Under State or Federal Law.--This Act shall not be construed to preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of any of the following: (1) Any law that provides for the reporting of vital statistics such as birth or death information.
Any law requiring the reporting of abuse or neglect information about any individual.
Subpart II of part E of title XXVI of the Public Health Service Act (relating to notifications of emergency response employees of possible exposure to infectious diseases).
The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990.
Any Federal or State statute that establishes a privilege for records used in health professional peer review activities.
Secretarial Authority.-- (1) Secretary of health and human services.--A provision of this Act does not preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of section 543 of the Public Health Service Act, except to the extent that the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines through regulations promulgated by such Secretary that the provision provides greater protection for protected health information, and the rights of protected individuals, than is provided under such section 543.
Secretary of veterans affairs.--A provision of this Act does not preempt, supersede, or modify the operation of section 7332 of title 38, United States Code, except to the extent that the Secretary of Veterans Affairs determines through regulations promulgated by such Secretary that the provision provides greater protection for protected health information, and the rights of protected individuals, than is provided under such section 7332.
HR 435 IH----2 HR 435 IH----3 HR 435 IH----4 HR 435 IH----5 HR 435 IH----6 HR 435 IH----7