This Act may be cited as the ``John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center Parking Improvement Act of 1997''.
PARKING GARAGE ADDITIONS AND SITE IMPROVEMENTS.
Section 3 of the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center Act (20 United States Code 76i) is amended-- (1) by striking the section heading and all that follows through ``The Board'' and inserting the following: ``SEC.
JOHN Federal Reporter KENNEDY CENTER FOR THE PERFORMING ARTS.
In General.--The Board''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Parking Garage Additions and Site Improvements.-- ``(1) In general.--Substantially in accordance with the plan entitled `Site Master Plan--Drawing Number 1997-2 April 29, 1997,' and map number NCR 844/82571, the Board may design and construct-- ``(A) an addition to the parking garage at each of the north and south ends of the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts; and ``(B) site improvements and modifications.
Availability.--The plan shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Secretary of the Center.
Limitation on use of appropriated funds.--No appropriated funds may be used to pay the costs (including the repayment of obligations incurred to finance costs) of-- ``(A) the design and construction of an addition to the parking garage authorized under paragraph (1)(A); ``(B) the design and construction of site improvements and modifications authorized under paragraph (1)(B) that the Board specifically designates will be financed using sources other than appropriated funds; or ``(C) any project to acquire large screen format equipment for an interpretive theater or to produce an interpretive film that the Board specifically designates will be financed using sources other than appropriated funds.''.
PEDESTRIAN AND VEHICULAR ACCESS.
Duties of the Board.--Section 4(a)(1) of the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center Act (20 United States Code 76j(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (G); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(I) ensure that safe and convenient access to the site of the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts is provided for pedestrians and vehicles.''.
Powers of the Board.--Section 5 of such Act (20 United States Code 76k) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g) Pedestrian and Vehicular Access.--Subject to approval of the Secretary of the Interior under section 4(a)(2)(F), the Board shall develop plans and carry out projects to improve pedestrian and vehicular access to the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts.''.
DEFINITION OF BUILDING AND SITE.
Section 13 of the John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center Act (20 United States Code 76s) and section 9(3) of the Act of October 24, 1951 (40 United States Code 193v), are each amended by inserting after ``numbered 844/82563, and dated April 20, 1994'' the following: ``(as amended by the map entitled `Transfer of John Federal Reporter Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts', numbered 844/82563a and dated May 22, 1997)''.
CONSTRUCTION OF A CENTER FOR PERFORMING ARTS.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States has an enriched legacy of Hispanic influence in politics, government, economic development, and cultural expression.
The Hispanic culture in what is now the United States can be traced to 1528 when a Spanish expedition from Cuba to Florida was shipwrecked on the Texas coast.
The Hispanic culture in New Mexico can be traced to 1539 when a Spanish Franciscan Friar, Marcos de Niza, and his guide, Estevanico, traveled into present day New Mexico in search of the fabled city of Cibola and made contact with the people of Zuni.
The Hispanic influence in New Mexico is particularly dominant and a part of daily living for all the citizens of New Mexico, who are a diverse composite of racial, ethnic, and cultural peoples.
Don Juan de Oarte and the first New Mexican families established the first capital in the United States, San Juan de los Cabelleros, in July of 1598.
Based on the 1990 census, there are approximately 650,000 Hispanics in New Mexico, the majority having roots reaching back ten or more generations.
There are an additional 200,000 Hispanics living outside of New Mexico with roots in New Mexico.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center is a living tribute to the Hispanic experience and will provide all citizens of New Mexico, the Southwestern United States, the entire United States, and around the world, an opportunity to learn about, partake in, and enjoy the unique Hispanic culture, and the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will assure that this 400-year old culture is preserved.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will teach, showcase, and share all facets of Hispanic culture, including literature, performing arts, visual arts, culinary arts, and language arts.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will promote a better cross-cultural understanding of the Hispanic culture and the contributions of individuals to the society in which we all live.
In 1993, the legislature and Governor of New Mexico created the Hispanic Cultural Division as a division within the Office of Cultural Affairs.
One of the principal responsibilities of the Hispanic Cultural Division is to oversee the planning, construction, and operation of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
The mission of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center is to create a greater appreciation and understanding of Hispanic culture.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will serve as a local, regional, national, and international site for the study and advancement of Hispanic culture, expressing both the rich history and the forward-looking aspirations of Hispanics throughout the world.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will be a Hispanic arts and humanities showcase to display the works of national and international artists, and to provide a venue for educators, scholars, artists, children, elders, and the general public.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will provide a venue for presenting the historic and contemporary representations and achievements of the Hispanic culture.
The New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center will sponsor arts and humanities programs, including programs related to visual arts of all forms (including drama, dance, and traditional and contemporary music), research, literary arts, genealogy, oral history, publications, and special events such as, fiestas, culinary arts demonstrations, film video productions, storytelling presentations and education programs.
Phase I of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center complex is scheduled to be completed by August of 1998 and is planned to consist of an art gallery with exhibition space and a museum, administrative offices, a restaurant, a ballroom, a gift shop, an amphitheater, a research and literary arts center, and other components.
Phase II of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center complex is planned to include a performing arts center (containing a 700-seat theater, a stage house, and a 300-seat film/video theater), a 150-seat black box theater, an art studio building, a culinary arts building, and a research and literary arts building.
It is appropriate for the Federal Government to share in the cost of constructing the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center because Congress recognizes that the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center has the potential to be a premier facility for performing arts and a national repository for Hispanic arts and culture.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Center.--The term ``Center'' means the Center for Performing Arts, within the complex known as the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center, which Center for the Performing Arts is a central facility in Phase II of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center complex.
Hispanic cultural division.--The term ``Hispanic Cultural Division'' means the Hispanic Cultural Division of the Office of Cultural Affairs of the State of New Mexico.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Construction of Center.--The Secretary shall award a grant to New Mexico to pay for the Federal share of the costs of the design, construction, furnishing, and equipping of the Center for Performing Arts that will be located at a site to be determined by the Hispanic Cultural Division, within the complex known as the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
Grant Requirements.-- (1) In general.--In order to receive a grant awarded under subsection (c), New Mexico, acting through the Director of the Hispanic Cultural Division-- (A) shall submit to the Secretary, within 30 days of the date of enactment of this section, a copy of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center Program document dated January 1996; and (B) shall exercise due diligence to expeditiously execute, in a period not to exceed 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the memorandum of understanding under paragraph (2) recognizing that time is of the essence for the construction of the Center because 1998 marks the 400th anniversary of the first permanent Spanish settlement in New Mexico.
Memorandum of understanding.--The memorandum of understanding described in paragraph (1) shall provide-- (A) the date of completion of the construction of the Center; (B) that Antoine Predock, an internationally recognized architect, shall be the supervising architect for the construction of the Center; (C) that the Director of the Hispanic Cultural Division shall award the contract for architectural engineering and design services in accordance with the New Mexico Procurement Code; and (D) that the contract for the construction of the Center-- (i) shall be awarded pursuant to a competitive bidding process; and (ii) shall be awarded not later than 3 months after the solicitation for bids for the construction of the Center.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall be in cash or in kind fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
The non- Federal share shall include any contribution received by New Mexico for the design, construction, furnishing, or equipping of Phase I or Phase II of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center complex prior to the date of enactment of this section.
The non-Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall include the following: (A) $16,410,000 that was appropriated by the New Mexico legislature since January 1, 1993, for the planning, property acquisition, design, construction, furnishing, and equipping of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center complex.
$116,000 that was appropriated by the New Mexico legislature for fiscal year 1995 for the startup and operating expenses of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
$226,000 that was appropriated by the New Mexico legislature for fiscal year 1996 for the startup and operating expenses of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
$442,000 that was appropriated by the New Mexico legislature for fiscal year 1997 for the startup and operating expenses of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
$551,000 that was appropriated by the New Mexico legislature for fiscal year 1998 for the startup and operating expenses of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
A 10.9-acre lot with a historic 22,000 square foot building donated by the Mayor and City Council of Albuquerque, New Mexico, to New Mexico for the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
12 acres of ``Bosque'' land adjacent to the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center complex for use by the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
The $30,000 donation by the Sandia National Laboratories and Lockheed Martin Corporation to support the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center and the program activities of the New Mexico Hispanic Cultural Center.
Use of Funds for Design, Construction, Furnishing, and Equipment.--The funds received under a grant awarded under subsection (c) shall be used only for the design, construction, management and inspection, furnishing, and equipment of the Center.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section a total of $17,800,000 for fiscal year 1998 and succeeding fiscal years.
Funds appropriated pursuant to the authority of the preceding sentence shall remain available until expended.
CONSTRUCTION OF A CENTER FOR REGIONAL BLACK CULTURE.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Currently 500,000 historically important artifacts of the Civil War era and the early days of the civil rights movement in the Southeast region of the United States are housed at Florida A&M University.
To preserve this large repertory of African-American history and artifacts it is appropriate that the Federal Government share in the cost of construction of this national repository for culture and history.
Definition.--In this section: (1) Center.--The term ``Center'' relates to the Center for Historically Black Heritage at Florida A&M University.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior Acting through the director of the Park Service.
Construction of Center.--The Secretary shall award a grant to the State of Florida to pay for the Federal share of the costs design construction, furnishing and equipping the Center at Florida A&M University.
Grant Requirements.-- (1) In general.--In order to receive the grant awarded under subsection (c), Florida A&M University, shall submit to the Secretary a proposal.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the costs described in subsection (c) shall be 50 percent.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out this section a total of $3,800,000 for fiscal year 1998 and preceding fiscal years.
Funds appropriated pursuant to the authority of the preceding sentence should remain available until expended.
RELOCATION AND EXPANSION OF HAFFENREFFER MUSEUM OF ANTHROPOLOGY.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the Haffenreffer Museum of Anthropology at Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Relocation and Expansion of Museum.--The Secretary shall make a grant to Brown University in Providence, Rhode Island, to pay the Federal share of the costs associated with the relocation and expansion of the Museum, including the design, construction, renovation, restoration, furnishing, and equipping of the Museum.
Grant Requirements.-- (1) In general.--To receive a grant under subsection (b), the Museum shall submit to the Secretary a proposal for the use of the grant.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the costs described in subsection (b) shall be 20 percent.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $3,000,000, to remain available until expended.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall award a grant to Juniata College for the construction of environmental research facilities and structures at Raystown Lake, Pennsylvania.
Coordination.--As a condition to receipt of the grant authorized in subsection (a), officials of Juniata College shall coordinate with the Baltimore District of the Army Corps of Engineers.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 to carry out this section.
FORT PECK DAM INTERPRETIVE CENTER.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall design, construct, furnish and equip an historical, cultural and paleontological interpretive center and museum to be located at Fort Peck Dam, Montana.
Coordination.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary of the Interior shall coordinate with officials of the Bureau of Reclamation, Bureau of Land Management, United States Army Corps of Engineers and the Fort Peck Dam Interpretive Center and Museum.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section a total of $10,000,000.
Funds appropriated are available until expended.
Passed the Senate July 31, 1997.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.