This Act may be cited as the ``Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act''.
CREATION OF GENERAL RULES RELATING TO CIVIL FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS.
Section 981 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting after subsection (i) the following: ``(j)(1)(A) In any nonjudicial civil forfeiture proceeding under a civil forfeiture statute, with respect to which the agency conducting a seizure of property must give written notice to interested parties, such notice shall be given as soon as practicable and in no case more than 60 days after the later of the date of the seizure or the date the identity of the interested party is first known or discovered by the agency, except that the court may extend the period for filing a notice for good cause shown.
A person entitled to written notice in such proceeding to whom written notice is not given may on motion void the forfeiture with respect to that person's interest in the property, unless the agency shows-- ``(i) good cause for the failure to give notice to that person; or ``(ii) that the person otherwise had actual notice of the seizure.
If the government does not provide notice of a seizure of property in accordance with subparagraph (A), it shall return the property and may not take any further action to effect the forfeiture of such property.
(A) Any person claiming such seized property may file a claim with the appropriate official after the seizure.
A claim under subparagraph (A) may not be filed later than 30 days after-- ``(i) the date of final publication of notice of seizure; or ``(ii) in the case of a person entitled to written notice, the date that notice is given.
The claim shall state the claimant's interest in the property.
Not later than 90 days after a claim has been filed, the Attorney General shall file a complaint for forfeiture in the appropriate court or return the property, except that a court in the district in which the complaint will be filed may extend the period for filing a complaint for good cause shown or upon agreement of the parties.
If the government does not file a complaint for forfeiture of property in accordance with subparagraph (D), it shall return the property and may not take any further action to effect the forfeiture of such property.
(A) If the person filing a claim is financially unable to obtain representation by counsel, the court may appoint counsel to represent that person with respect to the claim.
In determining whether to appoint counsel to represent the person filing the claim, the court shall take into account-- ``(i) the nature and value of the property subject to forfeiture, including the hardship to the claimant from the loss of the property seized, compared to the expense of appointing counsel; ``(ii) the claimant's standing to contest the forfeiture; and ``(iii) whether the claim appears to be made in good faith or to be frivolous.
The court shall set the compensation for that representation, which shall-- ``(i) be equivalent to that provided for court-appointed representation under section 3006A of this title, and ``(ii) be paid from the Justice Assets Forfeiture Fund established under section 524 of title 28, or in a case under the jurisdiction of the Treasury Department, from the Customs Forfeiture Fund established under section 613A of the Tariff Act of 1930.
In all suits or actions (other than those arising under section 592 of the Tariff Act of 1930) brought for the civil forfeiture of any property, the burden of proof is on the United States Government to establish, by clear and convincing evidence, that the property is subject to forfeiture.
(A) An innocent owner's interest in property shall not be forfeited under any civil forfeiture statute.
With respect to a property interest in existence at the time the illegal conduct giving rise to forfeiture took place, the term `innocent owner' means an owner who-- ``(i) did not know of the conduct giving rise to forfeiture; or ``(ii) upon learning of the conduct giving rise to the forfeiture, did all that reasonably could be expected under the circumstances to terminate such use of the property.
With respect to a property interest acquired after the conduct giving rise to forfeiture has taken place, the term `innocent owner' means a person who, at the time that person acquired the interest in the property, did not know-- ``(i)(I) of the conduct giving rise to the forfeiture; and ``(II) that the property was involved in, or the proceeds of, that conduct; or ``(ii) that the Government was seeking forfeiture of that property.
For the purposes of paragraph (5) of this subsection-- ``(A) a person may show that such person did all that reasonably can be expected, among other ways, by demonstrating that such person, to the extent permitted by law-- ``(i) gave timely notice to an appropriate law enforcement agency of information that led the person to know the conduct giving rise to a forfeiture would occur or has occurred; and ``(ii) in a timely fashion revoked permission for those engaging in such conduct to use the property or took reasonable actions in consultation with a law enforcement agency to discourage or prevent the illegal use of the property; and ``(B) in order to do all that can reasonably be expected, a person is not required to take steps that the person reasonably believes would be likely to subject the person to physical danger.
As used in this section, the term `civil forfeiture statute' means any provision of Federal law providing for the forfeiture of property other than as a sentence imposed upon conviction of a criminal offense.
(1) A claimant under subsection (j) is entitled to immediate release of seized property if-- ``(A) the claimant has a possessory interest in the property; ``(B) the continued possession by the United States Government pending the final disposition of forfeiture proceedings will cause substantial hardship to the claimant, such as preventing the functioning of a business, preventing an individual from working, or leaving an individual homeless; and ``(C) the claimant's likely hardship from the continued possession by the United States Government of the seized property outweighs the risk that the property will be destroyed, damaged, lost, concealed, or transferred if it is returned to the claimant during the pendency of the proceeding.
A claimant seeking release of property under this subsection must request possession of the property from the appropriate official, and the request must set forth the basis on which the requirements of paragraph (1) are met.
If within 10 days after the date of the request the property has not been released, the claimant may file a motion or complaint in any district court that would have jurisdiction of forfeiture proceedings relating to the property setting forth-- ``(A) the basis on which the requirements of paragraph (1) are met; and ``(B) the steps the claimant has taken to secure release of the property from the appropriate official.
If a motion or complaint is filed under paragraph (3), the district court shall order that the property be returned to the claimant, pending completion of proceedings by the United States Government to obtain forfeiture of the property, if the claimant shows that the requirements of paragraph (1) have been met.
The court may place such conditions on release of the property as it finds are appropriate to preserve the availability of the property or its equivalent for forfeiture.
The district court shall render a decision on a motion or complaint filed under paragraph (3) no later than 30 days after the date of the filing, unless such 30-day limitation is extended by consent of the parties or by the court for good cause shown.
''; and (2) by redesignating existing subsection (j) as subsection (l).
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO TITLE 28, TO RULES OF PROCEDURE, AND TO THE CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ACT.
Use of Assets Forfeiture Fund for Attorney Fees.--Section 524(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking out ``law enforcement purposes--'' in the matter preceding subparagraph (A) in paragraph (1) and inserting ``purposes--''; (2) by redesignating the final 3 subparagraphs in paragraph (1) as subparagraphs (J), (K), and (L), respectively; (3) by inserting after subparagraph (G) of paragraph (1) the following new subparagraph: ``(H) payment of court-awarded compensation for representation of claimants pursuant to section 981 of title 18; ``(I) payment of compensation for damages to property under section 5(b) of the Civil Asset Forfeiture Reform Act;''; and (4) by striking out ``(H)'' in subparagraph (A) of paragraph (9) and inserting ``(I)''.
In Rem Proceedings.--Paragraph (6) of Rule C of the Supplemental Rules for Certain Admiralty and Maritime Claims to the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure (28 United States Code Appendix) is amended by striking ``10 days'' and inserting ``30 days''.
Controlled Substances Act.--Section 518 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 888) is repealed.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS TO REVENUE LAWS.
In General.--Section 615 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1615) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
APPLICATION OF TITLE 18, UNITED STATES CODE TO FORFEITURE PROCEEDINGS.
``Those portions of section 981 of title 18, United States Code, that apply generally to civil forfeiture procedures apply also to any civil forfeiture proceeding relating to the condemnation or forfeiture of property for violation of the customs laws.''.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 608 of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1608) is repealed.
Time for Filing Claims.--Section 609(a) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1609) is amended-- (1) by striking ``twenty'' and inserting ``30''; and (2) by striking ``or bond''.
Treasury Asset Forfeiture Fund.--Section 613A(a)(3) of the Tariff Act of 1930 (19 United States Code 1613b(a)(3)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (E); (2) by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (F) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(G) payment of court-awarded compensation for representation of claimants pursuant to section 981 of title 18, United States Code.''.
Forfeiture of Personal Property.--Section 7325 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2), by striking ``for 3 weeks'' through ``such notice'' and inserting ``in accordance with section 981(j)(1) of title 18, United States Code''; (2) in paragraph (3), by amending the head to read ``Filing of claim'' and by striking ``stating his interest in the articles seized'' through ``description of the goods seized,'' and inserting ``stating such person's interest in the articles seized.
Such person shall transmit a duplicate list or description of the goods seized''; and (3) in paragraph (4), by amending the heading to read ``Sale'' and by striking ``and no bond is given within the time above specified''.
COMPENSATION FOR DAMAGE TO SEIZED PROPERTY.
Tort Claims Act.--Section 2680(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``law-enforcement'' and inserting ``law enforcement''; and (2) by inserting before the period the following: ``, except that the provisions of this chapter and section 1346(b) of this title do apply to any claim based on the negligent destruction, injury, or loss of goods, merchandise, or other property, while in the possession of any officer of customs or excise or any other law enforcement officer, if the property was seized for the purpose of forfeiture but the interest of the claimant is not forfeited''.
Department of Justice.-- (1) In general.--With respect to a claim that cannot be settled under chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, the Attorney General may settle, for not more than $50,000 in any case, a claim for damage to, or loss of, privately owned property caused by an investigative or law enforcement officer (as defined in section 2680(h) of title 28, United States Code) who is employed by the Department of Justice acting within the scope of his or her employment.
Limitations.--The Attorney General may not pay a claim under paragraph (1) that-- (A) is presented to the Attorney General more than 1 year after it occurs; or (B) is presented by an officer or employee of the United States Government and arose within the scope of employment.
PREJUDGMENT AND POSTJUDGMENT INTEREST.
Section 2465 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Upon''; and (2) adding at the end the following: ``(b) Interest.-- ``(1) Post-judgment.--Upon entry of judgment for the claimant in any proceeding to condemn or forfeit property seized or arrested under any Act of Congress, the United States shall be liable for post-judgment interest as set forth in section 1961 of this title.
Pre-judgment.--The United States shall not be liable for prejudgment interest, except that in cases involving currency, other negotiable instruments, or the proceeds of an interlocutory sale, the United States shall disgorge to the claimant any funds representing-- ``(A) interest actually paid to the United States from the date of seizure or arrest of the property that resulted from the investment of the property in an interest-bearing account or instrument; and ``(B) for any period during which no interest is actually paid, an imputed amount of interest that such currency, instruments, or proceeds would have earned at the rate described in section 1961.
Limitation on other payments.--The United States shall not be required to disgorge the value of any intangible benefits nor make any other payments to the claimant not specifically authorized by this subsection.''.
In General.--Unless otherwise specified in this Act, the amendments made by this Act apply with respect to claims, suits, and actions filed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Exceptions.-- (1) The standard for the required burden of proof set forth in section 981 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by section 2, shall apply in cases pending on the date of the enactment of this Act.
The amendment made by section 6 shall apply to any judgment entered after the date of enactment of this Act.