COMMUNICATION SITE USE FEES.
Fees.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture (hereinafter referred to as the ``Secretaries''), shall assess and collect charges for utilization of radio and television communications sites located on Federal lands administered by the Forest Service or the Bureau of Land Management at such rates as the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management shall establish or at such modified rates as are established pursuant to the provisions of subsection (b) of this section.
Adjustments.--(1) The Schedule of Charges established under this section shall be reviewed by the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management on an annual basis, and shall be adjusted by the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management to reflect changes in the Consumer Price Index.
Increases or decreases in charges shall apply to all categories of charges, but any increase or decrease shall not total less than 3 percent or more than 5 percent of the charge assessed to the user in the preceding year.
The Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service shall transmit to the Congress notification of any such adjustment not later than 60 days before the effective date of such adjustment.
Under the Schedule of Changes established under the section, if any radio or television communications site user is to be charged an amount that is greater than $1,000 more than the amount such site user pays to the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service as of January 1, 1993, then during the first year in which the Schedule of Charges is in effect, such site user shall pay an amount equal to the amount it paid to the Bureau of Land Management of the Forest Service as of January 1, 1993, plus $1,000.
Each year thereafter, such site user shall pay the full amount under the Schedule of Charges, as modified pursuant to the subsection.
Under the Schedule of Charges established under this section, if any radio or television communications site user is to be charged an amount that is less than the amount such site user paid to the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service as of January 1, 1993, then such site user shall continue to pay the higher amount until such time as the charge to the site user in the Schedule of Charges equals or exceeds that amount, as modified pursuant to this subsection.
Additional Users.--(1) If the radio or television communications site user is permitted under the terms of its site use authorization from the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service to grant access to the site to additional users, then the radio or television communications site user shall pay annually to the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service an amount equal to 25 percent of the gross income it receives from each such additional user during that year.
Authorizations to radio and television communications site users shall require such site users to provide the Bureau of Land Management or the Forest Service with a certified list which identifies all additional users of such sites and all gross revenues received from such additional users.
The Bureau of Land Management and the Forest Service shall not require any additional user of a radio or television communications site to obtain a separate authorization to use such a site.
Administrative Provisions.--(1) The Secretaries shall prescribe appropriate rules and regulations to carry out the provisions of this section.
Ten years after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretaries shall establish a broad-based advisory group, including representatives from the radio and television broadcast industry, to review the Schedule of Charges and other acceptable criteria for determining fair market value for radio and television communications site uses.
The advisory group shall report its findings to the Congress no later than 1 year after it is established.
Existing Charges.--(1) Until modified pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the Schedule of Charges for television communications site users which the Secretaries shall prescribe pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be as listed in exhibit 3 (television rental fee schedule) in the report of the radio and television broadcast use fee advisory committee dated December 1992.
Until modified pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, the Schedule of Charges for radio communications site users which the Secretaries shall prescribe pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be as listed in exhibit 4, radio rental fee schedule in the report of the radio and television broadcast use fee advisory committee dated December 1992.
NONBROADCAST COMMUNICATION SITE ADVISORY BOARD.
Establishment.--The Secretaries of the Interior and Agriculture are directed to jointly establish a broad-based advisory group comprised of representatives from the nonbroadcast communications industry (users of both private and public communication sites) and the 2 agencies to review recommendations on acceptable criteria for determining fair market values and next best alternative use.
Review.--The advisory group shall review the methodology used in any previous studies and reach concurrence on such methodology.
Assessments.--The advisory group shall also assess the validity of the results of such studies, taking into account all reasonable options for the establishment of fair market values and next best alternative use.
Report.--The advisory group shall report its findings to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives within 1 year after the enactment of this Act.