This Act may be cited as the ``Historic Homeownership Assistance Act''.
HISTORIC HOMEOWNERSHIP REHABILITATION CREDIT.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
HISTORIC HOMEOWNERSHIP REHABILITATION CREDIT.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 20 percent of the qualified rehabilitation expenditures made by the taxpayer with respect to a qualified historic home.
Dollar Limitation.-- ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) with respect to any residence of a taxpayer shall not exceed $50,000 ($25,000 in the case of a married individual filing a separate return).
Carryforward of credit unused by reason of limitation based on tax liability.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this subpart (other than this section), such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
Qualified Rehabilitation Expenditure.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified rehabilitation expenditure' means any amount properly chargeable to capital account-- ``(A) in connection with the certified rehabilitation of a qualified historic home, and ``(B) for property for which depreciation would be allowable under section 168 if the qualified historic home were used in a trade or business.
Certain expenditures not included.-- ``(A) Exterior.--Such term shall not include any expenditure in connection with the rehabilitation of a building unless at least 5 percent of the total expenditures made in the rehabilitation process are allocable to the rehabilitation of the exterior of such building.
Other rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of clauses (ii) and (iii) of section 47(c)(2)(B) shall apply.
Mixed use or multifamily building.--If only a portion of a building is used as the principal residence of the taxpayer, only qualified rehabilitation expenditures which are properly allocable to such portion shall be taken into account under this section.
Certified Rehabilitation.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the term `certified rehabilitation' has the meaning given such term by section 47(c)(2)(C).
Factors to be considered in the case of targeted area residences, etc.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of applying section 47(c)(2)(C) under this section with respect to the rehabilitation of a building to which this paragraph applies, consideration shall be given to-- ``(i) the feasibility of preserving existing architectural and design elements of the interior of such building, ``(ii) the risk of further deterioration or demolition of such building in the event that certification is denied because of the failure to preserve such interior elements, and ``(iii) the effects of such deterioration or demolition on neighboring historic properties.
Buildings to which this paragraph applies.-- This paragraph shall apply with respect to any building-- ``(i) any part of which is a targeted area residence within the meaning of section 143(j)(1), or ``(ii) which is located within an enterprise or empowerment zone, but shall not apply with respect to any building which is listed in the National Register or a State or local register of historic places.
Cooperative agreements.--The term `certified rehabilitation' includes a certification made in accordance with a cooperative agreement between the Secretary of the Interior and a State Historic Preservation Officer which authorizes such officer (or a local government certified pursuant to section 101(c)(1) of the National Historic Preservation Act), subject to such terms or conditions as may be specified in such agreement, to certify the rehabilitation of buildings within the jurisdiction of such officer (or local government) for purposes of this section.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Qualified historic home.--The term `qualified historic home' means a certified historic structure-- ``(A) which has been substantially rehabilitated, and ``(B) which (or any portion of which)-- ``(i) is owned by the taxpayer, and ``(ii) is used (or will, within a reasonable period, be used) by such taxpayer as his principal residence.
Substantially rehabilitated.--The term `substantially rehabilitated' has the meaning given such term by section 47(c)(1)(C); except that, in the case of any building described in subsection (d)(2), clause (i)(I) thereof shall not apply.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 1034.
Certified historic structure.--The term `certified historic structure' has the meaning given such term by section 47(c)(3).
Enterprise or empowerment zone.--The term `enterprise or empowerment zone' means any area designated under section 1391 as an enterprise community or an empowerment zone.
Rehabilitation not complete before certification.--A rehabilitation shall not be treated as complete before the date of the certification referred to in subsection (d).
Lessees.--A taxpayer who leases his principal residence shall, for purposes of this section, be treated as the owner thereof if the remaining term of the lease (as of the date determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary) is not less than such minimum period as the regulations require.
When Expenditures Taken Into Account.--In the case of a building other than a building to which subsection (g) applies, qualified rehabilitation expenditures shall be treated for purposes of this section as made-- ``(1) on the date the rehabilitation is completed, or ``(2) to the extent provided by the Secretary by regulation, when such expenditures are properly chargeable to capital account.
Regulations under paragraph (2) shall include a rule similar to the rule under section 50(a)(2) (relating to recapture if property ceases to qualify for progress expenditures).
Allowance of Credit for Purchase of Rehabilitated Historic Home.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a qualified purchased historic home, the taxpayer shall be treated as having made (on the date of purchase) the qualified rehabilitation expenditures made by the seller of such home.
Qualified purchased historic home.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified purchased historic home' means any substantially rehabilitated certified historic structure purchased by the taxpayer if-- ``(A) the taxpayer is the first purchaser of such structure after the date rehabilitation is completed, and the purchase occurs within 5 years after such date, ``(B) the structure (or a portion thereof) will, within a reasonable period, be the principal residence of the taxpayer, ``(C) no credit was allowed to the seller under this section or section 47 with respect to such rehabilitation, and ``(D) the taxpayer is furnished with such information as the Secretary determines is necessary to determine the credit under this subsection.
Historic Rehabilitation Mortgage Credit Certificate.-- ``(1) In general.--The taxpayer may elect, in lieu of the credit otherwise allowable under this section, to receive a historic rehabilitation mortgage credit certificate.
An election under this paragraph shall be made-- ``(A) in the case of a building to which subsection (g) applies, at the time of purchase, or ``(B) in any other case, at the time rehabilitation is completed.
Historic rehabilitation mortgage credit certificate.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `historic rehabilitation mortgage credit certificate' means a certificate-- ``(A) issued to the taxpayer, in accordance with procedures prescribed by the Secretary, with respect to a certified rehabilitation, ``(B) the face amount of which shall be equal to the credit which would (but for this subsection) be allowable under subsection (a) to the taxpayer with respect to such rehabilitation, ``(C) which may only be transferred by the taxpayer to a lending institution in connection with a loan-- ``(i) that is secured by the building with respect to which the credit relates, and ``(ii) the proceeds of which may not be used for any purpose other than the acquisition or rehabilitation of such building, and ``(D) in exchange for which such lending institution provides the taxpayer a reduction (determined as provided in such regulations) in the rate of interest on the loan.
Use of certificate by lender.--The amount of the credit specified in the certificate shall be allowed to the lender only to offset the regular tax (as defined in section 55(c)) of such lender.
The lender may carry forward all unused amounts under this subsection until exhausted.
Recapture.-- ``(1) In general.--If, before the end of the 5-year period beginning on the date on which the rehabilitation of the building is completed (or, if subsection (g) applies, the date of purchase of such building by the taxpayer)-- ``(A) the taxpayer disposes of such taxpayer's interest in such building, or ``(B) such building ceases to be used as the principal residence of the taxpayer, the taxpayer's tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which such disposition or cessation occurs shall be increased by the recapture percentage of the credit allowed under this section for all prior taxable years with respect to such rehabilitation.
Recapture percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the recapture percentage shall be determined in accordance with the table under section 50(a)(1)(B), deeming such table to be amended-- ``(A) by striking `If the property ceases to be investment credit property within--' and inserting `If the disposition or cessation occurs within--', and ``(B) in clause (i) by striking `One full year after placed in service' and inserting `One full year after the taxpayer becomes entitled to the credit'.
Basis Adjustments.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to any property (including any purchase under subsection (g) and any transfer under subsection (h)), the increase in the basis of such property which would (but for this subsection) result from such expenditure shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so allowed.
Processing Fees.--Proceeds of fees levied for the processing of applications for the certification of any rehabilitation under this section-- ``(1) shall be deposited in a trust fund, and ``(2) subject to appropriations Acts, may be used only to defray expenses associated with the processing of such applications.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for any amount for which credit is allowed under section 47.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations where less than all of a building is used as a principal residence and where more than 1 taxpayer use the same dwelling unit as their principal residence.''
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (24), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (25) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new item: ``(26) to the extent provided in section 23(j).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
Historic homeownership rehabilitation credit.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to rehabilitations the physical work on which begins after the date of enactment of this Act.