This Act may be cited as the ``Law Enforcement and Industrial Security Cooperation Act of 1996''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Seventy percent of all money invested in crime prevention and law enforcement each year in the United States is spent by the private sector.
There are nearly three employees in private sector security for every one in public law enforcement.
More than half of the responses to crime come from private security.
A bipartisan study commission specially constituted for the purposes of examining appropriate cooperative roles between public sector law enforcement and private sector security will be able to offer comprehensive proposals for statutory and procedural initiatives.
The purposes of the Commission are as follows: (1) To identify critical issues in crime control and law enforcement which may be better addressed through improved cooperation between public law enforcement agencies and private sector security professionals.
To examine existing models of public-private cooperation and, through consultation with leading authorities in law enforcement, private security, criminal justice and business, improve such models or develop new models that promote cooperation between public law enforcement and private security.
To encourage public agencies and private businesses and institutions to make use of effective models for cooperation in crime control and law enforcement.
To analyze Federal, State, and local statutes which either enhance or inhibit cooperation between public law enforcement and private security and to recommend changes to such laws which would have the effect of enhancing cooperation between public sector law enforcement agencies and private sector security professionals.
ESTABLISHMENT AND COMPOSITION OF THE COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Law Enforcement and Industrial Security Cooperation Commission (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members, as follows: (1) 3 members to be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate who shall select such members from a list of nominees provided by the Chairperson of the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate.
Of the 3, one shall be a Member of the Senate, one shall be a representative of public law enforcement, and one shall be a representative of private security.
3 members to be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate who shall select such members from a list of nominees provided by the ranking minority member of the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate.
Of the 3, one shall be a Member of the Senate, one shall be a representative of public law enforcement, and one shall be a representative of private security.
3 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives who shall select such members from a list of nominees provided by the chairperson of the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives.
Of the 3, one shall be a Member of the House, one shall be a representative of public law enforcement, and one shall be a representative of private security.
3 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives who shall select such members from a list of nominees provided by the ranking minority member of the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives.
Of the 3, one shall be a Member of the House, one shall be a representative of public law enforcement, and one shall be a representative of private security.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member was appointed to the Commission as a Member of Congress and the member ceases to be a Member of Congress, or was appointed to the Commission because the member was not an officer or employee of any government and later becomes an officer or employee of a government, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 30-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be a Member of Congress, or becomes such an officer or employee, as the case may be.
Chairperson.--The Commission shall elect a chairperson from among its members.
Quorum; Vacancy.-- (1) In general.--After its initial meeting, the Commission shall meet upon the call of the chairperson or a majority of its members.
Seven members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, except a lesser number may hold hearings.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers but shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Appointment of Members; Meeting.-- (1) Appointment of members.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Meeting.--If after 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, 7 or more members of the Commission have been appointed, the members who have been appointed may meet and select a chairperson who thereafter shall have authority to begin the operations of the Commission, including the hiring of staff.
COMPENSATION AND TRAVEL EXPENSES.
Compensation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), a member of the Commission whose services are not donated by such member's employer may be compensated at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which such member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Limitation.--Members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress shall receive no additional pay on account of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings and Subpoenas.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, take such testimony, receive such evidence, and require by subpoena the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such materials as the Commission considers appropriate.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency may furnish such information to the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Contracting.--The Commission may enter into contracts to enable the Commission to discharge its duties under this Act.
Assistance From Federal Agencies.-- (1) In general.--Financing of the Commission and its activities will come from corporate, foundation, and individual contributions.
No special appropriation of Federal funds shall be made for the purposes of this Act.
Federal services.--Departments and agencies of the United States are authorized, however, to provide to the Commission such services, funds, facilities, staff, and other support services as they may deem advisable for the purposes of this Act and as may be authorized by law.
Gifts.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
Staff.--The Commission chairperson, in accordance with rules agreed upon by the Commission and reasonable limitations imposed by budget, may appoint a staff director and such other personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its functions.
The staff director and other personnel may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Consultants and Experts.--The Commission is authorized to procure the services of experts and consultants in accordance with budgetary strictures.
The Commission shall submit to Congress and the Attorney General, not later than 2 years after the date of its first meeting, a final report containing such recommendations concerning methods and activities that promote cooperation between public sector law enforcement agencies and private sector security professionals, including proposing new or changed procedures, rules, regulations, or legislation.
Not later than 60 days after submitting its final report pursuant to section 8 the Commission shall terminate.