This Act may be cited as the ``Medication Errors Reduction Act of 2001''.
INFORMATICS SYSTEMS GRANT PROGRAM FOR HOSPITALS AND SKILLED NURSING FACILITIES.
Grants.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall establish a program to make grants to eligible entities that have submitted applications in accordance with subsection (b) for the purpose of assisting such entities in offsetting the costs related to purchasing, leasing, developing, and implementing standardized clinical health care informatics systems designed to improve patient safety and reduce adverse events and health care complications resulting from medication errors.
Duration.--The authority of the Secretary to make grants under this section shall terminate on September 30, 2011.
Costs defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``costs'' shall include total expenditures incurred for-- (A) purchasing, leasing, and installing computer software and hardware, including handheld computer technologies; (B) making improvements to existing computer software and hardware; (C) purchasing or leasing communications capabilities necessary for clinical data access, storage, and exchange; and (D) providing education and training to eligible entity staff on computer patient safety information systems.
Eligible entity defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means the following entities: (A) Hospital.--A hospital (as defined in section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(e))).
Skilled nursing facility.--A skilled nursing facility (as defined in section 1819(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395i-3(e))).
Application.--An eligible entity seeking a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form and manner, and containing such information as the Secretary specifies.
Special Consideration for Eligible Entities that Serve a Large Number of Medicare and Medicaid Eligible Individuals.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give special consideration to eligible entities in which individuals that are eligible for benefits under the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act or the medicaid program under title XIX of such Act make up a high percentage of the total patient population of the entity.
Limitation on Amount of Grant.-- (1) In general.--A grant awarded under this section may not exceed the lesser of-- (A) an amount equal to the applicable percentage of the costs incurred by the eligible entity for the project for which the entity is seeking funding under this section; or (B) in the case of a grant made to a-- (i) hospital, $750,000; or (ii) skilled nursing facility, $200,000.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), the term ``applicable percentage'' means, with respect to an eligible entity, the percentage of total net revenues for such period as determined appropriate by the Secretary for the entity that consists of net revenues from the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Eligible Entity Required To Furnish Secretary With Information.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under this section shall furnish the Secretary with such information as the Secretary may require to-- (1) evaluate the project for which the grant is made; and (2) ensure that funding provided under the grant is expended for the purposes for which it is made.
Reports.-- (1) Interim reports.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall submit, at least annually, a report to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate on the grant program established under this section.
Contents.--A report submitted pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall include information on-- (i) the number of grants made; (ii) the nature of the projects for which funding is provided under the grant program; (iii) the geographic distribution of grant recipients; and (iv) such other matters as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Final report.--Not later than 180 days after the completion of all of the projects for which a grant is made under this section, the Secretary shall submit a final report to the committees referred to in paragraph (1)(A) on the grant program established under this section, together with such recommendations for legislation and administrative action as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Authorization.-- (A) Hospitals.--There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i) $93,000,000, for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2011, for the purpose of making grants under this section to eligible entities that are hospitals.
Skilled nursing facilities.--There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund under section 1817 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395i) $4,500,000, for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2011, for the purpose of making grants under this section to eligible entities that are skilled nursing facilities.
Availability.--Any amounts appropriated pursuant to the authority contained in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, through September 30, 2011.