This Act may be cited as the ``Midwest Clean Air Gasoline Reserve Act''.
AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH RESERVE.
The Secretary of Energy may establish, maintain, and operate in the Midwest a Midwest Clean Air Gasoline Reserve.
A Reserve established under this Act is not a component of the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.
A Reserve established under this Act shall contain no more than 1,000,000 barrels of reformulated gasoline.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Midwest'' means the States or parts of States of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Nebraska, North Dakota, Ohio, South Dakota, and Wisconsin which are required by the Environmental Protection Agency under section 211(k) of the Clear Air Act to use reformulated gasoline; and (2) the term ``reformulated gasoline'' includes any of the compositions of gasoline which are required by the Environmental Protection Agency, under section 211(k) of the Clean Air Act, to be used.
To the extent necessary or appropriate to carry out this Act, the Secretary of Energy may-- (1) purchase, contract for, lease, or otherwise acquire, in whole or in part, storage and related facilities, and storage services; (2) use, lease, maintain, sell, or otherwise dispose of storage and related facilities required under this Act; (3) acquire by purchase, exchange (including exchange of petroleum products from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve or received as royalty from Federal lands), lease, or otherwise-- (A) reformulated gasoline; or (B) petroleum products for refinement into reformulated gasoline, for storage in the Midwest Clean Air Gasoline Reserve; (4) enter into contracts or other arrangements for the storage of reformulated gasoline or other petroleum products in facilities not owned by the United States; and (5) sell, exchange, or otherwise dispose of reformulated gasoline or other petroleum products from the Reserve established under this Act pursuant to section 5.
CONDITIONS FOR RELEASE; PLAN.
Conditions for Release.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary of Energy may release reformulated gasoline only in the event of-- (1) a severe energy supply disruption; (2) a severe price increase; or (3) another emergency affecting the Midwest, which the President determines to merit a release from the Reserve.
Exception.--The Secretary of Energy may, on terms the Secretary considers reasonable, sell, exchange, or otherwise dispose of reformulated gasoline from the Reserve established under this Act in order to maintain the quality or quantity of the reformulated gasoline stocks in the Reserve or to maintain the operational capability of the Reserve.
Plan.--Within 45 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy shall transmit to the Congress a report indicating whether the Secretary intends to establish a Reserve under this Act or not.
If the Secretary intends to establish a Reserve, the report shall include-- (1) a plan for the acquisition of storage and related facilities or storage services for the Reserve; (2) a plan for the acquisition of reformulated gasoline or other petroleum products for storage in the Reserve; (3) a description of the anticipated methods of disposition of reformulated gasoline or other petroleum products from the Reserve; and (4) a description of the estimated costs of establishment, maintenance, and operation of the Reserve.
If the Secretary decides not to establish a Reserve, the report shall include an explanation of the reasons for such decision.
Storage.--The storage under this Act of reformulated gasoline or other petroleum products in a storage facility that meets all applicable Federal and State environmental requirements shall not be considered a ``major Federal action significantly affecting the quality of the human environment'' as that term is used in section 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
MIDWEST CLEAN AIR GASOLINE RESERVE ACCOUNT.
Establishment.--Upon a decision of the Secretary of Energy to establish a Reserve under this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall establish in the Treasury of the United States an account known as the Midwest Clean Air Gasoline Reserve Account (referred to in this section as the ``Account'').
Deposits.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit in the Account any amounts appropriated to the Account and any receipts from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of reformulated gasoline from the Reserve.
Use of Funds.--The Secretary of Energy may obligate amounts in the Account to carry out activities under this Act without the need for further appropriation, and amounts available to the Secretary of Energy for obligation under this section shall remain available without fiscal year limitation.