This Act may be cited as the ``ATM Fee Reform Act of 1997''.
ELECTRONIC FUND TRANSFER FEE DISCLOSURES AT ANY HOST ATM.
Section 904 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 United States Code 1693b) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(d) In the event'' and inserting ``(d) Applicability to Service Providers Other Than Certain Financial Institutions.-- ``(1) In general.--In the event''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Fee disclosures at electronic terminals.-- ``(A) In general.--The regulations prescribed under paragraph (1) shall require any host electronic terminal operator who imposes a fee on any consumer for providing host transfer services to such consumer to provide notice in accordance with subparagraph (B) to the consumer (at the time the service is provided) of-- ``(i) the fact that a fee is imposed by such operator for providing the service; and ``(ii) the amount of any such fee.
Notice requirements.--The notice required under subparagraph (A) with respect to any fee described in such subparagraph shall-- ``(i) be posted in a prominent and conspicuous location on or at the electronic terminal at which the electronic fund transfer is initiated by the consumer; and ``(ii) appear on the screen of the electronic terminal, or on a paper notice issued from the terminal, after the transaction is initiated and before the consumer is irrevocably committed to completing the transaction.
Prohibition on fees not properly disclosed and explicitly assumed by consumer.--No fee may be imposed by any host electronic terminal operator in connection with any electronic fund transfer initiated by a consumer for which a notice is required under subparagraph (A), unless-- ``(i) the consumer receives such notice in accordance with subparagraph (B); and ``(ii) the consumer elects to continue in the manner necessary to effect the transaction after receiving such notice.
Definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph, the following definitions shall apply: ``(i) Electronic fund transfer.--The term `electronic fund transfer' includes a transaction which involves a balance inquiry initiated by a consumer in the same manner as an electronic fund transfer, whether or not the consumer initiates a transfer of funds in the course of the transaction.
Host electronic terminal operator.-- The term `host electronic terminal operator' means any person who-- ``(I) operates an electronic terminal at which consumers initiate electronic fund transfers; and ``(II) is not the financial institution which holds the account of any such consumer from which the transfer is made.
Host transfer services.--The term `host transfer services' means any electronic fund transfer made by a host electronic terminal operator in connection with a transaction initiated by a consumer at an electronic terminal operated by such operator.''.
DISCLOSURE OF POSSIBLE FEES TO CONSUMERS WHEN ATM CARD IS ISSUED.
Section 905(a) of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (12 United States Code 1693c(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (8); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (9) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraph: ``(10) a notice to the consumer that a fee may be imposed by-- ``(A) a host electronic terminal operator (as defined in section 904(d)(2)(D)(ii)) if the consumer initiates a transfer from an electronic terminal which is not operated by the person issuing the card or other means of access; and ``(B) any national, regional, or local network utilized to effect the transaction.''.
In General.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a study of the feasibility of requiring, in connection with any electronic fund transfer initiated by a consumer through the use of an electronic terminal-- (1) a notice to be provided to the consumer before the consumer is irrevocably committed to completing the transaction, which clearly states the amount of any fee which will be imposed upon the consummation of the transaction by-- (A) any host electronic terminal operator (as defined in section 904(d)(2)(D)(ii) of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act) involved in the transaction; (B) the financial institution holding the account of the consumer; (C) any national, regional, or local network utilized to effect the transaction; and (D) any other party involved in the transfer; and (2) the consumer to elect to consummate the transaction after receiving the notice described in paragraph (1).
Factors To Be Considered.--In conducting the study required under subsection (a) with regard to the notice requirement described in such subsection, the Comptroller General shall consider the following factors: (1) The availability of appropriate technology.
Implementation and operating costs.
The competitive impact any such notice requirement would have on various sizes and types of institutions, if implemented.
The period of time which would be reasonable for implementing any such notice requirement.
The extent to which consumers would benefit from any such notice requirement.
Any other factor the Comptroller General determines to be appropriate in analyzing the feasibility of imposing any such notice requirement.
Report to the Congress.--Before the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General shall submit a report to the Congress containing-- (1) the findings and conclusions of the Comptroller General in connection with the study required under subsection (a); and (2) the recommendation of the Comptroller General with regard to the question of whether a notice requirement described in subsection (a) should be implemented and, if so, how such requirement should be implemented.
NO LIABILITY IF POSTED NOTICES ARE DAMAGED.
Section 910 of the Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 United States Code 1693h) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Exception for Damaged Notices.--If the notice required to be posted pursuant to section 904(d)(2)(B)(i) by a host electronic terminal operator has been posted by such operator in compliance with such section and the notice is subsequently removed, damaged, or altered by any person other than the operator of the automated teller machine, the operator shall have no liability under this section for failure to comply with section 904(d)(2)(B)(i).''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act to other provisions of law shall take effect at the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.