SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``New England Wilderness Act of 2006''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Section 1.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--NEW HAMPSHIRE Sec.
Designation of wilderness areas.
Subtitle A--Designation of Wilderness Areas Sec.
Subtitle B--Moosalamoo National Recreation Area Sec.
Administration of National Recreation Area.
In this Act, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Chief of the Forest Service.
TITLE I--NEW HAMPSHIRE SEC.
In this title, the term ``State'' means the State of New Hampshire.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS AREAS.
In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), the following Federal land in the State is designated as wilderness and as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System: (1) Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 23,700 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed Wild River Wilderness--White Mountain National Forest'', dated February 6, 2006, which shall be known as the ``Wild River Wilderness''.
Certain Federal land managed by the Forest Service, comprising approximately 10,800 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed Sandwich Range Wilderness Additions--White Mountain National Forest'', dated February 6, 2006, and which are incorporated in the Sandwich Range Wilderness, as designated by the New Hampshire Wilderness Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-323; 98 United States Statutes at Large 259).
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and a legal description of each wilderness area designated by section 102 with the committees of appropriate jurisdiction in the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Force and Effect.--A map and legal description filed under subsection (a) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Public Availability.--Each map and legal description filed under subsection (a) shall be filed and made available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
Administration.--Subject to valid existing rights, each wilderness area designated under this title shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with-- (1) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (2) the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes).
Effective Date of Wilderness Act.--With respect to any wilderness area designated by this title, any reference in the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) to the effective date of the Wilderness Act shall be deemed to be a reference to the date of enactment of this Act.
Fish and Wildlife.--As provided in section 4(d)(7) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this title affects any jurisdiction or responsibility of the State with respect to wildlife and fish in the State.
Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all Federal land in the wilderness areas designated by section 102 are withdrawn from-- (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) disposition under the mineral leasing laws (including geothermal leasing laws).
In this title: (1) Management plan.--The term ``Management Plan'' means the Green Mountain National Forest Land and Resource Management Plan.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Vermont.
Subtitle A--Designation of Wilderness Areas SEC.
In accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), the following areas in the State are designated as wilderness areas and as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System: (1) Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 22,425 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Glastenbury Wilderness--Proposed'', dated September 2006, which shall be known as the ``Glastenbury Wilderness''.
Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 12,333 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Joseph Battell Wilderness-- Proposed'', dated September 2006, which shall be known as the ``Joseph Battell Wilderness''.
Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 3,757 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Breadloaf Wilderness Additions-- Proposed'', dated September 2006, which shall be known as the ``Breadloaf Wilderness''.
Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 2,338 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Lye Brook Wilderness Additions-- Proposed'', dated September 2006, which shall be known as the ``Lye Brook Wilderness''.
Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 752 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Peru Peak Wilderness Additions--Proposed'', dated September 2006, which shall be known as the ``Peru Peak Wilderness''.
Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 47 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Big Branch Wilderness Additions--Proposed'', dated September 2006, which shall be known as the ``Big Branch Wilderness''.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and a legal description of each wilderness area designated by section 211 with-- (1) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives; (2) the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives; and (3) the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.
Force of Law.--A map and legal description filed under subsection (a) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Public Availability.--Each map and legal description filed under subsection (a) shall be filed and made available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
Administration.--Subject to valid rights in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, each wilderness area designated under this subtitle and in the Green Mountain National Forest (as of the date of enactment of this Act) shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes).
Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the jurisdiction of the State with respect to wildlife and fish on the public land located in the State, including the stocking of fish in rivers and streams in the State to support the Connecticut River Atlantic Salmon Restoration Program.
Trails.--The Forest Service shall allow the continuance of-- (1) the Appalachian National Scenic Trail; (2) the Long Trail; (3) the Catamount Trail; and (4) the marking and maintenance of associated trails and trail structures of the Trails referred to in this subsection, consistent with the management direction (including objectives, standards, guidelines, and agreements with partners) established for the Appalachian National Scenic Trail, Long Trail, and Catamount Trail under the Management Plan.
Subtitle B--Moosalamoo National Recreation Area SEC.
Certain Federal land managed by the United States Forest Service, comprising approximately 15,857 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Moosalamoo National Recreation Area--Proposed'', dated September 2006, is designated as the ``Moosalamoo National Recreation Area''.
In General.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map and a legal description of the national recreation area designated by section 221 with-- (1) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives; (2) the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives; and (3) the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.
Force of Law.--A map and legal description filed under subsection (a) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this subtitle, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and legal description.
Public Availability.--Each map and legal description filed under subsection (a) shall be filed and made available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
ADMINISTRATION OF NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
In General.--Subject to valid rights existing on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall administer the Moosalamoo National Recreation Area in accordance with-- (1) laws (including rules and regulations) applicable to units of the National Forest System; and (2) the management direction (including objectives, standards, and guidelines) established for the Moosalamoo Recreation and Education Management Area under the Management Plan.
Fish and Wildlife.--Nothing in this subtitle affects the jurisdiction of the State with respect to wildlife and fish on the public land located in the State.
Escarpment and Ecological Areas.--Nothing in this subtitle prevents the Secretary from managing the Green Mountain Escarpment Management Area and the Ecological Special Areas, as described in the Management Plan.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.