This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Oceanography Coordination Improvement Act of 1996''.
FEDERAL OCEANOGRAPHY COORDINATION IMPROVEMENT.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The oceans and coastal areas of the United States are among the Nation's most valuable natural resources, making substantial contributions to economic growth, quality of life, and national security.
Oceans drive global and regional climate.
Therefore, they contain information affecting agriculture, fishing, and the prediction of severe weather.
Understanding of the oceans through basic and applied research is essential for using the oceans wisely and protecting their limited resources.
Therefore, the United States should maintain its world leadership in oceanography as one key to its competitive future.
Ocean research and education activities take place within Federal agencies, academic institutions, and industry.
These entities often have similar requirements for research facilities, data, and other resources (such as oceanographic research vessels).
The need exists for a formal mechanism to coordinate existing partnerships and establish new partnerships for the sharing of resources, intellectual talent, and facilities in the ocean sciences and education, so that optimal use can be made of this most important natural resource for the well-being of all Americans.
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSES OF PROGRAM.
The Secretary of Commerce shall establish a program to be known as the ``National Oceanographic Partnership Program''.
The purposes of the program are as follows: (1) To promote the national goals of assuring national security, advancing economic development, protecting quality of life, and strengthening science education and communication through improved knowledge of the ocean.
To coordinate and strengthen oceanographic efforts in support of those goals by-- (A) identifying and carrying out partnerships among Federal agencies, academia, industry, and other members of the oceanographic scientific community in the areas of data, resources, education, and communication; and (B) reporting annually to Congress on the program.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL OCEAN RESEARCH LEADERSHIP COUNCIL.
In General.--There is established a National Ocean Research Leadership Council (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Council'').
Membership.--The Council is composed of the following members: (1) The Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, who shall be the Chairman of the Council.
The Secretary of the Navy.
The Director of the National Science Foundation.
The Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration.
The Deputy Secretary of Energy.
The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The Commandant of the Coast Guard.
The Director of the Geological Survey of the Department of the Interior.
The Director of the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency.
The Director of the Minerals Management Service of the Department of the Interior.
The President of the National Academy of Sciences, the President of the National Academy of Engineering, and the President of the Institute of Medicine.
The Director of the Office of Science and Technology.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget.
One member appointed by the Chairman from among individuals who will represent the views of ocean industries.
One member appointed by the Chairman from among individuals who will represent the views of State governments.
One member appointed by the Chairman from among individuals who will represent the views of academia.
One member appointed by the Chairman from among individuals who will represent such other views as the Chairman considers appropriate.
Term of Office.--The term of office of a member of the Council appointed under paragraph (14), (15), (16), or (17) of subsection (b) shall be two years, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which his or her predecessor was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder of such term.
Initial Appointments of Council Members.--The Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration shall make the appointments required by subsection (b) by not later than December 1, 1996.
Responsibilities of Council.--The Council shall have the following responsibilities: (1) To establish the Ocean Research Partnership Coordinating Group as provided in section 7903.
To establish the Ocean Research Advisory Panel as provided in section 6.
To submit to Congress an annual report pursuant to subsection (f).
Annual Report.--Not later than March 1 of each year, the Council shall submit to Congress a report on the National Oceanographic Partnership Program.
The report shall contain the following: (1) A description of activities of the program carried out during the fiscal year before the fiscal year in which the report is prepared.
The description also shall include a list of the members of the Ocean Research Partnership Coordinating Group, the Ocean Research Advisory Panel, and any working groups in existence during the fiscal year covered.
A general outline of the activities planned for the program during the fiscal year in which the report is prepared.
A summary of projects continued from the fiscal year before the fiscal year in which the report is prepared and projects expected to be started during the fiscal year in which the report is prepared and during the following fiscal year.
A description of the involvement of the program with Federal interagency coordinating entities.
The amounts requested, in the budget submitted to Congress pursuant to section 1105(a) of title 31 for the fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the report is prepared, for the programs, projects, and activities of the program and the estimated expenditures under such programs, projects, and activities during such following fiscal year.
The first annual report required by this subsection shall be submitted to Congress not later than March 1, 1997.
The first report shall include, in addition to the information otherwise required by this subsection, information about the terms of office, procedures, and responsibilities of the Ocean Research Advisory Panel established by the Council.
OCEAN RESEARCH PARTNERSHIP COORDINATING GROUP.
Establishment.--The Council shall establish an entity to be known as the ``Ocean Research Partnership Coordinating Group'' (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Coordinating Group'').
Membership.--The Coordinating Group shall consist of members appointed by the Council, with one member appointed from each Federal department or agency having an oceanographic research or development program.
Chairman.--The Council shall appoint the Chairman of the Coordinating Group.
Responsibilities.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Council, the Coordinating Group shall have the following responsibilities: (1) To prescribe policies and procedures to implement the National Oceanographic Partnership Program.
To review, select, and identify and allocate funds for partnership projects for implementation under the program, based on the following criteria: (A) Whether the project addresses critical research objectives or operational goals, such as data accessibility and quality assurance, sharing of resources, education, or communication.
Whether the project has broad participation within the oceanographic community.
Whether the partners have a long-term commitment to the objectives of the project.
Whether the resources supporting the project are shared among the partners.
Whether the project has been subjected to adequate peer review.
To promote participation in partnership projects by each Federal department and agency involved with oceanographic research and development by publicizing the program and by prescribing guidelines for participation in the program.
To submit to the Council an annual report pursuant to subsection (h).
Partnership Program Office.--The Coordinating Group shall establish in the National Ocean Service and oversee a partnership program office to carry out such duties as the Chairman of the Coordinating Group considers appropriate to implement the National Oceanographic Partnership Program, including the following: (1) To establish and oversee working groups to propose partnership projects to the Coordinating Group and advise the Group on such projects.
To manage peer review of partnership projects proposed to the Coordinating Group and competitions for projects selected by the Group.
To submit to the Coordinating Group an annual report on the status of all partnership projects and activities of the office.
Contract and Grant Authority.--The Coordinating Group may authorize in the National Ocean Service to enter into contracts and make grants, using funds appropriated pursuant to an authorization for the National Oceanographic Partnership Program, for the purpose of implementing the program and carrying out the Coordinating Group's responsibilities.
Forms of Partnership Projects.--Partnership projects selected by the Coordinating Group may be in any form that the Coordinating Group considers appropriate, including memoranda of understanding, demonstration projects, cooperative research and development agreements, and similar instruments.
Annual Report.--Not later than February 1 of each year, the Coordinating Group shall submit to the Council a report on the National Oceanographic Partnership Program.
The report shall contain, at a minimum, copies of any recommendations or reports to the Coordinating Group by the Ocean Research Advisory Panel.
OCEAN RESEARCH ADVISORY PANEL.
Establishment.--The Council shall appoint an Ocean Research Advisory Panel (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Advisory Panel'') consisting of not less than 10 and not more than 18 members.
Membership.--Members of the Advisory Panel shall be appointed from among persons who are eminent in the fields of marine science or marine policy, or related fields, and who are representative, at a minimum, of the interests of government, academia, and industry.
Responsibilities.-- (1) Review of partnership projects.--The Coordinating Group shall refer to the Advisory Panel, and the Advisory Panel shall review, each proposed partnership project estimated to cost more than $500,000.
The Advisory Panel shall make any recommendations to the Coordinating Group that the Advisory Panel considers appropriate regarding such projects.
Other recommendations.--The Advisory Panel shall make any recommendations to the Coordinating Group regarding activities that should be addressed by the National Oceanographic Partnership Program that the Advisory Panel considers appropriate.
Initial Appointments of Advisory Panel Members.--The Council shall make the appointments to the Advisory Panel by not later than January 1, 1997.
In General.--Of the amounts authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Defense, $30,000,000 is authorized for the National Oceanographic Partnership Program.
Required Funding for Program Office.--Of the amount appropriated for the National Oceanographic Partnership Program for fiscal year 1997, at least $500,000, or 3 percent of the amount appropriated, whichever is greater, shall be available for operations of the partnership program office established under section 5(e) for such fiscal year.