This Act may be cited as the ``Presidential Debate Reform Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PRESIDENTIAL DEBATE COMMISSION.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``presidential debate commission ``Sec.
Establishment.--Not later than 6 months before the date of each general election for the offices of President and Vice President of the United States (beginning with the general election held in 2000), the President shall appoint a Presidential Debate Commission (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Commission') in accordance with this section with respect to such election.
Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 3 members appointed by the President as follows: ``(A) 1 member shall be from among a list of nominees submitted by the chair of the Republican National Committee.
1 member shall be from among a list of nominees submitted by the chair of the Democratic National Committee.
1 member (who shall not be a member of the Republican or Democratic Parties) shall be from among a list of nominees submitted jointly by the chairs of the Republican National Committee and the Democratic National Committee.
Qualifications.--Members of the Commission may be from the public or private sector, and may include Federal, State, or local officers or employees, members of academia, nonprofit organizations, or other interested individuals.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment not later than 10 days after the vacancy occurs.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall receive no compensation for service on the Commission, but shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of service for the Commission.
Powers; Meetings.--Except as provided in subsection (d), decisions made by the Commission shall be made by unanimous consent of the commissioners.
The Commission shall meet at a time and a site agreed upon by each of the members.
Staff.-- ``(1) Executive director.--With the approval of the majority of the Commission's members and without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, the Commission shall appoint an executive director, who shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Other personnel.--With the approval of the majority of the Commission's members, the Commission may appoint a secretarial assistant and such other staff as the Commission considers appropriate, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classifications and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for any such personnel may not exceed 75 percent of the rate of pay for the Executive Director.
Temporary and intermittent services.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Duties.--It shall be the duty of the Commission to establish a schedule of debates in accordance with subsection (f) as follows: ``(1) One preliminary debate.
Not more than 2 Vice Presidential debates.
Not less than 2 or more than 4 Presidential debates.
Debates Described.-- ``(1) Preliminary debates.--A preliminary debate shall take place no sooner than 90 days and no later than 60 days before a Presidential election.
The time and place of the preliminary debate shall be announced by the Commission no later than 14 days before the scheduled preliminary debate.
A preliminary debate shall involve any person who has declared himself a candidate for the position of President of the United States who is either on the ballot in all 50 States or is the choice of 5 percent of likely voters to be President of the United States, as determined by the Commission.
Factors to be taken into account include nationally recognized polling data.
The format shall be decided by the Commission.
The attendance by any candidate at the preliminary debate is optional.
Vice presidential debates.--Vice Presidential debates shall take place at least 7 days following the preliminary debate.
The time and date of all Vice Presidential debates shall be announced no later than 14 days prior to the first Vice Presidential debate.
All Vice Presidential debates shall involve persons who are the Vice Presidential candidates to qualified Presidential candidates described in paragraph (4).
The format of debates shall be decided by the Commission.
Presidential debates.--Presidential debates shall take place no sooner than 7 days following the preliminary debate.
The time and date of all qualified debates shall be announced no later than 21 days prior to the first scheduled qualified debate.
The format of debates shall be decided by the Commission, with at least 1 being of the single moderator format.
Presidential debates shall involve persons who are qualified Presidential candidates described in paragraph (4).
Qualified presidential candidate defined.--In this subsection, a `qualified Presidential candidate' is a candidate for President of the United States who is the choice of not less than 5 percent of likely voters, to be determined by the Commission taking into account only the polling data collected no sooner than 1 day after the conclusion of the preliminary debate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to each Commission appointed under this section such sums as may be necessary to carry out its activities with respect to the election involved.
Termination.--Each Commission appointed under this section shall terminate on the date following the day of the election for which the Commission was appointed.''.
REDUCTION IN AMOUNT OF FEDERAL PAYMENTS FOR PARTY CONVENTIONS OF PARTIES NOT PARTICIPATING IN COMMISSION DEBATES.
Section 9008 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Reduction in Payments for Parties Not Participating in Debates Certified by Presidential Debate Commission.-- ``(1) In general.--If the nominee for President of the United States or Vice President of the United States of a party receiving payments under this section does not certify to the Commission that the nominee will participate in all applicable debates scheduled by the Presidential Debate Commission pursuant to section 323 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 with respect to a general election (other than a preliminary debate described in section 323(f)(1) of such Act), the amount of the payment to which the party is otherwise entitled under this section for the nominating convention for the following general election shall be reduced by the percentage described in paragraph (2).
Reduction percentage described.--The percentage described in this paragraph with respect to a party is the amount (expressed as a percentage) equal to-- ``(A) the number of Presidential and Vice Presidential debates scheduled by the Presidential Debate Commission with respect to an election that the party's nominee did not attend; divided by ``(B) the total number of such debates scheduled by the Commission with respect to the election.