RELEASE OF REVERSIONARY INTERESTS, BLACKWATER RIVER AND WITHLACOOCHEE STATE FORESTS, FLORIDA.
Release.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall release the reversionary interests of the United States that were retained by the United States when the following parcels of real property were conveyed to the State of Florida: (1) The parcel of real property described in a deed dated November 4, 1955, conveying certain lands in Santa Rosa County to the State of Florida.
The parcel of real property described in a deed dated April 11, 1957, conveying certain lands in Santa Rosa County to the State of Florida.
The parcel of real property described in a deed dated November 4, 1955, conveying certain lands in Okaloosa County to the State of Florida.
The parcel of real property described in a deed dated November 26, 1982, conveying certain lands in Citrus, Hernando, Pasco, and Sumter Counties to the State of Florida.
The reversionary interest to be released under this section requires that the conveyed lands be used for public purposes and provides for a reversion of such lands to the United States if at any time they cease to be used for public purposes.
Legal Description.--The four deeds referred to in subsection (a) are recorded as follows: (1) Deed Book 122, Pages 397-437, Santa Rosa County, Florida.
Deed Book 133, Pages 333-337, Santa Rosa County, Florida.
Deed Book 121, Pages 511-528, Okaloosa County, Florida.
Official Record Book 610, Pages 1228-1237, Citrus County, Florida.
Official Record Book 517, Pages 491-500, Hernando County, Florida.
Official Record Book 269, Pages 126-135, Sumter County, Florida.
Official Record Book 1240, Pages 1065-1074, Pasco County, Florida.
Consideration.--As consideration for the release of the reversionary interests under subsection (a), the State of Florida shall agree to the following: (1) All proceeds from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the real property subject to the reversionary interests shall be used by the State of Florida for the acquisition of other lands within or adjacent to the exterior boundaries of Blackwater River State Forest and Withlacoochee State Forest, or, with the approval of the Secretary of Agriculture, for the purchase of the individual mineral interest of the United States under section 2.
Any lands acquired by the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the real property subject to the reversionary interests shall become a part of the State forest in which the acquired lands are located and shall be subject to the condition that the acquired lands be used for public purposes.
The total land base of such State forests shall not be reduced below the original acreage of the real property included in the conveyances described in subsection (a), except in the case of any lands conveyed at the request of the United States, and the total land base shall be managed in perpetuity as State forest land.
All proceeds from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the real property subject to the reversionary interests shall be maintained by the State of Florida in a separate fund.
The record of all transactions involving such fund shall be open to inspection by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Disposition of Funds.--Any proceeds derived from the sale of these mineral interests shall be deposited into the fund established by the Act of December 4, 1967 (16 United States Code 484a), known as the Sisk Act, and shall be available for expenditure, upon appropriation, for the acquisitions of lands and interests in lands in the same State.
Additional Terms.--The Secretary of Agriculture may require such additional terms or conditions in connection with the release of the reversionary interests under this section as the Secretary considers appropriate to protect the interests of the United States.
Instrument of Release.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall execute and file in the appropriate office or offices a deed of release, amended deed, or other appropriate instrument effectuating the release of the reversionary interests under this section.
SALE OF MINERAL RIGHTS.
Sale Authorized.--Upon application by the State of Florida, the Secretary of Agriculture may convey to the Board of Trustees of the Internal Improvement Trust Fund of the State of Florida, or to its designee, all of the individual mineral interests of the United States in any parcel of real property for which a reversionary interest is released under section 1.
Consideration.--As consideration for the sale of the mineral interests of the United States under subsection (a), the State of Florida shall pay to the United States an amount equal to the fair market value of such interests, as determined by appraisal acceptable to the Secretary of Agriculture.