This Act may be cited as the ``Disabled Veterans Tax Termination Act''.
ELIGIBILITY FOR PAYMENT OF BOTH RETIRED PAY AND VETERANS' DISABILITY COMPENSATION FOR CERTAIN ADDITIONAL MILITARY RETIREES WITH COMPENSABLE SERVICE-CONNECTED DISABILITIES.
Extension of Concurrent Receipt Authority to Retirees With Service-Connected Disabilities Rated Less Than 50 Percent.--Section 1414 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking paragraph (2) of subsection (a).
Repeal of Phase-in of Concurrent Receipt of Retired Pay and Veterans' Disability Compensation.--Such section is further amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking the final sentence of paragraph (1); (2) by striking subsection (c) and redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively; and (3) in subsection (d) (as so redesignated), by striking subparagraph (4).
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The heading for section 1414 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Members eligible for retired pay who are also eligible for veterans' disability compensation: concurrent payment of retired pay and disability compensation''.
The item relating to such section in the table of sections at the beginning of chapter 71 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``1414.
Members eligible for retired pay who are also eligible for veterans' disability compensation: concurrent payment of retired pay and disability compensation.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to payments for months beginning on or after that date.
COORDINATION OF SERVICE ELIGIBILITY FOR COMBAT-RELATED SPECIAL COMPENSATION AND CONCURRENT RECEIPT.
Eligibility for TERA Retirees.--Subsection (c) of section 1413a of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``entitled to retired pay who--'' and all that follows and inserting ``who-- ``(1) is entitled to retired pay, other than a member retired under chapter 61 of this title with less than 20 years of service creditable under section 1405 of this title and less than 20 years of service computed under section 12732 of this title; and ``(2) has a combat-related disability.''.
Amendments to Standardize Similar Provisions.-- (1) Clerical amendment.--The heading for paragraph (3) of section 1413a(b) of such title is amended by striking ``rules'' and inserting ``rule''.
Specification of qualified retirees for concurrent receipt purposes.--Subsection (a) of section 1414 of such title, as amended by section 2(a), is amended-- (A) by striking ``a member or'' and all that follows through ``retiree')'' and inserting ``an individual who is a qualified retiree for any month''; (B) by inserting ``retired pay and veterans' disability compensation'' after ``both''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Qualified retirees.--For purposes of this section, a qualified retiree, with respect to any month, is a member or former member of the uniformed services who-- ``(A) is entitled to retired pay, other than in the case of a member retired under chapter 61 of this title with less than 20 years of service creditable under section 1405 of this title and less than 20 years of service computed under section 12732 of this title; and ``(B) is also entitled for that month to veterans' disability compensation.''.
Standardization with crsc rule for chapter 61 retirees.--Subsection (b) of section 1414 of such title is amended-- (A) by striking ``Special Rules'' in the subsection heading and all that follows through ``is subject to'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``Special Rule for Chapter 61 Disability Retirees.--In the case of a qualified retiree who is retired under chapter 61 of this title, the retired pay of the member is subject to''; and (B) by striking paragraph (2).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the first day of the first month beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to payments for months beginning on or after that date.