This Act may be cited as the ``Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., Commemorative Coin Act of 2001''.
Congress finds that-- (1) Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. dedicated his life to securing the Nation's fundamental principles of liberty and justice for all its citizens; (2) Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was the leading civil rights advocate of his time, spearheading the civil rights movement in the United States during the 1950's and 1960's; (3) Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was the keynote speaker at the August 28, 1963, March on Washington, the largest rally of the civil rights movement, during which, from the steps of the Lincoln Memorial and before a crowd of more than 200,000 people, he delivered his famous ``I Have A Dream'' speech, one of the classic orations in American history; (4) Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. was a champion of nonviolence, fervently advocated nonviolent resistance as the strategy to end segregation and racial discrimination in America, and was awarded the 1964 Nobel Peace Prize in recognition of his efforts; (5) all Americans should commemorate the legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. so ``that one day this Nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: `We hold these truths to be self-evident; that all men are created equal.
'''; and (6) efforts are underway to secure the personal papers of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr., for the Library of Congress so that they may be preserved and studied for generations to come.
$1 Silver Coins.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from all available sources, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall be emblematic of the human rights legacy and leadership of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. (2) Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2003''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Librarian of Congress, the Commission of Fine Arts, and the estate of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the 1-year period beginning on January 1, 2003.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (c) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this Act shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, all surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Library of Congress for the purposes of purchasing and maintaining historical documents and other materials associated with the life and legacy of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.