This Act may be cited as the ``Overseas Broadcasting Consolidation and Deficit Reduction Act of 1993''.
TITLE I--REDUCTION IN GOVERNMENT-FUNDED RADIO AND TELEVISION BROADCASTING OVERSEAS SEC.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS FOR ISRAEL RADIO TRANSMITTER FACILITY.
None of the funds appropriated or otherwise made available under any provision of law may be used for the design, construction, or operation of a radio transmitter facility in Israel.
TERMINATION OF USIA TELEVISION MARTI PROGRAM.
Repeal.--Part D of title II of the Foreign Relations Authorization Act, Fiscal Years 1990 and 1991 (Public Law 101-246), relating to television broadcasting to Cuba, is repealed.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 5 of the Radio Broadcasting to Cuba Act (22 United States Code 1465c) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking ``Advisory Board for Cuba Broadcasting'' and inserting ``Advisory Board for Radio Broadcasting to Cuba''; (2) in subsection (b), by striking ``the Television Broadcasting to Cuba Act''; and (3) by amending subsection (d) to read as follows: ``(d) The head of the Cuba Service shall serve, ex officio, as a member of the Board.''.
References.--A reference in any provision of law to the ``Advisory Board for Cuba Broadcasting'' shall be considered to be a reference to the ``Advisory Board for Radio Broadcasting to Cuba''.
TERMINATION OF AUTHORITY OF USIA SATELLITE AND TELEVISION.
Repeal.--Section 505 of the United States Information and Educational Exchange Act of 1948 (22 United States Code 1464a) is repealed.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 506 of such Act is redesignated as section 505 of such Act.
TITLE II--TRANSFER OF FUNCTIONS AND SAVINGS PROVISIONS SEC.
For purposes of this title, unless otherwise provided or indicated by the context-- (1) the term ``Federal agency'' has the meaning given to the term ``agency'' by section 551(1) of title 5, United States Code; (2) the term ``function'' means any duty, obligation, power, authority, responsibility, right, privilege, activity, or program; (3) the term ``transferee agency'' means the United States Information Agency (acting through the Bureau for Broadcasting); and (4) the term ``transferor agency'' means the Board for International Broadcasting.
There are transferred to the transferee agency all functions which the head of the transferor agency exercised before the effective date of this title (including all related functions of any officer or employee of the transferor agency).
DETERMINATIONS OF CERTAIN FUNCTIONS BY THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
If necessary, the Office of Management and Budget shall make any determination of the functions that are transferred under section 202.
Appointments.--The head of the transferee agency may appoint and fix the compensation of such officers and employees as may be necessary to carry out the respective functions transferred under this title.
Except as otherwise provided by law, such officers and employees shall be appointed in accordance with the civil service laws and their compensation fixed in accordance with title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The head of the transferee agency may obtain the services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, and compensate such experts and consultants for each day (including traveltime) at rates not in excess of the rate of pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of such title.
The head of the transferee agency may pay experts and consultants who are serving away from their homes or regular place of business travel expenses and per diem in lieu of subsistence at rates authorized by sections 5702 and 5703 of such title for persons in Government service employed intermittently.
Except where otherwise expressly prohibited by law or otherwise provided by this title, the head of the transferee agency may delegate any of the functions transferred to the head of the transferee agency by this title and any function transferred or granted to such head of the transferee agency after the effective date of this title to such officers and employees of the transferee agency as the head of the transferee agency may designate, and may authorize successive redelegations of such functions as may be necessary or appropriate.
No delegation of functions by the head of the transferee agency under this section or under any other provision of this title shall relieve such head of the transferee agency of responsibility for the administration of such functions.
The head of the transferee agency is authorized to allocate or reallocate any function transferred under section 202 among the officers of the transferee agency, and to establish, consolidate, alter, or discontinue such organizational entities in the transferee agency as may be necessary or appropriate.
The head of the transferee agency is authorized to prescribe, in accordance with the provisions of chapters 5 and 6 of title 5, United States Code, such rules and regulations as the head of the transferee agency determines necessary or appropriate to administer and manage the functions of the transferee agency.
TRANSFER AND ALLOCATIONS OF APPROPRIATIONS AND PERSONNEL.
Except as otherwise provided in this title, the personnel employed in connection with, and the assets, liabilities, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds employed, used, held, arising from, available to, or to be made available in connection with the functions transferred by this title, subject to section 1531 of title 31, United States Code, shall be transferred to the transferee agency.
Unexpended funds transferred pursuant to this section shall be used only for the purposes for which the funds were originally authorized and appropriated.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, at such time or times as the Director shall provide, is authorized to make such determinations as may be necessary with regard to the functions transferred by this title, and to make such additional incidental dispositions of personnel, assets, liabilities, grants, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds held, used, arising from, available to, or to be made available in connection with such functions, as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this title.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall provide for the termination of the affairs of all entities terminated by this title and for such further measures and dispositions as may be necessary to effectuate the purposes of this title.
In General.--Except as otherwise provided by this title, the transfer pursuant to this title of full-time personnel (except special Government employees) and part-time personnel holding permanent positions shall not cause any such employee to be separated or reduced in grade or compensation for one year after the date of transfer of such employee under this title.
Executive Schedule Positions.--Except as otherwise provided in this title, any person who, on the day preceding the effective date of this title, held a position compensated in accordance with the Executive Schedule prescribed in chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, and who, without a break in service, is appointed in the transferee agency to a position having duties comparable to the duties performed immediately preceding such appointment shall continue to be compensated in such new position at not less than the rate provided for such previous position, for the duration of the service of such person in such new position.
Continuing Effect of Legal Documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, agreements, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, registrations, privileges, and other administrative actions-- (1) which have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, any Federal agency or official thereof, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the performance of functions which are transferred under this title, and (2) which are in effect at the time this title takes effect, or were final before the effective date of this title and are to become effective on or after the effective date of this title, shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the head of the transferee agency or other authorized official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Proceedings Not Affected.--The provisions of this title shall not affect any proceedings, including notices of proposed rulemaking, or any application for any license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending before the transferor agency at the time this title takes effect, with respect to functions transferred by this title but such proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this title had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this title had not been enacted.
Suits Not Affected.--The provisions of this title shall not affect suits commenced before the effective date of this title, and in all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this title had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the transferor agency, or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of the transferor agency, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this title.
Administrative Actions Relating to Promulgation of Regulations.--Any administrative action relating to the preparation or promulgation of a regulation by the transferor agency relating to a function transferred under this title may be continued by the transferee agency with the same effect as if this title had not been enacted.
If a provision of this title or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid, neither the remainder of this title nor the application of the provision to other persons or circumstances shall be affected.
The head of the transferee agency is authorized to utilize-- (1) the services of such officers, employees, and other personnel of the transferor agency with respect to functions transferred to the transferee agency by this title; and (2) funds appropriated to such functions for such period of time as may reasonably be needed to facilitate the orderly implementation of this title.
Reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or any document of or relating to-- (1) the head of the transferor agency with regard to functions transferred under section 202, shall be deemed to refer to the head of the transferee agency; and (2) the transferor agency with regard to functions transferred under section 202, shall be deemed to refer to the transferee agency.
DEVELOPMENT OF CONSOLIDATION PLAN.
In General.--Not later than 9 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the United States Information Agency, after consultation with the appropriate congressional committees, shall submit to those committees a plan for the consolidation of the functions transferred under section 202 with the existing broadcasting activities carried out by the Bureau for Broadcasting.
Contents of Plan.--Such plan shall include-- (1) a proposal for the reduction of broadcasting activities by RFE/RL, Inc., during the 36-month period which begins on the date of submission of the plan; and (2) any recommendations for legislative changes as may be necessary.
The Board for International Broadcasting Act of 1973 (22 United States Code 2871 et sequentes) is repealed.
This title shall take effect 12 months after its date of enactment.