This Act may be cited as the ``Paperwork Elimination Act of 1996''.
The purpose of this Act is to-- (1) minimize the burden of Federal paperwork demands upon small businesses, educational and nonprofit institutions, Federal contractors, State and local governments, and other persons through the sponsorship and use of alternative information technologies, including the use of electronic maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information to substitute for paper; and (2) more effectively enable Federal agencies to achieve the purposes of chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code, popularly known as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act''.
AUTHORITY AND FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR OF THE OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
Direction and Oversight of Information Technology.--Section 3504(a)(1)(B)(vi) of title 44, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(vi) the acquisition and use of information technology, including the use of alternative information technologies, such as the use of electronic submission, maintenance, or disclosure of information to substitute for paper.''.
Promotion of Use of Electronic Information Technology.--Section 3504(h) of title 44, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(6) specifically promote the optional use of electronic maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information where appropriate, as an alternative information technology to substitute for paper.''.
ASSIGNMENT OF TASKS AND DEADLINES.
Section 3505(a)(3) of title 44, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(D) a description of progress in providing for the use of electronic submission, maintenance, or disclosure of information to substitute for paper, including the extent to which such progress accomplishes reduction of burden on small businesses or other persons.''.
Providing for Use of Electronic Information Management.-- Section 3506(c)(1)(B) of title 44, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of clause (ii) and by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) provides for the optional use, where appropriate, of electronic maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information; and''.
Promotion of Electronic Information Management.--Section 3506(c)(3)(C) of title 44, United States Code, is amended by striking ``or'' after the semicolon at the end of clause (ii), by adding ``or'' after the semicolon at the end of clause (iii), and by adding at the end the following: ``(iv) the promotion and optional use, where appropriate, of electronic maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information.''.
Use of Alternative Information Technologies.--Section 3506(c)(3)(J) of title 44, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(J) to the maximum extent practicable, uses alternative information technologies, including the use of electronic maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information, to reduce burden and improve data quality, agency efficiency and responsiveness to the public.''.
PUBLIC INFORMATION COLLECTION ACTIVITIES; SUBMISSION TO DIRECTOR; APPROVAL AND DELEGATION.
Section 3507(a)(1)(D)(ii) of title 44, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of subclause (V), by adding ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of subclause (VI), and by adding at the end the following: ``(VII) a description of how respondents may, if appropriate, electronically maintain, submit, or disclose information under the collection of information.''.
Section 3514(a)(2) of title 44, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and'' after the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following: ``(E) reduced the collection of information burden on small businesses and other persons through the use of electronic maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information to substitute for paper maintenance, submission, or disclosure of information, including-- ``(i) a description of instances where such substitution has added to burden; and ``(ii) specific identification of such instances relating to the Internal Revenue Service.''.
This Act shall take effect October 1, 1997.
Passed the House of Representatives April 24, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.