This Act may be cited as the Valle Grande/Valles Caldera Preservation bill.
The Congress of the United States finds the following: (1) The lands managed by the Baca Land and Cattle Company which comprise most of the Valles Caldera in central New Mexico, represent a unique land mass, with significant scientific, cultural, historic, recreational, ecological, and productive values, including: (A) The Valles Caldera is one of the world's largest resurgent lava domes, testing by the United States Geological Survey of the Valles Caldera indicates significant geothermal activity; (B) The land was originally granted to the heirs of Don Luis Maria Cabeza de Vaca as part of a settlement by the United States of their Spanish land grant claims to the Village of Las Vegas, New Mexico, under the 1848 Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, (Act of June 21, 1860, an Act to Confirm Certain Private Land Claims in the Territory of New Mexico, Section 6).
Generations have used this land to raise sheep, cattle and horses, and as a timber supply.
Archaeological evidence of this use in the form of old logging camps, and other artifacts is important to a historical knowledge of territorial New Mexico.
In addition, these lands have been used since the 1940s for numerous films about the American West, and the various film sets remaining on the property are a significant part of the history of the American film industry; (C) The careful husbandry of the land by the Dunigan family, the current owners, including selective timbering, limited grazing and hunting, and the use of proscribed fire, have preserved a mix of healthy and nearly pristine range and timber land with significant species diversity which could be used as a model for sustainable land use; and (D) The incredible natural beauty and splendor of these lands, and their proximity to large municipal populations could provide numerous recreational opportunities for hiking, fishing, camping, cross- country skiing, and hunting.
The current owners have indicated that they wish to sell the land, creating an opportunity to acquire these lands into public ownership and allow for public access and enjoyment of these lands for the first time since 1860.
The Baca Land and Cattle Company Lands are bordered by the Sante Fe National Forest and the Bandelier National Monument.
They also contain the headwaters for the Jemez and San Antonio rivers.
These lands should be acquired expeditiously so that the American people will not lose the opportunity presented by this resource to potential subdivisions.
As these lands have different potential uses with different resulting impacts on water and land resources, an appropriate set of authorities is needed to allow the Department of Agriculture and the Department of the Interior to jointly develop a jurisdictional mechanism for best use and preservation of these lands.
The Secretary of Agriculture, acting through the Forest Service is hereby authorized to acquire all of the rights, title, and interests in the lands shown and described as Baca Location No.
1, on the plat entitled ``Independent Resurvey of the Baca Location No.
1,'' made by L.A. Osterhoudt, W.V.
Hall and Charles W. Devendorf, United States Reports Cadastral Engineers, June 30, 1920-August 24, 1921, under special instructions for Group No.
107 dated February 12, 1920, in New Mexico, by purchase through appropriated funds or funds which may be later made available by Congress from the sale of lands or assets administered by the Bureau of Land Management or the General Services Administration, by exchange of lands, or by donation: Provided, That such acquisition be on a willing seller basis, and on terms mutually acceptable to the current owners and the Secretary.
BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS: SANTA FE NATIONAL FOREST; BANDELIER NATIONAL MONUMENT.
The Secretary of Agriculture acting through the Forest Service, and the Secretary of the Interior acting through the National Park Service (the Secretaries), shall jointly develop a plan to adjust the boundaries between the Santa Fe National Forest and the Bandelier National Monument to provide consistent land management to protect the watershed of the monument.
The Secretaries shall submit this plan to Congress within 120 days of the acquisition of the Baca Location No.
1 by the Secretary of Agriculture.