This Act may be cited as the ``Securing America's Future Uniformed Services Act (SAFE-USA) of 1999''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The steady decline in the defense budget during the past 15 years has eroded the readiness of the Armed Forces to execute those missions called for under the National Military Strategy to the point where the Joint Chiefs of Staff have repeatedly characterized the ability of the Armed Forces to execute the National Military Strategy as representing ``moderate to high risk''.
This erosion in readiness of the Armed Forces, particularly in recent years, has resulted from inadequate rates of equipment modernization, delayed equipment maintenance, degraded quality and quantity of combat training, and a declining quality of life for members of the Armed Forces and their families.
The declining quality of life for members of the Armed Forces and their families has resulted from a range of factors, including inadequacies in pay and benefits, military retirement, health care, military housing, and family support programs, as shown by the following: (A) Low military pay, estimated on average to be 13.5 percent behind civilian levels, is forcing servicemembers and their families to struggle to make ends meet.
Inequities in the current military retirement system are a contributing factor to the current military personnel retention problem.
Growing dissatisfaction with military health care is another important factor contributing to military retention problems.
Military families and unaccompanied military personnel continue to live in inadequate facilities, as indicated by the fact that military barracks and dormitories are on average over 45 years old and almost two-thirds of military family housing has been deemed by the Department of Defense as unsuitable.
With a current force in which 65 percent of military personnel are married, family support programs are increasingly inadequate to meet their needs in the face of historically high rates of peacetime operations and the resulting increase in family separations.
The drawdown of the Armed Forces during the post-Cold War period, combined with the dramatic increase in the pace of military operations during the same period, has resulted in significant strains on military personnel and their families.
The Armed Forces face severe recruiting and retention difficulties and shortages of personnel with high-demand skills.
Surveys conducted by the Armed Forces and testimony before Congress indicate that the leading factors in declining retention rates are inadequate pay, family separations resulting from increased contingency operations, and the lack of adequate resources to carry out assigned missions.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the United States must provide the Armed Forces with sufficient resources to maintain the necessary capability to execute the National Military Strategy with minimal risk; and (2) despite past congressional efforts to improve military pay and benefits and housing, health care, and family support programs, a comprehensive effort is required to revitalize and sustain the all-volunteer force and address the decline in the quality of life for members of Armed Forces and their families by-- (A) significantly improving the quality and availability of affordable housing for military families and enhancing the condition of housing for unaccompanied military personnel; (B) reforming the military retirement system to permit the Armed Forces to retain sufficient high- quality personnel to meet requirements; and (C) enhancing pay and benefits to permit the Armed Forces to recruit and retain high-quality personnel.
FISCAL YEAR 2000 INCREASE IN MILITARY BASIC PAY.
Increase in Basic Pay.--Effective on January 1, 2000, the rates of monthly basic pay for members of the uniformed services shall be increased by 4.8 percent.
Waiver of Section 1009 Adjustment.--The adjustment to become effective during fiscal year 2000 required by section 1009 of title 37, United States Code, in the rates of monthly basic pay authorized members of the uniformed services shall not be made.