This Act may be cited as the ``Automobile Damage Consumer Protection Act of 1993''.
MOTOR VEHICLE DAMAGE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS.
The Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 United States Code 1901 et sequentes) is amended by inserting at the end the following new title: ``TITLE VII--DAMAGE DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS ``SEC.
In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to require, prior to the transfer of title of a motor vehicle in any State, that the person transferring such vehicle disclose to the transferee, in writing, any damage to the motor vehicle, which occurred during the time such person owned the motor vehicle, if the cost to repair the motor vehicle to its predamaged condition exceeded, or will exceed, $1,000 at the time of the transfer of title.
A copy of the damage disclosure statement shall be submitted by such person to the motor vehicle department of the State issuing the title.
Specific Guidelines.--In carrying out the provisions of subsection (a), the Secretary shall require, in addition to the damage disclosure statement required by subsection (a), that each certificate of title issued by a State on or after the date of enactment of this section include-- ``(1) an area for a damage disclosure form, which shall be located on the back of each certificate of title; ``(2) each certificate of title shall also contain on its front a statement as to whether previous damage disclosure statements indicate the motor vehicle had been damaged at one time in excess of $1,000; ``(3) a damage disclosure form, which will enable the person transferring the vehicle to disclose to the transferee any damage to the motor vehicle that must be disclosed under the provisions of subsection (a); ``(4) a diagram of a motor vehicle on which any damage to the motor vehicle that must be disclosed under the provisions of subsection (a) is to be indicated by circling the damaged area(s) on the diagram; and ``(5) a written statement indicating that damage disclosure is a requirement of Federal law.
Uniform Certificates of Title.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall prescribe by rule the form and content of all certificates of title.
``In carrying out the provisions of this title, the Secretary shall provide that the failure to repair a damaged motor vehicle to its predamaged condition, when the cost of such repairs would have exceeded $1,000, shall not exempt any person from the damage disclosure requirements of this title.
``In carrying out the provisions of this title, the Secretary shall require each State to establish and maintain records of all damage disclosure statements submitted to the State in accordance the provisions of section 701(a).
The State shall include these statements in the title history of the motor vehicles indicated in such statements.
``The regulations promulgated pursuant to section 701(a) shall not apply to any motor vehicle that-- ``(1) is more than 9 model years old at the time of transfer of title; or ``(2) has a gross weight in excess of 16,000 pounds.
In General.--Any person who knowingly and willfully commits any act or causes to be done any act that violates any provision of this title or knowingly and willfully omits to do any act or causes to be omitted any act that is required by any such provision shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor, as defined in section 3559 of title 18, United States Code, and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of that section.
Repeat Offenders.--In the case of a person's second or subsequent conviction under subsection (a), such person shall be guilty of a Class E felony, as defined in section 3559 of title 18, United States Code, and shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of that section.
In General.--Any person who violates any provision of this title shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $2,000 for each such violation.
A violation of this title shall, for purposes of this section, constitute a separate violation with respect to each motor vehicle or device involved, except that the maximum civil penalty shall not exceed $100,000 for any related series of violations.
Proceedings.--Any civil penalty under this section shall be assessed by the Secretary and collected in a civil action brought by the Attorney General on behalf of the United States.
Before referral of civil penalty claims to the Attorney General, civil penalties may be compromised by the Secretary after affording the person charged with a violation of any section of this title an opportunity to present views and evidence in support thereof to establish that the alleged violation did not occur.
Amount of Penalty.--In determining the amount of the civil penalty referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall consider-- ``(1) with respect to the person found to have committed the violation-- ``(A) the person's degree of culpability; ``(B) any history of prior offenses; ``(C) the person's ability to pay the penalty; and ``(D) the potential effect of the penalty on the person's ability to continue to do business; ``(2) with respect to the violation committed-- ``(A) the nature of the violation; ``(B) the circumstances of the violation; ``(C) the extent of the violation; and ``(D) the gravity of the violation; and ``(3) such other matters as justice may require.
Certificate of Title.--For the purposes of this title, the term `certificate of title' means a document issued by a State evidencing ownership of a motor vehicle.
Cost.--For the purposes of this title, the term `cost' means the costs of all parts, frame work, paint and labor.
Damage.--For the purposes of the damage disclosure statement required by section 701(a), the term `damage' means damage to the motor vehicle caused by theft, fire, vandalism, collision, weather, submersion in water, or flood.
This term does not include normal wear and tear, glass damage, mechanical repairs or electrical repairs that have not been caused by theft, fire, vandalism, collision, weather, submersion in water, or flood.
Motor Vehicle.--For the purposes of this title, the term `motor vehicle' means an automobile or a motor truck.
This term does not include motorcycles or mopeds.
Person.--For the purposes of this title, the term `person' includes any manufacturer, distributor, dealer, corporation, or other legal entity or individual.