This Act may be cited as the ``Gabrieleno/Tongva Nation Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The United States Government has had continuous dealings with the Gabrieleno/Tongva Nation from 1771 until at least 1961.
The Gabrieleno/Tongva Nation is the descendant of, and political successor to, the signatories of the June 10, 1851, Fort Tejon Treaty.
The Gabrieleno/Tongva Nation traditionally occupied the entire Los Angeles Basin and the islands of Santa Catalina, San Nicholas, and San Clemente, from Topanga Canyon to Laguna Beach, from the San Gabriel Mountains to the sea, in most of what is now Los Angeles and Orange Counties.
Several Federal officials have in the past recognized the Nation.
In 1851 and 1852, the United States Government sent Commissioner Barbour to treat with the Indians of Los Angeles, but he was called away.
Also in 1852, Superintendent of Indian Affairs E.Federal Reporter Beale noted a numerous Indian population within Los Angeles County.
In 1855, Superintendent of Indian Affairs Henley noted that the Indians in and around Los Angeles should be moved to a reservation.
Records show that a small number of the Nation lived at the Sebastian Reserve at the Tejon Pass, part of Los Angeles County.
In the 1870s former Mission Indian Agent J.Q.
Stanley noted the grievances of the Indians living at Mission San Gabriel.
Scholars and academics have also noted the existence of the Nation.
Helen Hunt Jackson, in the mid-1880s noted that the Gabrieleno/Tongva were continuing to live in the San Gabriel area where many worked as day laborers.
At the turn of the century, C. Hart Merriam and J.P. Harrington indicated that there were some groups of the Nation living at the Tejon Reservation, and further noted that one of the tribes represented at the reservation was the ``Tongva of San Gabriel''.
In the early 1900s, the Federal Government allowed Nation members, most of whom were of one-half Indian blood, to register at the Sherman Indian School in Riverside, California.
The United States purchased land for the Nation in 1913 according to the Kelsey Map of Indians of California, which indicates a symbol corresponding to ``lands recently purchased'' at the site of San Gabriel.
By 1928, many Nation members were still living in their traditional area of San Gabriel and identifying themselves as tribal members, as evidenced by the California Indians' Jurisdictional Act.
This Act authorized the Secretary to create a roll of California Indians for payment purposes.
There are at least 150 Gabrieleno/Tongvas on this roll, approximately fifty with one-half degree Indian blood or more, and 128 of at least one-quarter Indian blood.
The Nation's membership has historically included and presently includes a verifiable half-blood community, which is eligible for organization under section 19 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 479, commonly referred to as the Indian Reorganization Act), but the Bureau of Indian Affairs ignored the half-blood community and led the Nation to believe that it could not organize as a half-blood community.
The Nation has been politically active at the national level via the Mission Indian Federation, which lobbied the Congress for various Indian causes from the 1920s to the 1950s.
The Nation was also a plaintiff in an Indian Claims Commission case in 1949.
Forty-six bands filed suit, including the Tongva.
The Bureau of Indian Affairs approved contracts for each band and included the Nation in all negotiations.
After twelve years, all 46 bands were required to vote on a settlement, and the registers of voters indicated that the Nation members who voted at these meetings were, or are, relatives of presentday tribal members.
The State of California recognized the Gabrieleno/ Tongva in 1994, stating, ``The State of California...takes pride in recognizing the Indian inhabitants of the Los Angeles Basin and the continued existence of the Indian community within our State''.
(``Certificate of Recognition'', signed by California Assembly member Diane Martinez, 1994).
Furthermore, the city of San Gabriel recognizes the Gabrieleno/Tongva Nation.
The Nation has maintained its distinct community on its ancestral lands in San Gabriel and has maintained its unique culture and identity and maintains governance through a viable tribal government and a constitution and bylaws.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Member.--The term ``member'' means those individuals enrolled in the Nation pursuant to section 6.
Nation.--The term ``Nation'' means the Gabrieleno/ Tongva Nation.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Federal Recognition.--Federal recognition of the Gabrieleno/ Tongva Nation is hereby affirmed.
All laws and regulations of the United States of general application to Indians or nations, tribes, or bands of Indians, including the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 461 et seq.
), which are inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall not be applicable to the Nation and its members.
Such laws and regulations which are not inconsistent with any specific provision of this Act shall be applicable to the Nation and its members.
Federal Services and Benefits.-- (1) In general.--The Nation and its members shall be eligible for all services and benefits provided by the Federal Government to Indians because of their status as federally recognized Indians, and notwithstanding any other provision of law, such services and benefits shall be provided after the date of the enactment of this Act to the Nation and its members without regard to the existence of a reservation for the Nation or the location of the residence of any member on or near any Indian reservation.
Service areas.--For purposes of the delivery of Federal services to the enrolled members of the Nation, the service area shall consist of Los Angeles County and portions of Ventura and Orange Counties.
Such services shall be provided notwithstanding the establishment of a reservation for the Nation after the date of enactment of this Act.
Services may be provided to members outside the named service areas unless prohibited by law or regulation.
In General.--All rights and privileges of the Nation and its members, which may have been abrogated or diminished before the date of the enactment of this Act, are hereby reaffirmed and restored.
Existing Rights of Nation.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to diminish any right or privilege of the Nation or of its members that existed before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Except as otherwise specifically provided in any other provision of this Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed as altering or affecting any legal or equitable claim the Nation may have to enforce any right or privilege reserved by or granted to the Nation which was wrongfully denied or taken from the Nation before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Nation shall submit to the Secretary a membership roll consisting of all individuals currently enrolled for membership in the Nation.
The qualifications for inclusion on the membership roll of the Nation shall be determined by the membership clauses in the Nation's governing document.
Upon completion of the roll, the Secretary shall immediately publish notice of such in the Federal Register.
The Nation shall ensure that such roll is maintained and kept current.
The Nation's tribal lands shall consist of all real property, now or hereafter held by, or in trust for, the Nation.
The Secretary shall acquire real property for the Nation.
Any such property shall be taken by the Secretary in the name of the United States in trust for the benefit of the Nation and shall become part of the Nation's reservation.
CONSTITUTION AND GOVERNING BODY.
Constitution.-- (1) Adoption.--Not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall conduct, by secret ballot, elections for the purpose of adopting a new constitution for the Nation.
The elections shall be held in accordance with the procedures applicable to elections under section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (25 United States Code 476).
Interim governing documents.--Until such time as a new constitution is adopted under paragraph (1), the governing documents in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act shall be the interim governing documents for the Nation.
Officials.-- (1) Elections.--Not later than 6 months after the Nation adopts their constitution pursuant to subsection (a), the Nation shall conduct elections by secret ballot for the purpose of electing officials for the Nation as provided in the Nation's governing constitution.
The elections shall be conducted according to the procedures described in the Nation's constitution.
Interim governments.--Until such time as the Nation elects new officials pursuant to paragraph (1), the Nation's governing bodies shall be those bodies in place on the date of the enactment of this Act, or any new governing bodies selected under the election procedures specified in the respective interim governing documents of the Nation.
The Nation shall have jurisdiction to the full extent allowed by law over all lands taken into trust for the benefit of the Nation by the Secretary.
The Nation shall exercise jurisdiction over all its members who reside within the service area in matters pursuant to the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (25 United States Code 1901 et sequentes), as if the members were residing upon a reservation, as defined in that Act.