In this Act, the term ``agency''-- (1) means an executive agency as defined under section 105 of title 5, United States Code; and (2) does not include the Department of Defense.
REDUCTION IN THE NUMBER OF FEDERAL EMPLOYEES.
Determination of Number of Employees.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall determine the number of full-time employees employed in each agency.
The head of each agency shall cooperate with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget in making the determinations.
Reductions.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the head of each agency shall take such actions as necessary, including a reduction in force under sections 3502 and 3595 of title 5, United States Code, to reduce the number of full-time employees employed in that agency as determined under subsection (a) by 20 percent.
Time period for reductions.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided under subparagraph (B), the head of each agency shall complete the reductions under paragraph (1) not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Extensions.-- (i) First extension.--The head of an agency may extend the 1-year period described under subparagraph (A) by a 180-day period, if the head of that agency submits a report to Congress that includes an explanation of the reasons the extension is necessary to complete the reductions.
Second extension.--The head of an agency may extend the 1-year period described under subparagraph (A) which was extended under clause (i) of this subparagraph by an additional 180-day period, if the head of that agency submits a report to Congress that includes-- (I) an explanation of the reasons the extension is necessary to complete the reductions; (II) a plan detailing the completion of the reductions; and (III) any recommendation for legislation to provide for the completion of the reductions.
Elimination of Duplication and Restructuring.--In making reductions under subsection (b), the head of each agency shall-- (1) minimize the duplication of functions by employees within the agency; and (2) restructure employee responsibilities to carry out all essential tasks of the agency.
Reports.--Not later than 30 days after the end of each fiscal year in which reductions are made under this section, the head of each agency shall submit a report to Congress on-- (1) the actions taken by that agency to carry out this section; (2) the restructuring of employees within the agency; and (3) the savings resulting to the Federal Government by the reductions in salaries and expenses from the reductions in employees and restructuring under this section, including unexpended appropriations returned to the United States Treasury.
FREEZE IN COMPENSATION FOR FEDERAL EMPLOYEES AT NON-DEFENSE AGENCIES.
Pay.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, during fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013 no adjustment shall be made with respect to any employee of an agency-- (1) in the rates of basic pay under section 5303 of title 5, United States Code, or (2) in comparability payments under section 5304 or 5304a of title 5, United States Code.
Bonuses.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, during each of fiscal years 2011, 2012, and 2013 the total amount of bonuses and cash awards (including any performance-based cash awards under section 4505a of title 5, United States Code, or any similar provision of law) paid by an agency may not exceed the total amount of such bonuses and awards paid during fiscal year 2010.
REDUCTION IN APPROPRIATIONS TO THE WHITE HOUSE AND CONGRESS.
Appropriations to the White House.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the total amount of funds appropriated to the appropriations account under the heading ``The White House'' under the heading ``EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT AND FUNDS APPROPRIATED TO THE PRESIDENT'' for fiscal year 2011 may not exceed 85 percent of the total amount of funds appropriated to that account during fiscal year 2010.
Appropriations to Congress.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the total amount of funds appropriated under the headings ``SENATE'' and ``HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES'' for fiscal year 2011 may not exceed 85 percent of the total amount of funds appropriated under those headings during fiscal year 2010.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``motor vehicle'' has the meaning given under section 157(a)(1) of title 23, United States Code.
Reduction.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the total amount of funds appropriated for the acquisition and maintenance of all motor vehicles owned or operated by all agencies for fiscal year 2011 may not exceed 80 percent of the total amount of funds appropriated for the acquisition and maintenance of all motor vehicles owned or operated by all agencies during fiscal year 2010.