This Act may be cited as the ``SCHIP Expansion Act of 2004''.
ELIGIBILITY OF ALL UNINSURED CHILDREN FOR SCHIP.
In General.--Section 2110(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397jj(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking subparagraph (B); and (B) by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B); (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking ``include'' and all that follows through ``a child who is an'' and inserting ``include a child who is an''; and (B) by striking the semicolon and all that follows through the period and inserting a period; and (3) by striking paragraph (4).
No Exclusion of Children With Access to High-Cost Coverage.-- Section 2110(b)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397jj(b)(3)) is amended-- (1) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``rule'' and inserting ``rules''; (2) by striking ``A child'' and inserting the following: ``(A) Certain non federally funded coverage.--A child''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(B) No exclusion of children with access to high- cost coverage.--A State shall not exclude a child from being treated as a targeted vulnerable child who has access to coverage under a group health plan or health insurance coverage if the total annual aggregate cost for premiums, deductibles, cost sharing, and similar charges imposed under the group health plan or health insurance coverage with respect to all targeted vulnerable children in the child's family exceeds 5 percent of such family's income for the year involved.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Titles XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes; 1397aa et.
are amended by striking ``targeted low-income'' each place it appears and inserting ``targeted vulnerable''.
Section 2102(b)(3)(C) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397bb(b)(3)(C)) is amended by inserting ``particularly with respect to children whose family income exceeds 200 percent of the poverty line'' before the semicolon.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on October 1, 2004.
INCREASE IN FEDERAL FINANCIAL PARTICIPATION UNDER SCHIP AND MEDICAID FOR STATES WITH SIMPLIFIED ENROLLMENT AND RENEWAL PROCEDURES FOR CHILDREN.
SCHIP.--Section 2105(c)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397ee(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(C) Nonapplication of limitation and increase in federal payment for states with simplified enrollment and renewal procedures.-- ``(i) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a)(1) and subparagraph (A)-- ``(I) the limitation under subparagraph (A) on expenditures for items described in subsection (a)(1)(D) shall not apply with respect to expenditures incurred to carry out any of the outreach strategies described in clause (ii), but only if the State carries out the same outreach strategies for children under title XIX; and ``(II) the enhanced FMAP for a State for a fiscal year otherwise determined under subsection (b) shall be increased by 5 percentage points (without regard to the application of the 85 percent limitation under that subsection)) with respect to such expenditures.
Outreach strategies described.--For purposes of clause (i), the outreach strategies described in this clause are the following: ``(I) Presumptive eligibility.--The State provides for presumptive eligibility for children under this title and under title XIX.
Adoption of 12-month continuous eligibility.--The State provides that eligibility for children shall not be redetermined more often than once every year under this title or under title XIX.
Elimination of asset test.--The State does not apply any asset test for eligibility under this title or title XIX with respect to children.
Passive renewal.--The State provides for the automatic renewal of the eligibility of children for assistance under this title and under title XIX if the family of which such a child is a member does not report any changes to family income or other relevant circumstances, subject to verification of information from State databases.''.
Medicaid.-- (1) In general.--Section 1902(l) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396a(l)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (3), by inserting ``subject to paragraph (5)'', after ``Notwithstanding subsection (a)(17),''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(5)(A) Notwithstanding the first sentence of section 1905(b), with respect to expenditures incurred to carry out any of the outreach strategies described in subparagraph (B) for individuals under 19 years of age who are eligible for medical assistance under subsection (a)(10)(A), the Federal medical assistance percentage is equal to the enhanced FMAP described in section 2105(b) and increased under section 2105(c)(2)(C)(i)(II), but only if the State carries out the same outreach strategies for children under title XXI.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), the outreach strategies described in this subparagraph are the following: ``(i) Presumptive eligibility.--The State provides for presumptive eligibility for such individuals under this title and title XXI.
Adoption of 12-month continuous eligibility.--The State provides that eligibility for such individuals shall not be redetermined more often than once every year under this title or under title XXI.
Elimination of asset test.--The State does not apply any asset test for eligibility under this title or title XXI with respect to such individuals.
Passive renewal.--The State provides for the automatic renewal of the eligibility of such individuals for assistance under this title and under title XXI if the family of which such an individual is a member does not report any changes to family income or other relevant circumstances, subject to verification of information from State databases.''.
Conforming amendment.--The first sentence of section 1905(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(b)) is amended by striking ``section 1933(d)'' and inserting ``sections 1902(l)(5) and 1933(d)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on October 1, 2004.
ELIMINATION OF SCHIP DIP AND INCREASE IN FUNDING.
In General.--Section 2104(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397dd(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraphs (5), (6), and (7), by striking ``$3,150,000,000'' each place it appears and inserting ``$4,275,000,000''; (2) in paragraphs (8) and (9), by striking ``$4,050,000,000'' each place it appears and inserting ``$9,050,000,000''; and (3) in paragraph (10), by striking ``$5,000,000,000'' and inserting ``$10,000,000,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on October 1, 2004, and apply to allotments and redistributions of unused allotments made on or after that date.
LIMITATION ON PAYMENTS TO STATES THAT HAVE AN ENROLLMENT CAP BUT HAVE NOT EXHAUSTED THE STATE'S AVAILABLE ALLOTMENTS.
In General.--Section 2105 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397ee) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) Limitation on Payments to States That Have an Enrollment Cap but Have Not Exhausted the State's Available Allotments.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, payment shall not be made to a State under this section if the State has an enrollment freeze, enrollment cap, procedures to delay consideration of, or not to consider, submitted applications for child health assistance, or a waiting list for the submission or consideration of such applications or for such assistance, and the State has not fully expended the amount of all allotments available with respect to a fiscal year for expenditure by the State, including allotments for prior fiscal years that remain available for expenditure during the fiscal year under subsection (c) or (g) of section 2104 or that were redistributed to the State under subsection (f) or (g) of section 2104.
Rule of construction.--Paragraph (1) shall not be construed as prohibiting a State from establishing regular open enrollment periods for the submission of applications for child health assistance.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section take effect on October 1, 2004.
APPLICATION OF MEDICAID MANAGED CARE REQUIREMENTS TO SCHIP.
In General.--Section 2107(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397gg(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(E) Sections 1903(m) and 1932 (relating to requirements for managed care).''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) takes effect on October 1, 2004.