This Act may be cited as the ``National Youth Violence Commission Act''.
NATIONAL YOUTH VIOLENCE COMMISSION.
Establishment of Commission.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Youth Violence Commission (hereinafter referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall-- (1) be composed of 16 members appointed in accordance with subsection (b); and (2) conduct its business in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Membership.-- (1) Persons eligible.--Except for those members who hold the offices described under paragraph (2)(A), and those members appointed under paragraph (2) (C)(ii) and (D)(iv), the members of the Commission shall be individuals who have expertise, by both experience and training, in matters to be studied by the Commission under section 3.
The members of the Commission shall be well-known and respected among their peers in their respective fields of expertise.
Appointments.--The members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission as follows: (A) Four shall be appointed by the President of the United States, including-- (i) the Surgeon General of the United States; (ii) the Attorney General of the United States; (iii) the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services; and (iv) the Secretary of the Department of Education.
Four shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, including-- (i) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of law enforcement; (ii) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of school administration, teaching, or counseling; (iii) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of parenting and family studies; and (iv) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of child or adolescent psychology.
Two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, including-- (i) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of law enforcement; and (ii) 1 member who is a recognized religious leader.
Four shall be appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, including-- (i) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of law enforcement; (ii) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of school administration, teaching, or counseling; (iii) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the social sciences; and (iv) 1 member who is a recognized religious leader.
Two shall be appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate, including-- (i) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of school administration, teaching, or counseling; and (ii) 1 member who meets the criteria for eligibility in paragraph (1) in the field of parenting and family studies.
Completion of appointments; vacancies.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the appointing authorities under paragraph (2) shall each make their respective appointments.
Any vacancy that occurs during the life of the Commission shall not affect the powers of the Commission, and shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment not later than 30 days after the vacancy occurs.
Operation of the commission.-- (A) Chairmanship.--The appointing authorities under paragraph (2) shall jointly designate 1 member as the Chairman of the Commission.
In the event of a disagreement among the appointing authorities, the Chairman shall be determined by a majority vote of the appointing authorities.
The determination of which member shall be Chairman shall be made not later than 15 days after the appointment of the last member of the Commission, but in no case later than 45 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
The initial meeting of the Commission shall be conducted not later than 30 days after the later of-- (i) the date of the appointment of the last member of the Commission; or (ii) the date on which appropriated funds are available for the Commission.
Quorum; voting; rules.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum to conduct business, but the Commission may establish a lesser quorum for conducting hearings scheduled by the Commission.
Each member of the Commission shall have 1 vote, and the vote of each member shall be accorded the same weight.
The Commission may establish by majority vote any other rules for the conduct of the Commission's business, if such rules are not inconsistent with this Act or other applicable law.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.-- (1) In general.--It shall be the duty of the Commission to conduct a comprehensive factual study of incidents of youth violence to determine the root causes of such violence.
Matters to be studied.--In determining the root causes of incidents of youth violence, the Commission shall study any matter that the Commission determines relevant to meeting the requirements of paragraph (1), including at a minimum-- (A) the level of involvement and awareness of teachers and school administrators in the lives of their students and any impact of such involvement and awareness on incidents of youth violence; (B) trends in family relationships, the level of involvement and awareness of parents in the lives of their children, and any impact of such relationships, involvement, and awareness on incidents of youth violence; (C) the alienation of youth from their schools, families, and peer groups, and any impact of such alienation on incidents of youth violence; (D) the availability of firearms to youth, including the means by which they acquire such firearms, and any impact of such availability on incidents of youth violence; (E) the effect upon youth of depictions of violence in the media and any impact of such depictions on incidents of youth violence; and (F) the availability to youth of information regarding the construction of weapons, including explosive devices, and any impact of such information on incidents of youth violence.
Testimony of parents and students.--In determining the root causes of incidents of youth violence, the Commission shall, pursuant to section 4(a), take the testimony of parents and students to learn and memorialize their views and experiences regarding incidents of youth violence.
Recommendations.--Based on the findings of the study required under subsection (a), the Commission shall make recommendations to the President and Congress to address the causes of youth violence and reduce incidents of youth violence.
If the Surgeon General issues any report on media and violence, the Commission shall consider the findings and conclusions of such report in making recommendations under this subsection.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which the Commission first meets, the Commission shall submit to the President and Congress a comprehensive report of the Commission's findings and conclusions, together with the recommendations of the Commission.
Summaries.--The report under this subsection shall include a summary of-- (A) the reports submitted to the Commission by any entity under contract for research under section 4(e); and (B) any other material relied on by the Commission in the preparation of the Commission's report.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers advisable to carry out its duties under section 3.
Witness expenses.--Witnesses requested to appear before the Commission shall be paid the same fees as are paid to witnesses under section 1821 of title 28, United States Code.
Subpoenas.-- (1) In general.--If a person fails to supply information requested by the Commission, the Commission may by majority vote request the Attorney General of the United States to require by subpoena the production of any written or recorded information, document, report, answer, record, account, paper, computer file, or other data or documentary evidence necessary to carry out the Commission's duties under section 3.
The Commission shall transmit to the Attorney General a confidential, written request for the issuance of any such subpoena.
The Attorney General shall issue the requested subpoena if the request is reasonable and consistent with the Commission's duties under section 3.
A subpoena under this paragraph may require the production of materials from any place within the United States.
Interrogatories.--The Commission may, with respect only to information necessary to understand any materials obtained through a subpoena under paragraph (1), request the Attorney General to issue a subpoena requiring the person producing such materials to answer, either through a sworn deposition or through written answers provided under oath (at the election of the person upon whom the subpoena is served), to interrogatories from the Commission regarding such information.
The Attorney General shall issue the requested subpoena if the request is reasonable and consistent with the Commission's duties under section 3.
A complete recording or transcription shall be made of any deposition made under this paragraph.
Certification.--Each person who submits materials or information to the Attorney General pursuant to a subpoena issued under paragraph (1) or (2) shall certify to the Attorney General the authenticity and completeness of all materials or information submitted.
The provisions of section 1001 of title 18, United States Code, shall apply to any false statements made with respect to the certification required under this paragraph.
Treatment of subpoenas.--Any subpoena issued by the Attorney General under paragraph (1) or (2) shall comply with the requirements for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued by the Attorney General under paragraph (1) or (2), the Attorney General may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to comply with such subpoena.
The application may be made within the judicial district in which that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out its duties under section 3.
Upon the request of the Commission, the head of such department or agency may furnish such information to the Commission.
Information To Be Kept Confidential.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be considered an agency of the Federal Government for purposes of section 1905 of title 18, United States Code, and any individual employed by any individual or entity under contract with the Commission under subsection (e) shall be considered an employee of the Commission for the purposes of section 1905 of title 18, United States Code.
Disclosure.--Information obtained by the Commission or the Attorney General under this Act and shared with the Commission, other than information available to the public, shall not be disclosed to any person in any manner, except-- (A) to Commission employees or employees of any individual or entity under contract to the Commission under subsection (e) for the purpose of receiving, reviewing, or processing such information; (B) upon court order; or (C) when publicly released by the Commission in an aggregate or summary form that does not directly or indirectly disclose-- (i) the identity of any person or business entity; or (ii) any information which could not be released under section 1905 of title 18, United States Code.
Contracting for Research.--The Commission may enter into contracts with any entity for research necessary to carry out the Commission's duties under section 3.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
All members of the Commission who are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of service for the Commission.
Staff.-- (1) In general.--The Chairman of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
The employment and termination of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by a majority of the members of the Commission.
Compensation.--The executive director shall be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
The Chairman may fix the compensation of other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for such personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee, with the approval of the head of the appropriate Federal agency, may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status, benefits, or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairman of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission and any agency of the Federal Government assisting the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Any sums appropriated shall remain available, without fiscal year limitation, until expended.
TERMINATION OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall terminate 30 days after the Commission submits the report under section 3(c).