EXCISE TAX ON SELF-DEALING IN CERTAIN ASSETS OF TAX-EXEMPT MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS.
In General.--Chapter 42 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to private foundations and certain other tax-exempt organizations) is amended by redesignating subchapter D as subchapter E and by inserting after subchapter C the following new subchapter: ``Subchapter D--Self-Dealing in Certain Assets of Tax-Exempt Medical Service Organizations ``Sec.
Tax on self-dealing in certain assets of tax-exempt medical service organizations.
TAX ON SELF-DEALING IN CERTAIN ASSETS OF TAX-EXEMPT MEDICAL SERVICE ORGANIZATIONS.
Initial Taxes.-- ``(1) On self-dealer.--There is hereby imposed a tax on each self-dealing asset transaction between a disqualified person and a medical service organization.
The rate of tax shall be equal to 5 percent of the amount involved with respect to such transaction for each year (or part thereof) in the taxable period.
The tax imposed by this paragraph shall be paid by any disqualified person (other than an organization manager acting only as such) who participates in such transaction.
On organization manager.--In any case in which a tax is imposed by paragraph (1), there is hereby imposed on the participation of any organization manager in any self-dealing asset transaction between a disqualified person and a medical service organization, knowing that it is such a transaction, a tax equal to 2.5 percent of the amount involved with respect to such transaction for each year (or part thereof) in the taxable period, unless such participation is not willful and is due to reasonable cause.
The tax imposed by this paragraph shall be paid by any organization manager who participated in the self- dealing asset transaction.
Additional Taxes.-- ``(1) On self-dealer.--In any case in which an initial tax is imposed by subsection (a)(1) on a self-dealing asset transaction by a disqualified person with a medical service organization and such transaction is not corrected within the taxable period, there is hereby imposed a tax equal to 200 percent of the amount involved.
The tax imposed by this paragraph shall be paid by any disqualified person (other than an organization manager acting only as such) who participated in such transaction.
On organization manager.--In any case in which an additional tax is imposed by paragraph (1), if an organization manager refused to agree to part or all of the correction, there is hereby imposed a tax equal to 50 percent of the amount involved.
The tax imposed by this paragraph shall be paid by any organization manager who refused to agree to part or all of the correction.
Joint and Several Liability.--If more than one person is liable under any paragraph of subsection (a) or (b) with respect to any one self-dealing asset transaction, all such persons shall be jointly and severally liable under such paragraph with respect to such transaction.
Self-Dealing Asset Transaction.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `self-dealing asset transaction' means any direct or indirect sale or exchange, or leasing, of any medical asset to any disqualified person.
Exception.--Such term shall not include any transaction if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary that-- ``(A) such transaction is at arm's length and for fair market value, and ``(B) such transaction does not involve (and is not part of a series of transactions involving) the disposition of any medical activity (or of a substantial portion of any medical activity).
Controlled entities.--In the case of any 50-percent controlled entity (other than an entity exempt from tax under section 501(a)) of a medical service organization-- ``(A) if there is a disposition of any medical asset by such entity, such organization shall be treated as disposing of such asset to the extent of such organization's proportionate share of such entity, and ``(B) any disposition of an interest referred to in subsection (f)(2) in such entity shall be treated as a disposition of such organization's proportionate share of the medical assets of such entity.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `proportionate share' means the percentage of the interests referred to in subsection (f)(2) in such entity which are held by such organization.
Disqualified Person; Organization Manager.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Disqualified person.--The term `disqualified person' means-- ``(A) any organization manager, ``(B) any person who performs substantial professional medical services for the medical service organization pursuant to an employment or other contractual relationship with such organization, ``(C) any member of a family (as defined in section 4946(d)) of any individual described in subparagraph (A) or (B), and ``(D) any 35-percent controlled entity of persons described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C).
Organization manager.--The term `organization manager' means, with respect to a medical service organization, any officer, director, or trustee of such organization (or any individual having powers or responsibilities similar to those of officers, directors, or trustees of the organization).
Medical Service Organization; Medical Activity; Medical Asset.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Medical service organization.--The term `medical service organization' means any organization which (without regard to any self-dealing asset transaction) would be described in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 501(a) if such organization (either directly or through any 50-percent controlled entity of such organization) engages in a medical activity.
Medical activity.--The term `medical activity' means any activity of providing medical or hospital care or medical education or medical research.
Medical asset.--The term `medical asset' means any tangible or intangible asset used in a medical activity.
Controlled Entities.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) 35-percent controlled entity.--The term `35-percent controlled entity' means-- ``(A) a corporation in which persons described in subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) of subsection (e)(1) own more than 35 percent of the combined voting power, ``(B) a partnership in which such persons own more than 35 percent of the profits interest, and ``(C) a trust or estate in which such persons own more than 35 percent of the beneficial interest.
50-percent controlled entity.--The term `50-percent controlled entity' means any corporation, partnership, or trust in which a medical service organization owns more than 50 percent of the combined voting power, profits interest, or beneficial interest, as the case may be.
Constructive ownership rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 4946(a) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Taxable period.--The term `taxable period' means, with respect to any self-dealing asset transaction, the period beginning with the date on which the transaction occurs and ending on the earliest of-- ``(A) the date of mailing a notice of deficiency under section 6212 with respect to the tax imposed by subsection (a)(1), ``(B) the date on which the tax imposed by subsection (a)(1) is assessed, or ``(C) the date on which correction of the self- dealing asset transaction is corrected.
Amount involved.--The term `amount involved' means, with respect to any self-dealing asset transaction, the amount of money and fair market value of other property transferred by the medical service organization in the transaction (or in the case of a lease, the fair market value of the leased property).
For purposes of the preceding sentence-- ``(A) in the case of the taxes imposed by subsection (a), fair market value shall be determined as of the date of which the transaction occurs, and ``(B) in the case of the taxes imposed by subsection (b), fair market value shall be the highest fair market value during the taxable period.
Correction.--The terms `correction' and `correct' mean, with respect to any self-dealing asset transaction, undoing the transaction to the extent possible, but in any case place the medical service organization in a financial position not worse than that in which it would be if the disqualified person were dealing under the highest fiduciary standards.''
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 4963 of such Code are each amended by inserting ``4958,'' after ``4955,''.
Subsection (b) of section 4962 of such Code is amended by inserting before the period ``and shall not include the tax imposed by section 4958(a) (relating to initial tax on self- dealing asset transactions)''.
Subsection (e) of section 6213 of such Code is amended by inserting ``4958 (relating to self-dealing in certain assets of tax-exempt medical service organizations),'' before ``4971''.
The table of subchapters for chapter 42 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Subchapter D. Self-dealing in certain assets of tax-exempt medical service organizations.
``Subchapter E. Abatement of first and second tier taxes in certain cases.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to transactions occurring after November 26, 1991.