This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Investment and Growth Act''.
S CORPORATION TAX RATE.
In General.--Section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Tax Rate on Certain S Corporation Income.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (4), if a taxpayer has taxable S corporation income for any taxable year to which this subsection applies, then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed the sum of-- ``(A) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this subsection had not been enacted on the greater of-- ``(i) taxable income reduced by qualified taxable S corporation income, or ``(ii) the amount of taxable income taxed at a rate below 36 percent, plus ``(B) a tax of 34 percent of qualified taxable S corporation income in excess of the taxable income that is subject to tax under subparagraph (A).
Taxable s corporation income.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Qualified taxable s corporation income.--The term `qualified taxable S corporation income' means taxable S corporation income only to the extent such income does not exceed $5,000,000.
Special rule for qualified personal service corporation.-- ``(i) In general.--In the case of a qualified personal service corporation, taxable S corporation income taken into account under subparagraph (A) may not exceed the excess of-- ``(I) capital expenditures during the taxable year and the 2 prior taxable years, over ``(II) the amount of capital expenditures taken into account under subclause (I) for 2 prior taxable years.
Ordering rule.--For purposes of clause (i), capital expenditures shall be used in the order in which such expenditures are made, beginning with the earliest year.
Taxable s corporation income.--The term `taxable S corporation income' means, with respect to any taxable year, the taxable income of the taxpayer for such year attributable to the active conduct of any trade or business of an eligible S corporation.
Eligible s corporation.--The term `eligible S corporation' means an S corporation, except that such term does not include-- ``(i) a personal service corporation as defined in section 469(j)(2), other than a qualified personal service corporation, and ``(ii) a personal holding company (as defined in section 542).
Qualified personal service corporation defined.--The term `qualified personal service corporation' has the meaning given such term in section 448(d)(2).
Qualified retained earnings account.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--Each S corporation shall establish a qualified retained earnings account which shall be-- ``(i) increased each year by the portion of the taxable income of the S corporation that is attributable to the active conduct of a trade or business by the S corporation, ``(ii) decreased each year by the portion of the taxable loss of the S corporation that is attributable to such active conduct of a trade or business, and ``(iii) decreased by qualified and nonqualified distributions from such S corporation to the shareholders thereof.
Qualified distributions.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), a distribution from a qualified retained earnings account shall be treated as a qualified distribution if the distribution-- ``(i) is made to the owners of the eligible S corporation, and ``(ii) is made to enable the S corporation shareholder to pay income taxes (Federal, State, local) on the income of the eligible S corporation.
The Secretary is authorized to promulgate regulations pursuant to this subparagraph to provide rules to determine the extent to which distributions by an S corporation are made to enable the distributee to pay its income taxes, including regulations that establish a presumption that distributions are to enable the distributee to pay income taxes if such distributions do not exceed 34 percent of qualified taxable S corporation income.
Distributions after taxable year.--For purposes of subparagraph (B), a distribution from a qualified retained earnings account within 75 days after the end of a taxable year of the eligible S corporation may be treated as a distribution made on the last day of such taxable year.
Additional tax on nonqualified distributions.-- ``(A) In general.--If-- ``(i) a distribution other than a qualified distribution is made from a qualified retained earnings account, and ``(ii) such distribution is made from additions to the account for a taxable year with respect to which paragraph (1)(B) applied to the taxpayer by reason of such additions, then the tax imposed by this section for the taxable year of the taxpayer with or within which the taxable year of the eligible S corporation in which the distribution was made ends shall be increased by the amount determined under subparagraph (B).
Amount of additional tax.--The amount of tax determined under this subparagraph is an amount equal to the product of the taxpayer's pro rata share of the distribution described in subparagraph (A)(i) and the number of percentage points (and fractions thereof) by which the highest rate of tax applicable to the taxpayer in effect under this section for the taxpayer's taxable year exceeds 34 percent.
Order of distributions.--For purposes of this paragraph, distributions shall be treated as having been made from the qualified retained earnings account on a last-in, first-out basis.
Distributions in excess of the balance of the qualified retained earnings account shall not reduce such account below zero.
Years to which subsection applies.--This subsection shall apply to any taxable year if the highest rate of tax set forth in subsection (a), (b), (c), (d), or (e) (whichever applies) for the taxable year exceeds 34 percent.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations preventing the characterization of distributions for purposes of compensation or personal use as distributions of qualified retained earnings.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.