SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS; FINDINGS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Real Solutions to World Hunger Act of 2002''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents; findings.
Ensuring safety and mitigating ecological impacts of United States exports of genetically engineered animals, plants, and seeds.
Promotion of international research regarding sustainable agriculture to assist developing countries.
Position of the United States in the international financial institutions regarding genetically engineered animals, plants, and seeds.
Tax on biotech companies to help fund sustainable agriculture research.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The need for mandatory labeling, safety testing, and environmental reviews of genetically engineered foods do not constitute obstacles to the cessation of world hunger.
The dominant causes of world hunger are not technological in nature, but rooted in basic social-economic failures.
Technologies, like genetically engineered food, may have a limited role, but economics remain the significant barrier to a consistent food supply, and the development of expensive genetically engineered foods may only exacerbate this trend.
Most genetically engineered food products and almost all research funding for the development of genetically engineered food target developed nation agriculture and consumers.
Developing countries cannot afford this technology and therefore are vastly ignored.
Agroecological interventions have had significant success in helping developing nations feed themselves with higher yields and improved environmental practices, all within reasonable costs for developing countries.
If the biotech industry believes they can help mitigate hunger concerns, domestic or foreign, then requiring biotech companies to make available the necessary resources for this purpose is appropriate.
In this Act: (1) Genetically engineered animal.--The term ``genetically engineered animal'' means an animal that contains a genetically engineered material or was produced with a genetically engineered material.
An animal shall be considered to contain a genetically engineered material or to have been produced with a genetically engineered material if the animal has been injected or otherwise treated with a genetically engineered material or is the offspring of an animal that has been so injected or treated.
Genetically engineered plant.--The term ``genetically engineered plant'' means a plant that contains a genetically engineered material or was produced from a genetically engineered seed.
A plant shall be considered to contain a genetically engineered material if the plant has been injected or otherwise treated with a genetically engineered material (except that the use of manure as a fertilizer for the plant may not be construed to mean that the plant is produced with a genetically engineered material).
Genetically engineered seed.--The term ``genetically engineered seed'' means a seed that contains a genetically engineered material or was produced with a genetically engineered material.
A seed shall be considered to contain a genetically engineered material or to have been produced with a genetically engineered material if the seed (or the plant from which the seed is derived) has been injected or otherwise treated with a genetically engineered material (except that the use of manure as a fertilizer for the plant may not be construed to mean that any resulting seeds are produced with a genetically engineered material).
Genetically engineered material.--The term ``genetically engineered material'' means material that has been altered at the molecular or cellular level by means that are not possible under natural conditions or processes (including recombinant DNA and RNA techniques, cell fusion, microencapsulation, macroencapsulation, gene deletion and doubling, introducing a foreign gene, and changing the positions of genes), other than a means consisting exclusively of breeding, conjugation, fermentation, hybridization, in vitro fertilization or tissue culture or mutagenesis.
Biotech company.--The term ``biotech company'' means a person engaged in the business of creating genetically engineered material and obtaining the patent rights to that material for the purposes of commercial exploitation of that material.
The term does not include the employees of such person.
ENSURING SAFETY AND MITIGATING ECOLOGICAL IMPACTS OF UNITED STATES EXPORTS OF GENETICALLY ENGINEERED ANIMALS, PLANTS, AND SEEDS.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ship or offer for shipment, or for any carrier or other person to transport or receive for transportation, to any foreign country, any genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed that the person knows, or has reason to believe, will be used by the ultimate purchaser to produce an agricultural commodity if-- (1) the genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed-- (A) was denied a Federal approval necessary as a condition for commercial marketing in the United States; or (B) was the subject of an application for such a Federal approval that was withdrawn; or (2) the government of the foreign country has not certified that ecological impacts related to the importation of the genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed have been mitigated to the satisfaction of the foreign government.
PROMOTION OF INTERNATIONAL RESEARCH REGARDING SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE TO ASSIST DEVELOPING COUNTRIES.
Grants for International Research.--The Secretary of Agriculture may make grants to designated international research institutions for the purpose of promoting the development of sustainable agriculture techniques that rely on minimum artificial inputs to meet the food and fiber needs of developing countries.
Eligible sustainable agriculture techniques may not derive any genetic engineered material.
Use of Grant Funds.--A grant recipient shall use the funds provided under this section only in a manner consistent with the purpose for which the grant is awarded.
Designated Institutions.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall designate the international research institutions eligible to apply for a grant under this section.
The designated institutions shall include the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization and the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research.
Competitive Basis.--Grants under this section shall be made on a competitive basis.
Funding Source.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall use the Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund, in such amounts as provided in advance in appropriation Acts, to make grants under this section.
POSITION OF THE UNITED STATES IN THE INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS REGARDING GENETICALLY ENGINEERED ANIMALS, PLANTS, AND SEEDS.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director at each international financial institution (as defined in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act) to make no effort to encourage the institution to prohibit any country eligible for assistance under the Heavily Indebted Poor Countries (HIPC) Initiative of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development from requiring compulsory licensing with respect to any genetically engineered animal, genetically engineered plant, or genetically engineered seed.
TAX ON BIOTECH COMPANIES TO HELP FUND SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE RESEARCH.
Special Tax.-- (1) Tax imposed.--Subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART VIII--TAX ON GENETIC ENGINEERING BUSINESSES ``Sec.
Tax Imposed.--In the case of a corporation, there is hereby imposed (in addition to any other tax imposed by this subtitle) a tax equal to 1 percent of the gross income of such business for the taxable year which is attributable (directly or indirectly) to-- ``(1) the marketing in the United States of any genetically engineered organism, or ``(2) the holding of a patent on any such an organism.
Definition.--In this section, the term `genetically engineered organism' means-- ``(1) an organism that has been altered at the molecular or cellular level by means that are not possible under natural conditions or processes (including but not limited to recombinant DNA and RNA techniques, cell fusion, microencapsulation, macroencapsulation, gene deletion and doubling, introducing a foreign gene, and changing the positions of genes), other than a means consisting exclusively of breeding, conjugation, fermentation, hybridization, in vitro fertilization, tissue culture, or mutagenesis; and ``(2) an organism made through sexual or asexual reproduction (or both) involving an organism described in subparagraph (A), if possessing any of the altered molecular or cellular characteristics of the organism so described.''
Clerical amendment.--The table of parts for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part VIII.
Tax on genetic engineering businesses.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund.-- (1) Creation and funding source.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to trust fund code) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfer to Trust Fund of Certain Taxes.--There is hereby appropriated to the Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the taxes received in the Treasury under section 59B.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.--Amounts in the Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, only for grants under sections 3 and 4 of the Real Solutions to World Hunger Act of 2002.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for such subchapter A is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Sustainable Agriculture Trust Fund.''