This Act may be cited as the ``African Development Foundation Act of 2007''.
Renaming.--Section 503(a) of the African Development Foundation Act (22 United States Code 290h-1(a)) is amended by striking ``African Development Foundation'' and inserting ``United States African Development Foundation''.
References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, map, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the African Development Foundation shall be considered to be a reference to the United States African Development Foundation.
FUNCTIONS OF THE FOUNDATION.
Entities Eligible To Receive Grants, Loans, and Loan Guarantees.--Paragraph (1) of subsection (a) of section 505 of such Act (22 United States Code 290h-3(a)(1)) is amended by inserting after ``other entity'' the following: ``(including small- and medium-sized enterprises)''.
Use of Grant and Loan Funds.--Subparagraph (A) of such paragraph (22 United States Code 290h-3(a)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``local development institutions and the support of development efforts initiated by communities themselves'' and inserting ``local development institutions, including capital and technical assistance funds that promote the purposes of this title, and the support of development efforts initiated by communities themselves or their members''.
Increased Limitation on Funding of Individual Projects.-- Paragraph (2) of such subsection (22 United States Code 290h-3(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``$250,000.''
This funding limitation may be exceeded only in exceptional circumstances and with the approval of the Board of Directors and notification to Congress.
Approval of the Board of Directors and notification to Congress shall not be required in the case of an increase of less than $50,000 that is necessary to maintain the original value of an award in local currency.''.
Community Project Priorities.--Subsection (b) of such section (22 United States Code 290h-3(b)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by striking ``making grants, loans, and loan guarantees'' and all that follows through ``development'' and inserting ``making awards under subsection (a), the Foundation shall give priority to projects which community groups and small- and medium-sized enterprises undertake to foster development at the community level''; and (2) in the second sentence, by striking ``make such grants, loans, and loan guarantees'' and inserting ``make awards''.
Authority To Make Awards to Non-African Entities.--Such section is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Authority To Make Awards to Non-African Entities.--Upon the approval of the Board of Directors and notification to Congress, the Foundation may make an award to a small- or medium-sized enterprise that is not wholly-owned and controlled by indigenous Africans if it meets the following requirements: ``(1) Ownership of the entity is predominantly vested in one or more individuals who are indigenous to Africa and who are representative and knowledgeable of, and have a history of responding to, the needs and aspirations of the poor.
Management and daily business operations of the entity are controlled by one or more individuals who are indigenous to and reside in Africa.''.
Authority To Provide Training and Other Technical Assistance.-- Such section, as amended by subsection (e), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Authority To Provide Training and Other Technical Assistance.--The Foundation may provide training and other assistance to entities described in subsection (a) and to entities described in subsection (c), subject to the requirements of such subsection, in order to carry out the purposes specified in section 504.''.
Section 506(a) of such Act (22 United States Code 290h-4(a)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (9), (10), (11), and (12) as paragraphs (10), (12), (13), and (14), respectively; (2) by inserting after paragraph (8) the following new paragraph: ``(9) may make advance payments in an African country in accordance with lease or rental agreements for periods of time determined by law or custom;''; and (3) by inserting after paragraph (10), as redesignated by paragraph (2) of this section, the following new paragraph: ``(11) may maintain bank accounts outside the United States Treasury and retain any interest earned on such accounts in furtherance of the purposes of this Act;''.
Reimbursement of Transportation Expenses.--Subsection (b) of section 507 of such Act (22 United States Code 290h-5(b)) is amended by inserting after ``transportation expenses'' the following: ``(in accordance with the Federal Travel Regulations (chapters 300 through 304 of title 41, Code of Federal Regulations))''.
Limited Authority To Make Appointments Without Regard to Certain Civil Service Laws.--Subsection (d) of such section (22 United States Code 290h-5(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Subject to the full time equivalent (FTE) ceiling of the Foundation, the president may, without regard to civil service laws governing appointments in the competitive service, provide time-limited appointments lasting up to 4 years to not more than 4 individuals.
Individuals so appointed shall be subject to termination without regard to chapter 75 of title 5, United States Code.''.
Elimination of Requirement To Establish Advisory Council.-- Subsection (e) of such section is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``shall'' and inserting ``may''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``The Board'' and inserting ``If an advisory council is established under paragraph (1), the Board''.