If, after a formal complaint is filed under section 8, or under the regulations described in section 10(c)(3), the employee and the head of the employing office resolve the issues involved, the employee may withdraw the complaint or the parties may enter into a written agreement, subject to the approval of the Director.
House of Representatives.--Any intimidation of, or reprisal against, an employee of the House of Representatives by any Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives, or by the Architect of the Capitol, or anyone employed by the Architect of the Capitol, as the case may be, because of the exercise of a right under this Act constitutes an unlawful employment practice, which may be remedied in the same manner under this Act as is a violation.
Senate.--Any intimidation of, or reprisal against, an employee of the Senate by any Member, officer, or employee of the Senate, or by the Architect of the Capitol, or anyone employed by the Architect of the Capitol, as the case may be, because of the exercise of a right under this Act constitutes an unlawful employment practice, which may be remedied in the same manner under this Act as is a violation.
Counseling.--All counseling shall be strictly confidential except that the Office and the employee may agree to notify the head of the employing office of the allegations.
Mediation.--All mediation shall be strictly confidential.
Hearings.--Except as provided in subsection (d), the hearings, deliberations, and decisions of the hearing board shall be confidential.
Release of Records for Judicial Review.--The records and decisions of hearing boards, and the decisions of the Office, may be made public if required for the purpose of judicial review under section 9 or section 10(d).
POLITICAL AFFILIATION AND PLACE OF RESIDENCE.
In General.--It shall not be a violation to consider the-- (1) party affiliation; (2) domicile; or (3) political compatibility with the employing office, of an employee with respect to employment decisions.
Definition.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term ``employee'' means-- (1) a congressional employee on the staff of the leadership of the House of Representatives or the leadership of the Senate; (2) a congressional employee on the staff of a committee or subcommittee of-- (A) the House of Representatives; or (B) the Senate; (3) a congressional employee on the staff of a Member of the House of Representatives or on the staff of a Senator; (4) an officer of the House of Representatives or Senate, or a congressional employee, who is elected by the House of Representatives or Senate or is appointed by a Member of the House of Representatives or by a Senator, other than an employee described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3); or (5) an applicant for a position that is to be occupied by an individual described in paragraphs (1) through (4).
No Congressional employee may commence a judicial proceeding to redress practices prohibited under section 4, except as provided in this Act.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Civil Rights Act of 1991.-- (1) Presidential and state employees.--Sections 301 and 302 of the Government Employee Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 1201 and 1202) are amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEE RIGHTS ACT OF 1991.
Short Title.--This title may be cited as the `Government Employee Rights Act of 1991'.
Purpose.--The purpose of this title is to provide procedures to protect the right of certain government employees, with respect to their public employment, to be free of discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability.
Definition.--For purposes of this title, the term `violation' means a practice that violates section 302 of this title.
``All personnel actions affecting the appointees described in section 303(a)(1) or the individuals described in section 304(a) shall be made free from any discrimination based on-- ``(1) race, color, religion, sex, or national origin, within the meaning of section 717 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e-16); ``(2) age, within the meaning of section 15 of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 633a); or ``(3) handicap or disability, within the meaning of section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 791) and sections 102-104 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12112-14).''.
Repeals.--Section 117, sections 303 through 319, and sections 322, 324, and 325 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 60l, and 1203 et sequentes) are repealed.
Redesignation.--Sections 320 and 321 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 1219 and 1220) are redesignated as sections 303 and 304, respectively.
Rule of the House of Representatives.--Rule LI of the House of Representatives is repealed.
Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1989.--Section 8 of the Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1989 (29 United States Code 60k) is repealed.
Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.--Title V of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (2 United States Code 60m et sequentes) is repealed.
As used in this Act: (1) Congressional employee.--The term ``congressional employee'' means-- (A) an employee of the House of Representatives; (B) an employee of the Senate; and (C) an employee of an instrumentality.
Employee of an instrumentality.--The term ``employee of an instrumentality'' means-- (A) an employee of the Architect of the Capitol (except an employee described in paragraph (3) or (4)(B)), the Congressional Budget Office, the General Accounting Office, the Government Printing Office, the Library of Congress, the Office of Technology Assessment, or the United States Botanic Garden; (B) any applicant for a position that will last 90 days or more and that is to be occupied by an individual described in subparagraph (A); or (C) any individual who was formerly an employee described in subparagraph (A) and whose claim of a violation arises out of the employment of the individual by an instrumentality described in subparagraph (A).
Employee of the house of representatives.--The term ``employee of the House of Representatives'' means an individual who was eligible to file a formal complaint with the Office of Fair Employment Practice of the House of Representatives under clause 6 of rule LI of the House of Representatives, as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act.
Employee of the senate.--The term ``employee of the Senate'' means-- (A) any employee whose pay is disbursed by the Secretary of the Senate; (B) any employee of the Architect of the Capitol who is assigned to the Senate Restaurants or to the Superintendent of the Senate Office Buildings; (C) any applicant for a position that will last 90 days or more and that is to be occupied by an individual described in subparagraph (A) or (B); or (D) any individual who was formerly an employee described in subparagraph (A) or (B) and whose claim of a violation arises out of the individual's Senate employment.
Employing office.--The term ``employing office'' means the office headed by a head of an employing office.
Head of an employing office.--The term ``head of an employing office'' means the individual who has final authority to appoint, hire, discharge, and set the terms, conditions or privileges of the Senate employment of an employee.
Violation.--The term ``violation'' means a violation of a regulation that takes effect under section 4(c).
S 1439 IS----2 S 1439 IS----3