This Act may be cited as the ``Gasoline Affordability and Security Act'' or the ``GAS Act''.
TITLE I--CONSUMER PROTECTION SEC.
PROHIBITION ON GASOLINE PRICE GOUGING.
Unlawful Conduct.--During the 30-day period beginning on the date on which the President determines the existence of conditions warranting the drawdown and sale of petroleum products from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve under subsection (d) or (h) of section 161 of the Energy Policy and Conservation Act (42 United States Code 6241), it shall be an unfair or deceptive act or practice in violation of section 5(a)(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45(a)(1)) for any person to sell gasoline or diesel fuel at a price which constitutes price gouging as defined by rule pursuant to subsection (b).
Enforcement.--A violation of subsection (a) shall be treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or deceptive act or practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)) and shall be enforced by the Federal Trade Commission in accordance with all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act.
Penalties.--Any person who violates subsection (a), or the rules promulgated pursuant to this section, shall be subject to a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $11,000 per day in which a violation occurs.
Rulemaking.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall promulgate rules, in accordance with section 5(n) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45(n)), that-- (1) define ``price gouging'' for purposes of this section; and (2) carry out this section.
COMPETITIVE PRICING TASK FORCE.
Establishment.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall establish a Competitive Pricing Task Force (referred to in this section as the ``Task Force''.
Duties.--The Task Force shall provide each State attorney general who requests assistance from the Task Force-- (1) with assistance in the investigation of alleged price gouging affecting the consumers of the State; and (2) such additional technical assistance as may be necessary in studying and drafting State laws to prohibit price gouging.
Duration.--The Task Force shall carry out the duties described in subsection (b) during the 2-year period beginning on the date on which the Task Force is established under subsection (a).
List.--The Federal Trade Commission shall publish a list on its Web site containing the names of all persons penalized under section 101.
Information About Gasoline Prices.--The Energy Information Administration of the Department of Energy shall disseminate to all persons selling gasoline or diesel fuel to retail consumers, in a manner suitable for posting, information contained in the table on the Administration's Web site entitled, ``WHAT WE PAY FOR IN A GALLON OF REGULAR GASOLINE'', to inform such consumers of the factors contributing to the price of gasoline.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this title.
TITLE II--INCREASING SUPPLY SEC.
Section 402 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 15962) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(A)-- (A) in clause (iv), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) by redesignating clause (v) as clause (vi); and (C) by inserting after clause (iv) the following: ``(v) a Fischer-Tropsch technology project to produce ultra-low sulfur liquid transportation fuel; and''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Energy Policy Priority.-- ``(1) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the Secretary provides funds for a Fischer-Tropsch technology project to produce ultra-low sulfur liquid transportation fuel under subsection (b)(1)(A)(v), the Secretary shall establish as an energy policy priority the expedited, large-scale commercialization of that technology to promote the supply of affordable, clean, domestic gasoline and diesel fuel.
Subsequent projects.-- ``(A) In general.--In accordance with the energy policy priority established under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide funds for a subsequent Fischer- Tropsch technology project to produce ultra-low sulfur liquid transportation fuel as soon as practicable after the date on which the priority is established.
Criteria for selection.--In carrying out subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall select the private sector recipient that is the most capable of designing and constructing a Fischer-Tropsch technology project with an output of not less than 50,000 barrels per day of ultra-low sulfur transportation fuel, as determined by the Secretary.''.
Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall conduct an expedited review of any fuel additive an application for verification for which has been filed in accordance with the voluntary diesel retrofit program.
TITLE III--DECREASING DEMAND SEC.
301. CREDIT FOR TELEWORKING.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified teleworking expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such year.
Maximum Credit.-- ``(1) Per teleworker limitation.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable year with respect to qualified teleworking expenses paid or incurred by or on behalf of an individual teleworker shall not exceed-- ``(A) in the case of an eligible taxpayer described in subsection (c)(1)(A), $1,000, and ``(B) in the case of an eligible taxpayer described in subsection (c)(1)(B), $2,000.
Reduction for teleworking less than full year.--In the case of an individual who is in a teleworking arrangement for less than a full taxable year, the dollar amount referred to subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (1) shall be reduced by an amount which bears the same ratio to such dollar amount as the number of months in which such individual is not in a teleworking arrangement bears to 12.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, an individual shall be treated as being in a teleworking arrangement for a month if the individual is subject to such arrangement for any day of such month.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible taxpayer.--The term `eligible taxpayer' means-- ``(A) in the case of an individual, an individual who performs services for an employer under a teleworking arrangement, and ``(B) in the case of an employer, an employer for whom employees perform services under a teleworking arrangement.
Teleworking arrangement.--The term `teleworking arrangement' means an arrangement under which an employee teleworks for an employer not less than 75 days per year.
Qualified teleworking expenses.--The term `qualified teleworking expenses' means expenses paid or incurred under a teleworking arrangement for furnishings and electronic information equipment which are used to enable an individual to telework.
Telework.--The term `telework' means to perform work functions, using electronic information and communication technologies, thereby reducing or eliminating the physical commute to and from the traditional work site.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) Liability for tax.--The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(A) the regular tax for the taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and the preceding sections of this subpart, over ``(B) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Carryforward of unused credit.--If the amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the limitation under paragraph (1) for the taxable year, the excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the amount allowable as a credit under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Basis reduction.--The basis of any property for which a credit is allowable under subsection (a) shall be reduced by the amount of such credit (determined without regard to subsection (d)).
Recapture.--The Secretary shall, by regulations, provide for recapturing the benefit of any credit allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property which ceases to be property eligible for such credit.
Property used outside united states not qualified.-- No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any property referred to in section 50(b)(1) or with respect to the portion of the cost of any property taken into account under section 179.
Election to not take credit.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any expense if the taxpayer elects to not have this section apply with respect to such expense.
Denial of double benefit.--No deduction or credit (other than under this section) shall be allowed under this chapter with respect to any expense which is taken into account in determining the credit under this section.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (a) of section 1016 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (36), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (37) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(38) to the extent provided in section 30D(e)(1), in the case of amounts with respect to which a credit has been allowed under section 30D.''.
Section 55(c)(3) of such Code is amended by inserting ``30D(d),'' after ``30(b)(3),''.
Section 6501(m) of such Code is amended by inserting ``30D(e)(4),'' after ``30C(e)(5),''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.
EMPLOYER-PROVIDED COMPUTER EQUIPMENT TREATED AS FRINGE BENEFIT.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 132 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) qualified employer-provided computer equipment fringe.''.
Qualified Employer-Provided Computer Equipment Fringe.--Section 132 of such Code is amended by redesignating subsection (o) as subsection (p) and by inserting after subsection (n) the following new subsection: ``(o) Qualified Employer-Provided Computer Equipment Fringe.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified employer-provided computer equipment fringe' means any computer and related equipment and services provided to an employee by an employer if-- ``(A) such computer and related equipment and services are necessary for the employee to perform work for the employer from the employee's home, and ``(B) the employee makes substantial business use of the equipment in the performance of work for the employer.
Substantial use.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `substantial business use' includes standby use for periods when work from home may be required by the employer such as during work closures caused by the threat of terrorism, inclement weather, or natural disasters.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2005.
It is the sense of Congress that Congress and the employees of the legislative branch of the Federal Government should-- (1) conserve gasoline, aviation, and diesel fuel by whatever means practicable; and (2) as a part of such conservation efforts, promote teleworking.