This Act may be cited as the ``Child Support Enforcement Act''.
NO EFFECT ON RIGHTS AND LIABILITIES.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect-- (1) the right of an individual or State to receive any child support payment; or (2) the obligation of an individual to pay child support.
INCLUSION IN INCOME OF AMOUNT OF UNPAID CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENTS.
In General.--Section 108 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to discharge of indebtedness income) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h) Unpaid Child Support Payments.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this chapter, any taxable unpaid child support payments of a taxpayer for any taxable year shall be treated as amounts includible in gross income of the taxpayer for the taxable year by reason of the discharge of indebtedness of the taxpayer.
Taxable unpaid child support payments.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `taxable unpaid child support payments' means payments-- ``(A) which were applicable child support payments which the taxpayer was required to pay under a support instrument for the support of a child of the taxpayer, and ``(B) with respect to which the notice requirements of paragraph (3) are met.
Notice requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--During January of the second calendar year following a calendar year in which there begins a taxable year for which a deduction allowed under section 166(f) was claimed, the eligible taxpayer shall send a notice (in such form as the Secretary may prescribe) to the individual who failed to make payments which contains-- ``(i) the amount of the applicable child support payments for such taxable year, and ``(ii) notice that the individual is required to include such amount in gross income for the taxable year beginning in the preceding calendar year.
Notice by secretary.--If notice cannot be provided under subparagraph (A) because the address is not known to the eligible taxpayer, the Secretary shall send such notice if the address is available to the Secretary.
Address unknown.--If notice cannot be provided under subparagraph (A) or (B) because there is no known address, no income shall be included in gross income for any taxable year beginning before the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which such notice may be sent.
Subsequent payments.--If any payment required to be included in gross income under paragraph (1) is subsequently made, the amount of such payment shall be allowed as a deduction for the taxable year in which such payment is made.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the terms `applicable child support payments' and `eligible taxpayer' have the meanings given such terms by section 166(f).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
ALLOWANCE OF BAD DEBT DEDUCTION FOR UNPAID CHILD SUPPORT PAYMENTS.
In General.--Section 166 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to deduction for bad debts) is amended by redesignating subsection (f) as subsection (g) and by inserting after subsection (e) the following new subsection: ``(f) Unpaid Child Support Payments.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of any eligible taxpayer who has any applicable child support payments remaining unpaid as of the close of the taxable year-- ``(A) subsections (a) and (d) shall not apply to such payments, and ``(B) there shall be allowed as a deduction for such taxable year an amount equal to the amount of such payments.
Per child limitation on deduction.--The aggregate amount allowable as a deduction for any taxable year under paragraph (1) with respect to any child for whom applicable child support payments are required to be paid shall not exceed $5,000.
Eligible taxpayer.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `eligible taxpayer' means an individual-- ``(A) whose adjusted gross income for the taxable year does not exceed $50,000, ``(B) with respect to whom the amount of applicable child support payments remaining unpaid as of the close of the taxable year is equal to or greater than $500, and ``(C) who meets the identification requirements of paragraph (5).
Applicable child support payment.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `applicable child support payment' means, with respect to any taxable year of the eligible taxpayer-- ``(i) any periodic payment of a fixed amount, or ``(ii) any payment of a medical or educational expense, insurance premium, or other similar item, which is required to be paid to such taxpayer during such taxable year by an individual under a support instrument meeting the requirements of paragraph (8) for the support of any qualifying child of such individual.
Qualifying child.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualifying child' means a child of an eligible individual with respect to whom a deduction is allowable under section 151 for the taxable year (or would be so allowable but for paragraph (2) or (4) of section 152(e)) or, while eligible for such deduction, was determined to be disabled under subtitles 2 or 16 of chapter 42.
Payments must be delinquent for at least entire year.--Any payment described in subparagraph (A) which is required to be made by an individual to an eligible taxpayer shall not be treated as an applicable unpaid child support payment if at least half of the payments which are required to be paid to the eligible taxpayer during the 12-month period ending on the last day of the taxable year are paid.
In the case of the 1st taxable year to which this subsection applies to payments from any individual, the preceding sentence shall be applied by substituting `24-month' for `12- month'.
Coordination with afdc.--The term `applicable child support payment' shall not include any payment the right to which has been assigned to a State under section 402(a)(26) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 602(a)(26)).
Identification requirements.--The requirements of this paragraph are met if the eligible taxpayer includes on the return claiming the deduction under this subsection the name, address, and taxpayer identification number of-- ``(A) each child with respect to whom child support payments to which this subsection applies are required to be paid, and ``(B) the individual who was required to make such child support payments.
In the case of a failure to provide the information under subparagraph (B), the preceding sentence shall not apply if the eligible taxpayer certifies that any such information is not known.
Cost-of-living adjustments.--In the case of any taxable year beginning after 1993, the $5,000 amount under paragraph (2), the $50,000 amount under paragraph (3)(A), and the $500 amount under paragraph (3)(B) shall each be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(A) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(B) the cost-of-living adjustment determined under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, except that section 1(f)(3)(B) shall be applied by substituting `1992' for `1989'.
Subsequent payments.--If any payment with respect to which a deduction was allowed under paragraph (1) is subsequently made, such payment shall be included in gross income of the eligible taxpayer for the taxable year in which paid.
This paragraph shall not apply to any amount if an individual has assigned the right to receive such amount to a State (and the State does not pay such amount to such individual).
Support instrument.--For purposes of this subsection, a support instrument meets the requirements of this paragraph if it is-- ``(A) a decree of divorce or separate maintenance or a written instrument incident to such a decree, ``(B) a written separation agreement, or ``(C) a decree (not described in subparagraph (A)) of a court or administrative agency requiring a parent to make payments for the support or maintenance of 1 or more children of such parent.''
Deduction for Nonitemizers.--Section 62(a) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(15) Unpaid child support payments.--The deduction allowed by section 166(f).''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 166(d)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, or'' and by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(C) a debt which is an applicable child support payment under subsection (f).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992.
REDUCTION OF FEDERAL DEBT.
Net revenues received in the Treasury pursuant to this Act shall be applied, as provided in appropriation Acts, solely to the retirement of outstanding public debt obligations of the United States and may not be obligated or expended for any other purpose, notwithstanding any other provision of law that does not specifically refer to this section.