This Act may be cited as the ``National Family Enterprise Preservation Act of 1995''.
INCREASE IN UNIFIED ESTATE AND GIFT TAX CREDITS FOR FAMILY ENTERPRISES.
Estate Tax.--Section 2010 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to unified credit against estate tax) is amended by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) Additional Credit For Family Enterprises.--The amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) shall be increased by an amount equal to the value of any family enterprise property included in the decedent's gross estate under section 2040A(a), to the extent such value does not exceed $121,800.''.
Gift Tax.--Section 2505 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to unified credit against gift tax) is amended by redesignating subsections (b) and (c) as subsections (c) and (d), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection: ``(b) Additional Credit For Family Enterprises.--The amount of the credit allowable under subsection (a) for each calendar year shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(1) the value of gifts of family enterprise property (as defined in section 2040A(b)(1)), to the extent such value does not exceed $121,800, reduced by ``(2) the sum of the amounts allowable as a credit to the individual under this subsection for all preceding calendar periods.''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) Estate tax credit.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to the estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1995.
Gift tax credit.--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall apply to gifts made after December 31, 1995.
INCREASE IN ANNUAL GIFT TAX EXCLUSION.
In General.--Section 2503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable gifts) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d), and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Additional Exclusions From Gifts.--The amount of the exclusion allowable under subsection (b) during a calendar year shall be increased by an amount equal to the value of gifts of family enterprise property (as defined in section 2040A(b)(1)) made during such year, to the extent such value does not exceed $10,000.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to gifts made after December 31, 1995.
In General.--Part III of subchapter A of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to gross estate) is amended by inserting after section 2040 the following new section: ``SEC.
General Rule.--The value included in the decedent's gross estate with respect to family enterprise property by reason of this section shall be-- ``(1) the value of such property, reduced by ``(2) the lesser of-- ``(A) 50 percent of the value of such property, or ``(B) $1,000,000.
Family Enterprise Property.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term ``family enterprise property'' means any interest in real or personal property which is devoted to use as a farm or used for farming purposes (within the meaning of paragraphs (4) and (5) of section 2032A(e)) or is used in any other trade or business, if at least 80 percent of the ownership interest in such farm or other trade or business is held-- ``(A) by 5 or fewer individuals, or ``(B) by individuals who are members of the same family (within the meaning of section 2032A(e)(2)).
Limited partnership interests excluded.--An interest in a limited partnership (other than a limited partnership composed solely of individuals described in paragraph (1)(B)) shall in no event be treated as family enterprise property.
Tax Treatment of Dispositions and Failure To Use for Qualifying Use.-- ``(1) Imposition of additional estate tax.--With respect to family enterprise property inherited from the decedent, if within 10 years after the decedent's death and before the death of any individual described in subsection (b)(1)-- ``(A) such individual disposes of any interest in such property (other than by a disposition to a member of the individual's family), or ``(B) such individual or a member of the individual's family ceases to participate in the active management of such property, then there is hereby imposed an additional estate tax.
Amount of additional tax.--The amount of the additional tax imposed by paragraph (1) with respect to any interest in family enterprise property shall be the amount equal to the excess of the estate tax liability attributable to such interest (determined without regard to subsection (a)) over the estate tax liability, reduced by 5 percent for each year following the date of the decedent's death in which the individual described in subsection (b)(1) or a member of the individual's family participated in the active management of such family enterprise property.
Active management.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``active management'' means the making of the management decisions of a business other than the daily operating decisions.
Additional Rules.--For purposes of this section, rules similar to the rules under paragraphs (3), (4), and (5) of section 2032A(c), paragraphs (7), (8), (9), (10), (11), and (12) of section 2032(e), and subsections (f), (g), (h), and (i) of section 2032A shall apply.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part III of subchapter A of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 2040 the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to the estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1995.
VALUATION OF CERTAIN FARM, ETC., REAL PROPERTY.
In General.--Section 2032A(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitation on aggregate reduction in fair market value) is amended by striking ``$750,000'' and inserting ``$1,000,000''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to the estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1995.