This Act may be cited as the ``Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund Amendments Act of 1996''.
LEAKING UNDERGROUND STORAGE TANKS.
Trust Fund Distribution.--Section 9004 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6991c) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Trust Fund Distribution to States.-- ``(1) In general.--(A) The Administrator shall distribute to States at least 85 percent of the funds appropriated to the Environmental Protection Agency from the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund (in this subsection referred to as the `Trust Fund') each fiscal year for the reasonable costs under cooperative agreements entered into with the Administrator for the following: ``(i) States' actions under section 9003(h)(7)(A).
Necessary administrative expenses directly related to corrective action and compensation programs under section 9004(c)(1).
Enforcement of a State or local program approved under this section or enforcement of this subtitle or similar State or local provisions by a State or local government.
State and local corrective actions pursuant to regulations promulgated under section 9003(c)(4).
Corrective action and compensation programs under section 9004(c)(1) for releases from underground storage tanks regulated under this subtitle in any instance, as determined by the State, in which the financial resources of an owner or operator, excluding resources provided by programs under section 9004(c)(1), are not adequate to pay for the cost of a corrective action without significantly impairing the ability of the owner or operator to continue in business.
Funds provided by the Administrator under subparagraph (A) may not be used by States for purposes of providing financial assistance to an owner or operator in meeting the requirements respecting underground storage tanks contained in section 280.21 of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations (as in effect on the date of the enactment of this subsection) or similar requirements in State programs approved under this section or similar State or local provisions.
Allocation.-- ``(A) Process.--In the case of a State that the Administrator has entered into a cooperative agreement with under section 9003(h)(7)(A), the Administrator shall distribute funds from the Trust Fund to the State using the allocation process developed by the Administrator for such cooperative agreements.
Revisions to process.--The Administrator may revise such allocation process only after-- ``(i) consulting with State agencies responsible for overseeing corrective action for releases from underground storage tanks and with representatives of owners and operators; and ``(ii) taking into consideration, at a minimum, the total revenue received from each State into the Trust Fund, the number of confirmed releases from leaking underground storage tanks in each State, the number of notified petroleum storage tanks in each State, and the percent of the population of each State using groundwater for any beneficial purpose.
Recipients.--Distributions from the Trust Fund under this subsection shall be made directly to the State agency entering into a cooperative agreement or enforcing the State program.
Cost recovery prohibition.--Funds provided to States from the Trust Fund to owners or operators for programs under section 9004(c)(1) for releases from underground storage tanks are not subject to cost recovery by the Administrator under section 9003(h)(6).''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 9508(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``and to carry out section 9004(f) of such Act''.
Technical Amendments.--Subtitle I of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6991 et sequentes) is amended as follows: (1) Section 9001(3)(A) (42 United States Code 6991(3)(A)) is amended by striking out ``sustances'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``substances''.
Section 9003(f)(1) (42 United States Code 6991b(f)(1)) is amended by striking out ``subsection (c) and (d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subsections (c) and (d)''.
Section 9004(a) (42 United States Code 6991c(a)) is amended by striking out ``in 9001(2)(A)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``in section 9001(2)(A)''.
Section 9005 (42 United States Code 6991d) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking out ``study taking'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``study, taking''; (B) in subsection (b)(1), by striking out ``relevent'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``relevant''; and (C) in subsection (b)(4), by striking out ``Evironmental'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Environmental''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 25, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.
By Jeff Trandahl, Assistant to the Clerk.