This Act may be cited as the ``ESOP Promotion Act of 1997''.
PROVISIONS RELATING TO S CORPORATIONS ESTABLISHING EMPLOYEE STOCK OWNERSHIP PLANS.
Repeal of Provision Making Certain ESOP Benefits Inapplicable to S Corporations.--Section 1316(d) of the Small Business Job Protection Act of 1996 is repealed, and the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall be applied and administered as if the amendments made by such section had not been enacted.
Repeal of Application of Unrelated Business Income Tax.-- Section 512(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (1) by striking ``described in section 1361(c)(7)'' in paragraph (1) and inserting ``described in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from taxation under section 501(a)'', and (2) by inserting ``Charitable Organizations Holding Stock in'' after ``Applicable to'' in the heading.
ESOPs Allowed To Distribute Cash Rather Than Stock.-- (1) In general.--Section 409(h)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(8) Plan maintained by s corporation.--In the case of a plan established and maintained by an S corporation which otherwise meets the requirements of this subsection or section 4975(e)(7), such plan shall not be treated as failing to meet the requirements of this subsection or section 401(a) merely because it does not permit a participant to exercise the right described in paragraph (1)(A) if such plan provides that the participant entitled to a distribution from the plan shall have a right to receive the distribution in cash.''
Conforming amendments.--Section 409(h)(2) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``A plan'' and inserting: ``(A) In general.--A plan'', and (B) by striking ``In the case of an employer'' and inserting: ``(B) Plans restricted by charter or bylaws.--In the case of an employer''.
Exemptions From Prohibited Transaction Rules Available to ESOPs and Shareholder Employees.--The last sentence of section 408(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1108(d)) is amended by striking all that precedes ``a participant or beneficiary'' and inserting ``For purposes of this subsection,''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
AMENDMENTS RELATED TO SECTION 1042.
Extension of Section 1042 Principles to Stock Received as Compensation for Services.-- (1) In general.--Section 83 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to property transferred in connection with performance of services) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Exception for Transfers of Qualified Securities Sold to Employee Stock Ownership Plans.-- ``(1) Exclusion from income.--Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply to, and no amount shall be includible in gross income with respect to, the transfer of any qualified security (as defined in section 1042(c)(1)) in connection with the performance of services if, and to the extent that, within 60 days after the event which would cause the recognition of income pursuant to subsection (a) or (b) but for this subsection, the transferee sells such qualified security to an employee stock ownership plan (as defined in section 4975(e)(7)) and the requirements of section 1042(a) are met with respect to such sale.
No deduction by employer.--Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (h), the person for whom the services were performed in connection with which any qualified security is transferred shall not be entitled to a deduction with respect to such transfer if, and to the extent that, paragraph (1) applies to such transfer.''
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Section 424(c)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (B), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (C) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) a sale to which section 1042 applies.''
Section 1042(a) of such Code is amended-- (i) by striking ``which would be recognized as long-term capital gain'' from the first sentence thereof, and (ii) by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Any gain which is recognized after the application of the preceding sentence shall be treated as ordinary income to the extent of the lesser of the amount of such gain or the amount which would have been treated as ordinary income but for this section.''
Section 1042(b)(4) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The requirements of the preceding sentence shall not apply to qualified securities received by the taxpayer in a transfer to which section 83 or 422 applied (or to which section 422 or 424 (as in effect on the day before the date of enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) applied).''
Section 1042(c)(1)(B) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B) were not received by the taxpayer in-- ``(i) a distribution from a plan described in section 401(a), or ``(ii) a transfer pursuant to a right to acquire stock to which section 423 applied.''
The first sentence of section 1042(d) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``The basis of the taxpayer in qualified replacement property purchased by the taxpayer during the replacement period shall be reduced by the amount of gain not recognized by virtue of such purchase, taking into account the application of subsection (a) and, if applicable, the application of section 83(i) or section 424(c)(1)(D).''
Section 1042(e)(1) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--If a taxpayer disposes of any qualified replacement property, then, notwithstanding any other provision of this title, gain (if any) shall be recognized to the extent of the gain which was not recognized by reason of the acquisition by such taxpayer of such qualified replacement property, taking into account the application of subsection (a) and, if applicable, the application of section 83(i) or 424(c)(1)(D).
Such gain shall be treated as ordinary income to the extent of the excess (if any) of the amount which would have been treated as ordinary income but for the application of such sections over the amount treated as ordinary income under the last sentence of subsection (a).''
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to sales of qualified securities on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Modification to 25-Percent Shareholder Rule.-- (1) In general.--Section 409(n)(1)(B) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B) for the benefit of any other person who owns (after the application of section 318(a)) more than 25 percent of-- ``(i) the total combined voting power of all classes of stock of the corporation which issued such employer securities or of any corporation which is a member of the same controlled group of corporations (within the meaning of subsection (l)(4)) as such corporation, or ``(ii) the total value of all classes of stock of any such corporation.''
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
ESOP DIVIDENDS MAY BE REINVESTED WITHOUT LOSS OF DIVIDEND DEDUCTION.
In General.--Section 404(k)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining applicable dividends) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (ii), by redesignating clause (iii) as clause (iv), and by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause: ``(iii) is, at the election of such participants or their beneficiaries-- ``(I) payable as provided in clause (i) or (ii), or ``(II) paid to the plan and reinvested in qualifying employer securities, or''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.