SHORT TITLE: TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Port Authority of New York/New Jersey Port Security Task Force Implementation Act of 2008''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Secure systems of international intermodal transportation.
Risk based resource allocation.
Use of maritime security risk assessment model.
Maritime and cargo security integrated project teams.
Integration of security plans and systems with local port authority and law enforcement agencies.
Standardized policy for advanced notice of Coast Guard boarding for security or port state control inspections.
Fraudulent or tampered with transportation worker identification cards.
Federal licensing of ship agents.
Establishment of a security individual.
Certification of maritime security guards.
Grants to tier 1 and tier 2 ports require regional strategic risk management assessment.
Vessel security plans for supply and similar vessels.
SECURE SYSTEMS OF INTERNATIONAL INTERMODAL TRANSPORTATION.
Section 70116 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``transportation.''
in subsection (a) and inserting ``transportation-- ``(1) to ensure the security and integrity of shipments of goods to the United States from the point at which such goods are initially packed or loaded into a cargo container for international shipment until they reach their ultimate destination; and ``(2) to facilitate the movement of such goods through the entire supply chain through an expedited security and clearance program.
''; and (2) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following: ``(b) Program Elements.--Within one year after the date of enactment of the Port Authority of New York/New Jersey Port Security Task Force Implementation Act of 2008, the Secretary, acting through the Commissioner of Customs and Border Protection, shall-- ``(1) establish minimum standards and procedures for verifying, at the point at which goods are placed in a cargo container for shipping, that the container is free of unauthorized contents, including hazardous chemical, biological, radiological, or nuclear material and for securely sealing such containers after the contents are so verified; ``(2) establish standards and procedures for securing cargo and monitoring that security while in transit; ``(3) develop performance standards to enhance the physical security of shipping containers, including performance standards for seals and locks and protocols and procedures to address anomalies; ``(4) establish standards and procedures for screening and evaluating cargo prior to loading in a foreign port for shipment to the United States either directly or via a foreign port; ``(5) establish standards and procedures that will enable the United States Government to ensure and validate compliance with those standards and procedures; and ``(6) incorporate any other measures the Secretary considers necessary to ensure the security and integrity of international intermodal transport movements.
Requirements for Entry of Containers.--Beginning 1 year after the date on which the Secretary determines that the standards and procedures under subsection (b)(5) have been established and are in effect, the Commissioner of Customs and Border Protection shall refuse entry into the customs territory of the United States to any container, arriving directly or via a foreign port, unless the entity shipping the container has complied with those standards and procedures with respect to that container.''.
Establishment.--Section 70103(b)(2) of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (G) as subparagraphs (F) through (H), respectively; and (2) by inserting after subparagraph (D) the following: ``(E) establish regional response and recovery protocols to prepare for, respond to, mitigate against, and recover from a transportation security incident consistent with section 202 of the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 (6 United States Code 942) and section 70103(a) of title 46, United States Code;''.
Coordination of Plans.--Section 70103(b)(1) of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon in subparagraph (F); (2) by redesignating subparagraph (G) as subparagraph (H); and (3) by inserting after subparagraph (F) the following: ``(G) be consistent with, and support implementation of, the National Incident Management System, the National Response Plan, the National Infrastructure Protection Plan, the National Preparedness Guidance, the National Preparedness Goal, the National Transportation Security Plan, National Tactical Plans, and other similar initiatives; and''.
Use of Area Maritime Transportation Security Plans in Exercises.--Section 114(b)(1) of the SAFE Port Act (6 United States Code 912(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon in paragraph (1); (2) by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (1) the following: ``(2) utilizes the Area Maritime Transportation Security Plans established under section 70103(b) of title 46, United States Code, in conducting such exercises; and''.
The Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall ensure that the National Tactical Plan is shared with the Area Maritime Security Committees established under section 70112 of title 46, United States Code.
The Area Maritime Security Committees shall use the plan in developing regional and local plans and for exercises.
RISK BASED RESOURCE ALLOCATION.
National Standard.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, in carrying out chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code, the Homeland Security Act of 2002, and the Security and Accountability for Every Port Act of 2006 the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall develop and utilize a national standard and formula for prioritizing and addressing assessed security risks at United States ports, such as the Maritime Assessment Strategy Tool that has been tested by the Department of Homeland Security.
Use by Maritime Security Committees.--Within 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall require each Area Maritime Security Committee to use this standard to regularly evaluate each port's assessed risk and prioritize how to mitigate the most significant risks.
Other Uses of Standard.--The Secretary shall utilize the standard when considering departmental resource allocations and grant- making decisions.
USE OF MARITIME SECURITY RISK ASSESSMENT MODEL.
Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the department in which the Coast Guard is operating shall make the United States Coast Guard's Maritime Security Risk Assessment Model tool available, in an unclassified version, on a limited basis to regulated vessels and facilities to conduct true risk assessments of their own facilities and vessels using the same criteria employed by the United States Coast Guard when evaluating a port area.
MARITIME AND CARGO SECURITY INTEGRATED PROJECT TEAMS.
The Secretary of Homeland Security shall-- (1) establish integrated project teams within the science and technology directorate to assist the Department of Homeland Security in product research, development, transition, and acquisition activities for cargo security; and (2) provide for participation by port authorities or the appropriate State agency responsible for oversight of port areas in such activities.
INTEGRATION OF SECURITY PLANS AND SYSTEMS WITH LOCAL PORT AUTHORITY AND LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Section 70102 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(c) Sharing of Assessment; Integration of Plans and Equipment.-- The owner or operator of a facility shall-- ``(1) make a current copy of the vulnerability assessment conducted under subsection (b) available to the port authority with jurisdiction of the facility and appropriate State or local law enforcement agencies; and ``(2) integrate, to the maximum feasible extent, any security system for the facility with compatible systems operated or maintained by the port authority or such law enforcement agencies.''.
STANDARDIZED POLICY FOR ADVANCED NOTICE OF COAST GUARD BOARDING FOR SECURITY OR PORT STATE CONTROL INSPECTIONS.
Within 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall establish, and publish in the Federal Register, a policy governing how much advance notice is to be provided by the Coast Guard to the owner or operator of a vessel before the vessel is boarded by the Coast Guard for ISPS compliance or Port State Control inspection.
FRAUDULENT OR TAMPERED WITH TRANSPORTATION WORKER IDENTIFICATION CARDS.
Section 70105 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(n) Confiscation of Fraudulent TWICs.--If any Federal, State, or local government law enforcement officer, or any member of the United States Coast Guard in the execution of such officer's duties, has reasonable cause to believe that a transportation security card issued under this section is fraudulent, has been unlawfully modified, or is otherwise invalid, the officer may confiscate the card, notify the Department of Homeland Security, and hold the bearer of the card in custody for a reasonable period of time for relinquishment to appropriate law enforcement authorities.''.
FEDERAL LICENSING OF SHIP AGENTS.
In General.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Maritime Commission shall establish and implement a procedure for the training, certification, and licensing of steamship agents and agencies operating in the United States.
TWIC Required.--An individual may not receive a license under the procedure established by the Federal Maritime Commission under subsection (a) unless that individual holds a valid transportation security card issued under section 70105 of title 46, United States Code.
License Requirement.--Beginning 1 year after the date on which the Federal Maritime Commission establishes the licensing procedure, or after such date as the Federal Maritime Commission may establish, it shall be unlawful for any person to act as a vessel agent in the United States without a valid license issued by the Federal Maritime Commission and a valid transportation security card issued under section 70105 of title 46, United States Code.
Enforcement.--Violation of subsection (c) is punishable by imprisonment for not more than 1 year and a fine under title 18, United States Code.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A SECURITY INDIVIDUAL.
Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Homeland Security, each vessel documented under chapter 121 of title 46, United States Code, and each foreign vessel entering a United States port, engaged in the commercial transportation of goods or passengers shall-- (1) designate a United States person that is responsible for responding to a transportation security incident involving the vessel while in a United States port by notifying appropriate emergency response entities and facilitating vessel response activities; and (2) provide notice to the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Commandant of the Coast Guard, and the captain of the port of the identity and contact information for such person.
CERTIFICATION OF MARITIME SECURITY GUARDS.
In General.--Chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Sec.
Incident command system training ``The Secretary shall ensure that all maritime security guards meet minimum training and performance standards in the Department of Homeland Security's security awareness and response procedures and in the handling of hazardous materials.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 701 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 70121 the following: ``70122.
Incident command system training.''.
GRANTS TO TIER 1 AND TIER 2 PORTS REQUIRE REGIONAL STRATEGIC RISK MANAGEMENT ASSESSMENT.
Section 70107(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end ``The Secretary shall establish regional strategic risk management priorities for tier 1 and tier 2 ports and take such priorities into account in awarding grants under this section.''.
VESSEL SECURITY PLANS FOR SUPPLY AND SIMILAR VESSELS.
In General.--Section 70103(c)(2)(A) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by striking ``incident;'' and inserting ``incident (including supply vessels, bunker and fuel deliver and launch vessels conducting activities or providing services to other vessels at anchorage;''.
TWICs Required for Crew.--Section 70105(b)(2)(F) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``personnel working on board vessels described in section 70103(c)(2)(A) of this title and'' after ``(F)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.