This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Cost Reduction and Reform Act of 1993''.
DEFINITION OF QUALIFYING HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE.
Section 301(19) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(19)) is amended to read as follows: ``(19) The term `qualifying House of Representatives candidate' means a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, whose principal campaign committee includes in its statement of organization a declaration of intention under section 303(b)(7) and, by reason of such declaration, is subject to the expenditure limitations specified in section 315(i) or section 315(j).''.
AMENDMENTS TO DEFINITION OF CONTRIBUTION RELATING TO VALUATION FORMULA AND ENCOURAGEMENT CONTRIBUTIONS.
Section 301(8)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(8)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i)-- (A) by inserting after ``anything of value'' the following: (such value to be determined by the highest of: cost to the person making the contribution, fair market value on the date of acquisition by the person making the contribution, or fair market value on the date of the contribution); and (B) by striking out ``or'' after the semicolon; (2) in clause (ii), by striking out the period and inserting in lieu thereof ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) any gift, subscription, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value (such value to be determined in the manner described in clause (i)) made by any person for the purpose of encouraging any specific individual who is not a candidate to become a candidate.''.
AMENDMENTS TO DEFINITION OF EXPENDITURE RELATING TO VALUATION FORMULA AND ENCOURAGEMENT EXPENDITURES.
Section 301(9)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(9)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i)-- (A) by inserting after ``anything of value'' the following: ``(such value to be determined by the highest of: cost to the person making the expenditure, fair market value on the date of acquisition by the person making the expenditure, or fair market value on the date of the expenditure); and (B) by striking out ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in clause (ii), by striking out the period and inserting in lieu thereof ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iii) any purchase, payment, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, or gift of money or anything of value (such value to be determined in the manner described in clause (i)) made by any person for the purpose of encouraging any specific individual who is not a candidate to become a candidate.''.
REGISTRATION AS QUALIFYING HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE.
In General.--Section 303(b) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 433(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (5), by striking out ``and'' after the semicolon at the end; (2) in paragraph (6), by striking out the period at the end and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) in the case of a principal campaign committee of a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress, who desires to be a qualifying House of Representatives candidate, a declaration of intention of the candidate to comply voluntarily with all contribution limitations and expenditure limitations under this Act.''.
Amendment to Statement of Organization.--Section 303 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 433) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) In the case of a political committee referred to in paragraph (7) of subsection (b), if the statement of organization does not include a declaration referred to in that paragraph, the committee may amend the statement to include such declaration, if such amendment is filed under section 302(g) not later than the day the candidate becomes a candidate for purposes of State law.
A declaration of intention that is included in a statement of organization under paragraph (7) of subsection (b), whether in the original filing or by amendment, may not be revoked.''.
AMENDMENT TO DEFINITION OF INDEPENDENT EXPENDITURE.
Section 301(17) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431(17)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``An expenditure is not an independent expenditure if-- ``(A) there is any arrangement, coordination, or direction with respect to the expenditure between the candidate and the person making the expenditure; ``(B) with respect to the election, the person making the expenditure-- ``(i) is authorized to solicit contributions or make expenditures on behalf of the candidate or an authorized committee of the candidate; ``(ii) is an officer of an authorized committee of the candidate; or ``(iii) receives any compensation or reimbursement from the candidate, or an authorized committee of the candidate; ``(C) the expenditure is clearly intended to encourage voters to support or oppose a specific candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.''.
LIMITATIONS ON EXPENDITURES BY QUALIFYING HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(i) A qualifying House of Representatives candidate shall not make expenditures derived from personal funds of such candidate in excess of $75,000 with respect to an election for the Office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.
A qualifying House of Representatives candidate shall not make expenditures in excess of $600,000 with respect to an election cycle.''.
LIMITATIONS WITH RESPECT TO QUALIFYING HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by section 7 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k)(1) A qualifying House of Representatives candidate may not accept, in an election cycle-- ``(A) more than $300,000 in contributions from persons other than individuals; ``(B) more than $5,000 from a single multicandidate political committee; ``(C) more than $75,000 from political party committees; or ``(D) more than $100,000 from individuals who reside outside the congressional district involved.
No person may make independent expenditures in an election cycle of more than $10,000 advocating the election of a qualifying House of Representatives candidate or advocating the defeat of the opponent of such candidate.
An individual may not make contributions of more than $2,000 to a qualifying House of Representatives candidate in an election cycle.
As used in this section, the term `election cycle' means-- ``(A) in the case of a candidate or the authorized committees of a candidate, the term beginning on the day after the date of the most recent general election for the specific office or seat which such candidate seeks and ending on the date of the next general election for such office or seat; or ``(B) for all other persons, the term beginning on the first day following the date of the last general election and ending on the date of the next general election.
(A) Any person who exceeds a limitation under this subsection by 5 percent or less shall pay to the Commission an amount equal to the amount of the excess.
Any person who exceeds a limitation under this subsection by more than 5 percent but not more than 10 percent shall pay to the Commission an amount equal to three times the amount of the excess.
Any person who exceeds a limitation under this subsection by more than 10 percent shall pay to the Commission an amount equal to three times the amount of the excess plus a civil penalty in an amount determined by the Commission.''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986 RELATING TO THE CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN QUALIFYING HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
General Rule.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN QUALIFYING HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the total of contributions to qualifying House of Representatives candidates which are made by the taxpayer during the taxable year, with respect to elections in the congressional district of which the taxpayer is a resident.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable year shall not exceed $100 ($200 in the case of a joint return under section 6013).
Verification.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) shall be allowed, with respect to any qualified political contribution, only if such contribution is verified in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulations.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms `contribution' and `qualifying House of Representatives candidate' have the meanings given those terms in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 642 of such Code (relating to special rules for credits and deductions of estates or trusts) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Credit for Political Contributions Not Allowed.--An estate or trust shall not be allowed the credit against tax provided by section 24.''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 23 the following new item: ``Sec.
Contributions to certain qualifying House of Representatives candidates.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections for Federal office beginning with the general election of November 8, 1994 (and any primary election relating to such general election).