REPEAL OF LIMITATION OF COVER OVER OF TAX ON DISTILLED SPIRITS.
In General.--Section 7652 (relating to limitation on cover over of tax on distilled spirits) is amended by striking subsection (f) and by redesignating subsection (g) as subsection (f).
Conforming Amendments.--Section 7652(f) of such Code (as so redesignated) is amended by striking ``subsection (f) of this section'' in paragraph (1)(B) and inserting ``section 5001(a)(1)''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to articles containing distilled spirits that are tax- determined after September 30, 1999.
Special rule.-- (A) In general.--For the 5-year period beginning after September 30, 1999, the treasury of Puerto Rico shall make a Conservation Trust Fund transfer within 30 days from the date of each cover over payment made during such period to such treasury under section 7652(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Conservation trust fund transfer.-- (i) In general.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``Conservation Trust Fund transfer'' means a transfer to the Puerto Rico Conservation Trust Fund of an amount equal to 50 cents per proof gallon of the taxes imposed under section 5001 or section 7652 of such Code on distilled spirits that are covered over to the treasury of Puerto Rico under section 7652(e) of such Code.
Treatment of transfer.--Each Conservation Trust Fund transfer shall be treated as principal for an endowment, the income from which to be available for use by the Puerto Rico Conservation Trust Fund for the purposes for which the Trust Fund was established.
Result of nontransfer.-- (I) In general.--Upon notification by the Secretary of the Interior that a Conservation Trust Fund transfer has not been made by the treasury of Puerto Rico during the period described in subparagraph (A), the Secretary of the Treasury shall, except as provided in subclause (II), deduct and withhold from the next cover over payment to be made to the treasury of Puerto Rico under section 7652(e) of such Code an amount equal to the appropriate Conservation Trust Fund transfer and interest thereon at the underpayment rate established under section 6621 of such Code as of the due date of such transfer.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer such amount deducted and withheld, and the interest thereon, directly to the Puerto Rico Conservation Trust Fund.
Good cause exception.--If the Secretary of the Interior finds, after consultation with the Governor of Puerto Rico, that the failure by the treasury of Puerto Rico to make a required transfer was for good cause, and notifies the Secretary of the Treasury of the finding of such good cause before the due date of the next cover over payment following the notification of nontransfer, then the Secretary of the Treasury shall not deduct the amount of such nontransfer from any cover over payment.
Puerto rico conservation trust fund.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``Puerto Rico Conservation Trust Fund'' means the fund established pursuant to a Memorandum of Understanding between the United States Department of the Interior and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, dated December 24, 1968.