This Act may be cited as the ``Earned Income Credit Public Awareness Campaign Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) In 2001, the earned income credit provided over $30,000,000,000 in tax relief to 18,500,000 low-income taxpayers.
The earned income credit is the second largest program, after Medicaid, that provides assistance to low-income individuals combating poverty.
Data from the United States Census Bureau Current Population Survey indicates that in 1999, the earned income credit assisted 4,700,000 people, including 2,600,000 children of low-income workers, to rise above the poverty line.
Each year, between 15 and 25 percent of those who are eligible to receive the earned income credit fail to claim their credit, either because they are unaware of it or cannot obtain the assistance they may need to properly complete the appropriate tax return.
Lack of education, language barriers, fear or intimidation, limited financial resources, and unawareness of the earned income credit all contribute to low-income families and individuals not taking advantage of the credit.
The Taxpayer Advocate's Fiscal Year 2002 Annual Report notes, ``The laws and regulations governing family status in the Internal Revenue Code are numerous and complex.
As a result, taxpayers must often seek the service of paid tax preparers to claim credits and benefits on returns.
Low income taxpayers are particularly susceptible to this need.
They rely extensively on paid preparers to assist in navigating the intricacies of the Earned Income Tax Credit''.
2002 Internal Revenue Service data indicates that nearly 68 percent of earned income credit recipients pay someone to prepare their tax returns, and fewer than 1 in 10 have their tax returns prepared for free by the Volunteer Income Tax Assistance program.
An estimated $994,000,000 in earned income credit refunds were paid by the taxpayer directly to tax preparers and related businesses for costs associated with preparation, filing, loans, and check cashing.
Many low-income families and individuals are disproportionately disadvantaged in meeting the financial obligation of hiring tax preparers and purchasing tax preparation products.
According to the Taxpayer Advocate's Fiscal Year 2002 Annual Report, ``The Internal Revenue Service must undertake a significant consumer education campaign so that low income taxpayers are able to make informed choices between tax preparers and tax preparation products''.
Increasing public awareness about the earned income credit will lead to increased utilization of the credit by low- income families and individuals.
EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT AWARENESS CAMPAIGN.
Establishment of National Campaign.--The Commissioner of Internal Revenue (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commissioner'') shall establish and carry out a national public awareness campaign to educate Americans of the availability of the credit allowable under section 32 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``earned income credit''.
Special Targeted Campaign.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Commissioner shall make special efforts to conduct outreach to-- (1) low-income families and individuals; (2) students; (3) single parents; (4) businesses and corporations; (5) limited English proficient individuals; (6) transient workers; and (7) military personnel.
Educational Activities.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Commissioner shall make special efforts to-- (1) produce and distribute educational materials to be distributed nationwide to groups identified under subsection (b); (2) conduct a targeted media campaign highlighting the earned income tax credit; (3) encourage businesses and corporations to make available and distribute educational materials produced under paragraph (1) to their employees; and (4) make educational materials available to public libraries, post offices, State agencies, and other public locations where tax information and forms are readily available or tax preparation services are offered.
Reports to Congress.-- (1) Annual report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Commissioner shall submit to the Congress a report detailing the activities carried out by the Commissioner under this section and section 5 of this Act and recommendations for amendments to this Act.
EARNED INCOME TAX CREDIT STATE GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Commissioner shall make grants to State agencies for the purposes of carrying out an earned income credit Statewide public awareness campaign in conjunction with the national campaign under section 3.
Allotments.--The Commission shall allot to each State for each fiscal year an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount appropriated to carry out subsection (a) for such fiscal year as the total amount of earned income credit claims made by residents in that State on returns filed during the second preceding fiscal year bears to the total amount of earned income credit claims on returns filed during such second preceding fiscal year.
Requirement of Matching Funds.--To be eligible to receive an allotment under this section, a State shall provide matching funds to a grant made available under this section.
Applications.--To be eligible to receive an allotment under this section, a State shall submit an application to the Commissioner at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Commissioner may require.
Accountability.--To be eligible to receive an allotment under this section, within 180 days of receiving an allotment, a State shall submit to the Commissioner a detailed report indicating steps taken by the State to implement subsection (a) of this section.
Funding.--No less than 25 percent and no more than 50 percent of the funds appropriated to carry out this Act shall be made available to carry out this section.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Internal Revenue Service $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2014.
Limitation of Administrative Expenses.--Not more than 3 percent of the funds appropriated to carry out this Act shall be spent on administrative costs of the Internal Revenue Service.