This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care for America's Children Act of 1998''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Over 10,000,000 children in the United States, 1 in 7, lack health insurance coverage.
Nearly half of those children (4,700,000) are eligible for health benefits coverage through the medicaid program but are not enrolled in that program.
Children without health insurance coverage are 4 times more likely to go without needed medical or surgical care.
One out of 5 children who are uninsured for a year or longer are missing all of their current immunizations.
Children without health insurance are less likely to have a family doctor, less likely to receive timely preventive care, and less likely to receive treatment, even for serious illnesses.
Uninsured children are more likely to need emergency room care at twice the cost of office-based care.
A recent report by the Agency for Health Care Policy and Research (AHCPR) stressed the need for States to engage in outreach activities to increase the enrollment of medicaid- eligible children.
Outreach activities like shortened and simplified applications, presumptive and continuous eligibility, and outstationing of eligibility workers in schools and day care centers have been found to be effective in getting medicaid- eligible children enrolled in the medicaid program.
MEDICAID CHILDREN'S ENROLLMENT PERFORMANCE BONUS.
Section 1903 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(x)(1) In General.--Beginning with fiscal year 1999 and each fiscal year thereafter, in addition to any other payment under this title, the Secretary shall pay to each State that satisfies the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3) a children's enrollment performance bonus under this subsection for such fiscal year in such amount as the Secretary shall determine.
Demonstration of Implementation of Outreach Strategies.--A State shall demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the State has a commitment to reach and enroll children who are eligible for medical assistance under, but not enrolled in, the State plan under this title through effective implementation of each of the following outreach activities: ``(A) Streamlined eligibility procedures.-- ``(i) In general.--The State uses streamlined procedures described in clause (ii) for determining the eligibility for medical assistance under, and enrollment in, the State plan under this title of-- ``(I) children in families with incomes that do not exceed the effective income level (expressed as a percent of the poverty line) that has been specified under such State plan (including under a waiver authorized by the Secretary or under section 1902(r)(2) for the child to be eligible for medical assistance under section 1902(l)(2) or 1905(n)(2) (as selected by a State)) for the age of such child; and ``(II) children determined eligible for such assistance, and enrolled in the State plan under this title in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 1931(b).
Procedures described.--The streamlined procedures described in this clause include-- ``(I) using shortened and simplified applications for the children described in clause (i); ``(II) eliminating the assets test for determining the eligibility of such children; and ``(III) allowing applications for such children to be submitted by mail or telephone.
Continuous eligibility for children.--The State provides (or demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, not later than fiscal year 2001, the State shall provide) for 12-months of continuous eligibility for children in accordance with section 1902(e)(12).
Presumptive eligibility for children.--The State provides (or demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that, not later than fiscal year 2001, the State shall provide) for making medical assistance available to children during a presumptive eligibility period in accordance with section 1920A.
Outstationing and alternative applications.--The State complies with the requirements of section 1902(a)(55) (relating to outstationing of eligibility workers for the receipt and initial processing of applications for medical assistance and the use of alternative application forms).
Simplified verification of eligibility requirements.--The State demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the State uses only the minimum level of verification requirements as are necessary for the State to ensure accurate eligibility determinations under the State plan under this title.
Report on Number of Enrollments Resulting From Outreach.--A State shall annually report to the Secretary on the number of full year equivalent children that are determined to be eligible for medical assistance under the State plan under this title and are enrolled under the plan as a result of-- ``(A) having been provided presumptive eligibility in accordance with section 1920A; ``(B) having submitted an application for such assistance through an outstationed eligibility worker; and ``(C) having submitted an application for such assistance by mail or telephone.
No Substitution of Spending.--Amounts paid to a State under this subsection shall be used to supplement and not supplant other Federal, State, or local funds provided to the State under this title or title XXI.
Amounts provided to the State under any other provisions of this title shall not be reduced solely as a result of the State's eligibility for a performance bonus under this subsection.