This Act may be cited as the ``Intelligence Community Accountability Act of 2004''.
INSPECTOR GENERAL FOR INTELLIGENCE.
Establishment.--(1) Title I of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 402 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 118 the following new section: ``inspector general for intelligence ``Sec.
Establishment.--(1) There is hereby established the Office of Inspector General for Intelligence (in this section referred to as the `Office').
The Office shall not be located for administrative or other purposes within the Central Intelligence Agency.
The purpose of the Office is to-- ``(A) provide an objective and effective office, appropriately accountable to Congress, to-- ``(i) initiate and conduct independently investigations, audits, and reviews of significant failures by the intelligence community as a whole in the discharge of the intelligence, intelligence- related, or other national security missions of the intelligence community; and ``(ii) identify means of improving the discharge of such missions by the intelligence community as a whole; ``(B) provide a means for keeping the Director of Central Intelligence, as the head of the intelligence community, fully and currently informed about significant failures in the discharge of such missions, the necessity for and progress of corrective actions, and means of improving the discharge of such missions by the intelligence community as a whole; ``(C) in the manner prescribed by this section, ensure that the congressional intelligence committees are kept similarly informed of significant failures in the discharge of such missions, the necessity for and progress of corrective actions, and means of improving the discharge of such missions by the intelligence community as a whole; and ``(D) identify policies and practices of the intelligence community that may serve as a model for similar policies and practices for other departments, agencies, and elements of the United States Government.
Appointment; Supervision; Removal.--(1)(A) There shall be at the head of the Office the Inspector General for Intelligence who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The appointment of an individual as Inspector General shall be made without regard to political affiliation, and shall be solely on the basis of integrity, compliance with the security standards of the intelligence community, and prior experience in matters relating to foreign intelligence.
The Inspector General shall report directly to and be under the general supervision of the Director of Central Intelligence, acting as the head of the intelligence community.
The Inspector General may be removed from office only by the President.
The President shall immediately communicate in writing to the congressional intelligence committees the reasons for the removal from office of an Inspector General.
Acting Inspector General.--(1) The Director of Central Intelligence, acting as the head of the intelligence community, may appoint an individual to act as the Inspector General in a circumstance as follows: ``(A) During a vacancy in the position of Inspector General.
During any period when the Inspector General is absent from duty or is for any reason unable to perform the duties of the Inspector General.
An individual appointed to act as the Inspector General may not continue to so act for more than nine months after such appointment.
Duties and Responsibilities.--The Inspector General shall-- ``(1) investigate, audit, or review each significant failure (including an error of communication, cooperation, or coordination) of the intelligence community as a whole in the discharge of an intelligence, intelligence-related, or other national security mission of the intelligence community; ``(2) identify means of improving the discharge of the intelligence, intelligence-related, or other national security missions of the intelligence community by the intelligence community as a whole; ``(3) keep the Director of Central Intelligence, as the head of the intelligence community, fully and currently informed about significant failures in the discharge of such missions, the necessity for and progress of corrective actions, and means of improving the discharge of such missions by the intelligence community as a whole; and ``(4) identify policies and practices of the intelligence community that may serve as a model for similar policies and practices for other departments, agencies, and elements of the United States Government.
Authorities.--(1) Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Inspector General shall have such powers and authorities under the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
as are required for the discharge of the duties and responsibilities of the Inspector General under subsection (d).
The Inspector General shall have direct and prompt access to the Director of Central Intelligence, acting as the head of the intelligence community, when necessary for any purpose pertaining to the performance of the duties of the Inspector General.
(A) The Inspector General may, in consultation with the head of the element of the intelligence community concerned, conduct such inspections of the element of the intelligence community as the Inspector General considers appropriate for the performance of the duties of the Inspector General.
In conducting an inspection under subparagraph (A), the Inspector General may, after notice to the head of the element of the intelligence community concerned, enter into any place occupied by the element of the intelligence community at such time or times as the Inspector General considers appropriate.
(A) The Inspector General shall have access to any employee or any contractor employee of an element of the intelligence community whose testimony is needed for the performance of the duties of the Inspector General.
The Inspector General shall have direct access to all records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers, recommendations, or other material which relate to the programs and operations with respect to which the Inspector General has responsibilities under this section.
Failure on the part of any employee or contractor to cooperate with the Inspector General shall be grounds for appropriate administrative actions by the head of the element of the intelligence community concerned, including loss of employment or the termination of an existing contractual relationship.
The Inspector General shall have authority to administer to or take from any person an oath, affirmation, or affidavit, whenever necessary in the performance of the duties of the Inspector General, which oath affirmation, or affidavit when administered or taken by or before an employee of the Office designated by the Inspector General shall have the same force and effect as if administered or taken by or before an officer having a seal.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Inspector General may require by subpoena the production of all information, documents, reports, answers, records, accounts, papers, and other data and documentary evidence necessary in the performance of the duties and responsibilities of the Inspector General.
In the case of a department or agency of the United States Government, the Inspector General shall obtain information, documents, reports, answers, records, accounts, papers, and other data and evidence for the purpose specified in subparagraph (A) using procedures other than by subpoenas.
The Inspector General may not issue a subpoena for or on behalf of any other element or component of the intelligence community.
In the case of contumacy or refusal to obey a subpoena issued under this paragraph, the subpoena shall be enforceable by order of any appropriate district court of the United States.
Initiation of Investigations.--The Inspector General may commence an investigation as follows: ``(1) Upon the initiative of the Inspector General.
Upon the request of the President.
Upon the request of the Director of Central Intelligence.
Upon the request of the head of another element of the intelligence community.
Upon the request of an Inspector General of an element of the intelligence community.
Upon the request of a congressional intelligence committee, the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate, or the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives.
Upon the request of a Member of Congress.
Cooperation of Intelligence Community Inspectors General.-- (1) Each Inspector General of an element of the intelligence community shall cooperate fully with the Inspector General for Intelligence in the performance by the Inspector General for Intelligence of the duties and responsibilities of the Inspector General for Intelligence under this section.
The Inspector General for Intelligence shall cooperate fully with each Inspector General of an element of the intelligence community in the performance by the Inspector General of such element of the intelligence community of the duties and responsibilities of the Inspector General of such element of the intelligence community under law.
The cooperation of the Inspector General of an element of the intelligence community with the Inspector General for Intelligence under paragraph (1) may not be construed to modify or affect the duties and responsibilities of the duties and responsibilities of the Inspector General for Intelligence with respect to the intelligence community as a whole under this section or the duties and responsibilities of the Inspector General of such element of the intelligence community with respect to such element of the intelligence community under law.
Reports.--(1)(A) The Inspector General may make to the President, the Director of Central Intelligence, or the head of any element of the intelligence community any report on an investigation conducted by the Inspector General that the Inspector General considers appropriate.
A report on an investigation under subparagraph (A) may include such recommendations for corrective or disciplinary action as the Inspector General considers appropriate as a result of the investigation.
(A) In accordance with section 535 of title 28, United States Code, the Inspector General shall submit to the Attorney General a report on any information, allegation, or complaint received by the Inspector General relating to a violation of Federal criminal law that involves a program or operation of an element of the intelligence community, consistent with such guidelines as may be issued by the Attorney General pursuant to subsection (b)(2) of such section.
The Inspector General shall submit to the Director of Central Intelligence, acting as the head of the intelligence community, a copy of each report submitted to the Attorney General under subparagraph (A).
Not later than January 31 and July 31 each year, the Inspector General shall submit to the congressional intelligence committees a report on the activities of the Inspector General and the Office during the preceding six months.
Each report shall include, for the six-month period covered by such report-- ``(A) a description of each significant investigation commenced by the Inspector General, including the progress made in such investigation; ``(B) a summary of the other investigations commenced or conducted by the Inspector General; and ``(C) in the case of any investigation concluded by the Inspector General, a description of the findings of the Inspector General as a result of such investigation, including whether the Inspector General made a recommendation for corrective or disciplinary action under paragraph (1)(B), or submitted to the Attorney General a report on a violation of Federal criminal law under paragraph (2)(A), as a result of such investigation.
Each report submitted to the congressional intelligence committees under paragraph (3) shall be submitted in both classified and unclassified form.
The head of any element of the intelligence community may submit to the congressional intelligence committees a report on any matter in a report under paragraph (3) that relates to such element of the intelligence community.
Support.--(1) The Inspector General shall have a staff of personnel with such expertise and experience as the Inspector General considers appropriate to carry out the duties of the Inspector General under this section.
The staff of the Inspector General under paragraph (1) shall possess security clearances appropriate for the work of the Inspector General.
The Director of Central Intelligence, acting as the head of the intelligence community, shall provide the Inspector General with appropriate and adequate office space, together with such equipment, office supplies, maintenance services, and communications facilities and services as may be necessary for the operation of the Office.
(A) Subject to the concurrence of the Director, the Inspector General may request from any department or agency of the United States Government such information or assistance as may be necessary for carrying out the duties of the Inspector General under this section.
Upon request of the Inspector General for information or assistance under subparagraph (A), the head of the department or agency concerned shall, insofar as is practicable and not in contravention of any existing statutory restriction or regulation of such department or agency, furnish such information or assistance to the Inspector General.
Separate Budget Account.--Beginning with fiscal year 2006 and in accordance with procedures to be issued by the Director of Central Intelligence in consultation with the congressional intelligence committees, the Director shall include in the National Foreign Intelligence Program budget a separate account for the Office of Inspector General for Intelligence.''.
The table of contents for the National Security Act of 1947 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 118 the following new item: ``Sec.
Inspector General for Intelligence.''.
Executive Schedule Level IV.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to the Inspector General of the Central Intelligence Agency the following new item: ``Inspector General for Intelligence.