This Act may be cited as the ``Chronic Wasting Disease Research, Monitoring, and Education Enhancement Act of 2003''.
CHRONIC WASTING DISEASE RESEARCH AND MONITORING AND PUBLIC EDUCATION AND OUTREACH.
In General.--The Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act (16 United States Code 661 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Geological Survey, shall carry out in accordance with this section a program to support, conduct, and coordinate programs to strengthen scientific research and monitoring and public education activities to elevate knowledge of Chronic Wasting Disease in free-ranging populations of deer and elk.
Purposes.--The purposes of the program shall be the following: ``(1) To initiate and encourage completion of the relevant goals and action plans specified in the National Plan.
To enhance the scientific understanding of Chronic Wasting Disease.
To provide technical assistance in support of State efforts to conduct scientific research, implement wildlife management strategies, and conduct and promote comprehensive public education programs in affected States.
Research and Monitoring.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may support, promote, and coordinate research on, and long-term monitoring and surveillance of, Chronic Wasting Disease as it affects deer and elk in States identified as having the disease present within their borders, to promote improved understanding of the disease and support State management of deer and elk.
Authorized activities.--Activities under this subsection may include scientific research, monitoring, surveillance, and disease management activities identified in the National Plan, including the following: ``(A) Research to investigate the biology, pathogenesis, host ecology, epidemiology, transmission, and environmental persistence of Chronic Wasting Disease.
Development and utilization of an Internet- based biological data management system and integrated information sharing network.
Development, testing, and validation of rapid diagnostic methods.
Development of new testing and screening techniques for Chronic Wasting Disease, including live animal early detection field tests.
Surveillance programs to track the prevalence, incidence, and distribution of Chronic Wasting Disease in wild populations of deer and elk.
Research and development of therapeutics and vaccines.
Development and implementation of field sampling methods and comprehensive assessments of deer and elk populations.
Other activities to implement national plan and support state activities.--The Secretary may implement other research and monitoring activities as necessary to implement the National Plan and to support State activities to manage and conserve deer and elk.
National Public Education Strategy.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and promote a national public education strategy-- ``(A) to increase awareness among the hunting community and the general public of the distribution of Chronic Wasting Disease; ``(B) to enhance comprehension of the biology, ecology, and epidemiology of the Chronic Wasting Disease; and ``(C) to support and communicate State management activities to control Chronic Wasting Disease in deer and elk populations.
Goals.--The goals of the strategy are the following: ``(A) Increasing public awareness of Federal, State, and tribal Chronic Wasting Disease activities.
Distilling and disseminating to the general public scientific and technical information concerning Chronic Wasting Disease in an easily comprehended manner.
Providing updates and reviews of advances in Chronic Wasting Disease control methods for deer and elk.
Development of print, video, and other interpretive and media materials to implement the strategy and to communicate accomplishments in addressing the problem of Chronic Wasting Disease.
Targeting.--The strategy should target stakeholder groups in States affected by Chronic Wasting disease, including consumptive and non-consumptive users of deer and elk.
Consultation and Coordination.--In conducting, supporting, and coordinating activities authorized under this section, the Secretary shall consult coordinate, where appropriate, with other Federal, interstate, or regional agencies, State agencies, tribes, local communities, non-governmental organizations, and colleges and universities.
Report Requirements.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall report to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works in the Senate on the activities implemented under this section.
Availability of Results.--The Secretary shall make available to the public the results of research and monitoring conducted, supported, or permitted by the Secretary under this section.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section: ``(1) Chronic wasting disease.--The term `Chronic Wasting Disease' means the transmissible animal disease that afflicts deer and elk and belongs to the group of diseases known as transmissible spongiform encephalopathies.
Deer and elk.--The term `deer and elk' means-- ``(A) free-ranging populations of deer and elk residing in proximity of the endemic area for Chronic Wasting Disease as identified in the National Plan; and ``(B) deer and elk residing in States outside of that endemic area, where the disease has been introduced and established in deer and elk populations.
National plan.--The term `National Plan' means the plan published jointly by the Department of the Interior and the Department of Agriculture entitled `Plan for Assisting States, Federal Agencies, and Tribes in Managing Chronic Wasting Disease in Wild and Captive Cervids', dated June 26, 2002.
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the United States Geological Survey.
State.--The term `State' means the several States of the United States, Puerto Rico, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, Guam, and the territories and possessions of the United States.
Report.--The Secretary of the Interior shall submit a report describing activities undertaken to implement this section to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this section and biennially thereafter.
Authorization of Appropriations.--To implement this section there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary the following: ``(1) Research and monitoring.--For the implementation of scientific research and monitoring activities under subsection (d), $15,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.
Public education.--For the implementation of public education activities under subsection (e), $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.
Administration.--For the administration of this section by the Secretary $1,00,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.