RECOGNITION AS CORPORATION AND GRANT OF FEDERAL CHARTER.
The Congressional Medal of Honor Museum of the United States, a nonprofit corporation organized under the laws of the State of New York, is recognized as such and is granted a Federal charter.
The Congressional Medal of Honor Museum of the United States (in this Act referred to as the ``corporation'') shall have only those powers granted to it through its bylaws and articles of incorporation filed in the State in which it is incorporated and subject to the laws of such State.
The objects and purposes of the corporation are those provided for in its bylaws and articles of incorporation and shall include the following: (1) Preserving the memory and history of medal of honor recipients.
Preserving artifacts and records of medal of honor recipients that are donated or loaned to the museum in order to honor the memory and history of such recipients, to display such artifacts and records for educational purposes, and to encourage research relating to such artifacts and records.
Educating the people of the United States on the value of the medal of honor.
Inspiring and stimulating the youth of the United States to become worthy citizens of the United States.
With respect to service of process, the corporation shall comply with the laws of the State in which it is incorporated and those States in which it carries on its activities in the furtherance of its corporate purposes.
Except as provided in section 8, eligibility for membership in the corporation and the rights and privileges of members of the corporation shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation and bylaws of the corporation.
Except as provided in section 8, the composition of the board of directors of the corporation and the responsibilities of such board shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation of the corporation and in conformity with the laws of the State in which it is incorporated.
Except as provided in section 8, the positions of officers of the corporation and the election of members to such positions shall be as provided in the articles of incorporation of the corporation and in conformity with the laws of the State in which it is incorporated.
In establishing the conditions of membership in the corporation and in determining the requirements for serving on the board of directors or as an officer of the corporation, the corporation may not discriminate on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, handicap, age, or national origin.
Income and Compensation.--No part of the income or assets of the corporation may inure to the benefit of any member, officer, or director of the corporation or be distributed to any such individual during the life of this charter.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent the payment of reasonable compensation to the officers of the corporation or reimbursement for actual necessary expenses in amounts approved by the board of directors.
Loans.--The corporation may not make any loan to any officer, director, or employee of the corporation.
Stock.--The corporation shall have no power to issue any shares of stock or to declare or pay any dividends.
Congressional Approval.--The corporation shall not claim congressional approval or the authorization of the Federal Government for any of its activities by reason of this Act.
The corporation shall be liable for the acts of its officers and agents whenever such officers and agents have acted within the scope of their authority.
The corporation shall keep correct and complete books and records of account and minutes of any proceeding of the corporation involving any of its members, the board of directors, or any committee having authority under the board of directors.
The corporation shall keep, at its principal office, a record of the names and addresses of all members having the right to vote in any proceeding of the corporation.
All books and records of such corporation may be inspected by any member having the right to vote in any corporation proceeding, or by any agent or attorney of such member, for any proper purpose at any reasonable time.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to contravene any applicable State law.
AUDIT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the audit of accounts of private corporations established under Federal law'', approved August 30, 1964 (36 United States Code 1101), is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(77) The Congressional Medal of Honor Museum of the United States.''.
The corporation shall report annually to Congress concerning the activities of the corporation during the preceding fiscal year.
Such annual report shall be submitted at the same time as the report of the audit required by section 2 of the Act referred to in section 12.
The report shall not be printed as a public document.
RESERVATION OF RIGHT TO AMEND OR REPEAL CHARTER.
The right to alter, amend, or repeal this Act is expressly reserved to Congress.
The corporation shall maintain its status as an organization exempt from taxation as provided in the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
If the corporation fails to maintain such status, the charter granted by this Act shall expire.
The charter granted by this Act shall expire if the corporation fails to comply with-- (1) any restriction or other provision of this Act; (2) any provision of its bylaws or articles of incorporation; or (3) any provision of the laws of the State of New York that apply to corporations such as the corporation recognized under this Act.
For the purposes of this Act, the term ``State'' includes the District of Columbia, the commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and the territories and possessions of the United States.