This Act may be cited as the ``Defending American Taxpayers From Abusive Government Takings Act of 2012''.
PROHIBITION RELATING TO USE OF POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN.
Fannie Mae.--Subsection (b) of section 302 of the Federal National Mortgage Association Charter Act (12 United States Code 1717(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7)(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the corporation may not purchase any mortgage that is secured by a structure or dwelling unit that is located within a county that contains any structure or dwelling unit that secures or secured a residential mortgage loan that the State (or the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth or Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States), including any agency or political subdivision thereof, obtained during the preceding 120 months by exercise of the power of eminent domain.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `residential mortgage loan' means a mortgage loan that is evidenced by a promissory note and secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other security instrument on a residential structure or a dwelling unit in a residential structure.
Such term includes a first mortgage loan or any subordinate mortgage loan.''.
Freddie Mac.--Subsection (a) of section 305 of the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation Act (12 United States Code 1454(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6)(A) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Corporation may not purchase any mortgage that is secured by a structure or dwelling unit that is located within a county that contains any structure or dwelling unit that secures or secured a residential mortgage loan that the State (or the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States), including any agency or political subdivision thereof, obtained during the preceding 120 months by exercise of the power of eminent domain.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `residential mortgage loan' means a mortgage loan that is evidenced by a promissory note and secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other security instrument on a residential structure or a dwelling unit in a residential structure.
Such term includes a first mortgage or any subordinate mortgage.''.
FHA.--Title V of the National Housing Act (12 United States Code 1731a et seq.)
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION RELATING TO USE OF POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may not newly insure under this Act any mortgage that is secured by a structure or dwelling unit that is located within a county that contains any structure or dwelling unit that secures or secured to a residential mortgage loan that the State (or the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, or any territory or possession of the United States), including any agency or political subdivision thereof, obtained during the preceding 120 months by exercise of the power of eminent domain.
Definition.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `residential mortgage loan' means a mortgage loan that is evidenced by a promissory note and secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other security instrument on a residential structure or a dwelling unit in a residential structure.
Such term includes a first mortgage or any subordinate mortgage.''.
VA.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 37 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding after section 3736 the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION RELATING TO USE OF POWER OF EMINENT DOMAIN.
Prohibition.--The Secretary may not guarantee, make, or insure a loan under this chapter if such loan is for a residence that is located within a county (or trust land with respect to a loan under subchapter V) that contains any residence that secures or secured a residential mortgage loan that the State, including any agency or political subdivision thereof, obtained during the preceding 120 months by exercise of the power of eminent domain.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `residential mortgage loan' means a mortgage loan that is evidenced by a promissory note and secured by a mortgage, deed of trust, or other security instrument on a residential structure or a dwelling unit in a residential structure.
Such term includes a first mortgage or any subordinate mortgage.
The term `State' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, any other territory or possession of the United States, and each federally recognized Indian tribe.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3736 the following new item: ``3737.
Prohibition relating to use of power of eminent domain.