ESTABLISHMENT OF DEMONSTRATION GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--Part D of title IV of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1737 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 456 the following new section: ``SEC.
EMPLOYMENT INFORMATION NETWORK DEMONSTRATION GRANT PROGRAM.
Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--From the amounts reserved under section 3(c)(6) for each fiscal year to carry out this section, the Secretary shall provide a grant to a private nonprofit organization for the purpose of establishing an employment information network to provide job search services in an eligible community described in paragraph (2).
Eligible community.--An eligible community described in this paragraph is a community which is part of an area with respect to which the President, within the 3-year period ending on the date of the enactment of this section, has declared under the Robert T. Stafford Disaster Relief and Emergency Assistance Act (42 United States Code 5121 et sequentes) that a major disaster or emergency exists relating to urban social unrest.
Period of grant.--A grant received under paragraph (1) may extend for a period of not less than 3 fiscal years.
Application.--The Secretary may provide a grant to a private nonprofit organization under subsection (a) only if such organization submits to the Secretary an application which contains such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) Establishment of network.-- ``(A) In general.--A private nonprofit organization shall use amounts received from a grant under subsection (a) to establish an employment information network (in this section referred to as the `network') to provide job search services to unemployed individuals, underemployed individuals, and economically disadvantaged individuals in an eligible community described in subsection (a)(2).
Composition.--The network shall be composed of businesses, educational organizations, governmental entities, labor organizations, and community-based organizations.
Activities of network.--The network shall-- ``(A) establish and carry out job fairs to help put unemployed individuals, underemployed individuals, and economically disadvantaged individuals in touch with prospective employers and community-based organizations; ``(B) establish and carry out seminars and workshops relating to job search skills, interviewing skills, job retention skills, and other related job search and employment skills; ``(C) at least once a week, publish and distribute a periodical containing detailed information on available jobs in the community; and ``(D) utilize the local broadcast media to provide information relating to available jobs in the community.
Reports.-- ``(1) Reports to secretary.--The Secretary may provide a grant to a private nonprofit organization under subsection (a) only if such organization agrees to submit to the Secretary, in each fiscal year in which the Secretary makes payments under such grant to such organization, a report containing-- ``(A) a description and evaluation of the activities of the Network established under subsection (c); and ``(B) any other information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Reports to congress.-- ``(A) Interim reports.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which the Secretary receives from a private nonprofit organization a report under paragraph (1) in both the 1st and 2d fiscal years in which the Secretary makes payments under a grant to such organization, the Secretary shall submit to the President and the Congress an interim report containing a compilation of the information contained in each such report received under paragraph (1).
Final report.--Not later than 180 days after the date on which the Secretary receives from a private nonprofit organization a report under paragraph (1) in the 3d fiscal year in which the Secretary makes payments under a grant to such organization, the Secretary shall submit to the President and the Congress a final report containing-- ``(i) a compilation of the information contained in such report received under paragraph (1); and ``(ii) an evaluation of the effectiveness of the demonstration grants authorized under subsection (a).''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Subsection (c) of section 3 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6)(A) From the amount appropriated under paragraph (1) for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1996, the Secretary, after making the reservations under paragraph (2), shall reserve $2,600,000 for each such fiscal year to carry out section 457.
Amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 456 the following new item: ``Sec.
Employment Information Network Demonstration Program.