SMALL BUSINESS JOINT VENTURE LOAN PROGRAM FOR THE FORMER SOVIET UNION.
Establishment of Program.--The Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 is amended by adding at the end the following new title: ``TITLE XI--SMALL BUSINESS JOINT VENTURE LOAN PROGRAM ``SEC.
``It is the purpose of this title to assist United States small businesses expand into markets in the independent states of the former Soviet Union, thereby developing those markets to the benefit of United States small businesses and the United States economy.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SMALL BUSINESS JOINT VENTURE PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary of State shall carry out a program in accordance with this title to support the establishment by United States small businesses and Independent States small businesses or entrepreneurs of joint ventures to engage in business activity in the independent states of the former Soviet Union.
Examples of Business Areas.--Joint ventures supported under this title may include joint ventures in areas such as manufacturing, telecommunications, energy production, environmental protection, agriculture, housing, aviation, and defense conversion.
LOANS TO JOINT VENTURES.
Authorization.--The Secretary is authorized to make loans in accordance with this section for joint ventures described in section 1102(a).
Criteria.--The Secretary shall use the following criteria in determining which joint ventures receive a loan under this section: ``(1) Preference shall be given to joint ventures involving United States small businesses located in economically depressed communities.
Preference shall be given to loans that will be most cost-effective.
Preference shall be given to joint ventures that have the greatest likelihood of success.
A loan may not be made to a joint venture if the Secretary determines that the joint venture is unlikely to be successful.
Preference shall be given to joint ventures that are most likely to benefit the participating United States small businesses and the United States economy.
Preference shall be given to joint ventures in which-- ``(A) the participating United States small business will provide the management, accounting, marketing, training, and other business expertise needed by the joint venture; and ``(B) the participating Independent States small business or entrepreneur will provide entrepreneurship, the understanding of local needs and conditions, and the local resources needed by the joint venture.
Preference shall be given to joint ventures that will produce goods that are to be used, or services that are to be provided, within the independent states of the former Soviet Union.
Limitations on Amount of Loan.--A loan under this section may not exceed $100,000.
Not more than one loan may be made for any single joint venture.
Term and Repayment of Loans.--The following shall apply with respect to any loan under this section: ``(1) The Secretary shall determine the term of the loan.
Payments of principal shall not be required during the 1st 3 years of the loan.
Interest shall not accrue during the 1st 5 years of the loan.
Thereafter, the rate of interest shall be based on the average of the Consumer Price Index (all items--United States city average), published monthly by the Bureau of Labor Statistics in the Department of Labor, for such period prior to the due date for each interest payment as the Secretary may determine.
Prohibition on Transfer of Jobs From the United States.--A loan may not be made to a joint venture under this section if, as a result of that joint venture, the United States small business participating in the joint venture would transfer any business operation or activity that it has been carrying out in the United States to any location outside the United States.
Prohibition on Imports to the United States.-- ``(1) In general.--Goods produced pursuant to any joint venture that receives a loan under this section may not be imported into the United States, including as parts or components of other goods.
Enforcement.--The Secretary and the Secretary of the Treasury shall take appropriate steps to implement and enforce paragraph (1).
Such steps shall include a requirement that any joint venture that receives a loan under this section and produces any goods for export submit to the Secretary such information as the Secretary may require regarding the foreign recipient of any such goods that are to be exported, the identifying characteristics of such goods, and the amount of goods to be exported.
The Secretary shall provide such lists to the Commissioner of Customs.
OTHER ACTIVITIES TO FACILITATE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF JOINT VENTURES.
Database Contractor.-- ``(1) In general.--In order to facilitate the establishment of joint ventures that would be eligible to receive a loan under section 1103(a), the Secretary shall enter into a contract with an eligible private business entity (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `contractor') for the development and maintanence by the contractor of the database described in subsection (b).
Selection of contractor.--The Secretary shall use competitive procedures in selecting the contractor and shall award the contract required by paragraph (1) within 60 days after the date of enactment of this section.
Limitation on contract amount; budget act requirements.--(A) Subject to subparagraphs (B) and (C), the Secretary shall determine the amount of the contract awarded pursuant to this subsection.
The contract awarded pursuant to this subsection may not require the United States Government to make payments to the contractor that in the aggregate exceed $3,000,000 for any fiscal year.
The United States Government shall be obligated to make outlays under the contract required by this subsection only to the extent that the budget authority for such outlays is provided in advance by appropriation Acts.
Database.--The database provided for in subsection (a) shall list-- ``(1) United States small businesses that are interested in participating in a joint venture that would be eligible to receive a loan under section 1103(a); and ``(2) Independent States small businesses or entrepreneurs that have submitted a proposal for the establishment of a joint venture that would be eligible to receive a loan under section 1103(a).
The database shall include information regarding the types of business activity in which each such business is involved.
Submission and Distribution of Proposals for Joint Ventures.-- ``(1) Submission to the secretary.--The Secretary shall accept proposals for joint ventures submitted by Independent States small businesses or entrepreneurs and shall forward them to the contractor.
Distribution by the contractor.--The contractor shall provide information about each such proposal to United States small businesses listed in the database established pursuant to subsection (a) that would be qualified to participate in the proposed joint venture.
Review of Proposed Joint Ventures by the Contractor.--Each application for a loan under section 1103(a) shall be submitted to the contractor.
The contractor-- ``(1) shall determine whether the Independent States small business or entrepreneur that would be participating in the proposed joint venture has the resources it claims it will contribute to the joint venture; and ``(2) shall make a recommendation to the Secretary with respect to whether a loan should be made for the proposed joint venture based on the criteria set forth in section 1103(b).
Publicizing Program.-- ``(1) United states small businesses.--The Secretary shall take appropriate steps to make United States small businesses aware of the database established pursuant to subsection (a) and the loan program established pursuant to section 1103.
Such steps shall include publication of information about the database and the program in the Federal Register.
Independent states small businesses or entrepreneurs.--The Secretary shall also take appropriate steps to make Independent States small businesses or entrepreneurs aware of the database and the loan program.
Loan Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 to carry out section 1103, including for the cost (as defined in section 502 of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990) of loans.
Database Costs.--There are authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 for each fiscal year for payments pursuant to the contract provided for in section 1104(a).
Economically Depressed Community.--For purposes of this title, the term `economically depressed community' means a rural or urban community which, relative to other communities in the United States, is depressed in terms of age of housing, the extent of poverty, the growth rate of per capita income, the extent of unemployment, job lag, or the extent of surplus labor.
Eligible Private Business Entity.--For purposes of this title, the term `eligible private business entity' means a United States small business that-- ``(1) has experience in business activity in at least one independent state of the former Soviet Union; and ``(2) has its main business office within the metropolitian Washington, D.C., area.
Independent States Small Business or Entrepreneur.--For purposes of this title, the term `Independent States small business or entrepreneur' means-- ``(1) a small business that is organized under the laws of an independent state of the former Soviet Union and that is more than 50 percent owned by citizens of the independent states (as determined under regulations of the Secretary); or ``(2) an entrepreneur who is a citizen of an independent state and is a resident of an independent state.
Secretary.--For purposes of this title, the term `Secretary' means the Secretary of State.
Small Business.--For purposes of this title, the term `small business'-- ``(1) in the case of United States small businesses, means an organization that is a small business concern for purposes of the Small Business Act; and ``(2) in the case of Independent States small businesses, means an organization that is determined to be a small business by the Secretary using criteria comparable to those used for identifying small business concerns for purposes of the Small Business Act.
United States Small Business.--For purposes of this title, the term `United States small business' means a small business-- ``(1) that is organized under the laws of the United States (including any State, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, Guam, the Virgin Islands, or any other territory or possession of the United States); and ``(2) that is more than 50 percent owned by United States citizens (as determined under regulations of the Secretary).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents in section 2 of the Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE XI--SMALL BUSINESS JOINT VENTURE LOAN PROGRAM ``Sec.
Establishment of small business joint venture program.
Loans to joint ventures.
Other activities to facilitate the establishment of joint ventures.