ESTABLISHMENT AND FUNCTIONS OF COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a Commission on Structural Alternatives for the Federal Courts of Appeals (hereinafter referred to as the ``Commission'').
Functions.--The functions of the Commission shall be to-- (1) study the present division of the United States into the several judicial circuits; (2) study the structure and alignment of the Federal court of appeals system, with particular reference to the Ninth Circuit; and (3) report recommendations to the President and Congress on appropriate changes in circuit boundaries or structure for the expeditious and effective disposition of the caseload of the Federal Courts of Appeals, consistent with fundamental concepts of fairness and due process.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 8 members appointed as follows: (1) One member appointed by the President of the United States.
Three members appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
Three members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One member appointed by the Chief Justice of the United States.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Chair.--The Commission shall elect a Chair and Vice Chair from among its members.
Quorum.--Four members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but 3 may conduct hearings.
In General.--Members of the Commission who are Federal officers or employees shall receive no additional compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of duties vested in the Commission, but not in excess of the maximum amounts authorized under section 456 of title 28, United States Code.
Non-Federal Members.--Any member of the Commission who is not a Federal officer or employee shall receive $200 for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission, plus reimbursement for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of such duties, but not in excess of the maximum amounts authorized under section 456 of title 28, United States Code.
Executive Director.--The Commission may appoint an Executive Director who shall receive compensation at a rate not exceeding the rate prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The Executive Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the compensation of such additional personnel as the Executive Director determines necessary, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service or the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Compensation under this subsection shall not exceed the annual maximum rate of basic pay for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5108 of title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The Executive Director may procure personal services of experts and consultants as authorized under section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, at rates not to exceed the highest level payable under the General Schedule pay rates under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Services.--The Administrative Office of the United States Courts shall provide administrative services, including financial and budgeting services, for the Commission on a reimbursable basis.
The Federal Judicial Center shall provide necessary research services on a reimbursable basis.
The Commission is authorized to request from any department, agency, or independent instrumentality of the Government any information and assistance the Commission determines necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.
Each such department, agency, and independent instrumentality is authorized to provide such information and assistance to the extent permitted by law when requested by the Chair of the Commission.
No later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, or June 30, 1998, whichever occurs first, the Commission shall submit its report to the President and the Congress under section 1(b).
The Commission shall terminate 90 days after the date of the submission of the report.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Commission the sum of $500,000 to carry out this Act.