This Act may be cited as the ``Expanded Options in Higher Education for District of Columbia Students Act of 1999''.
It is the purpose of this Act to establish a program that enables college-bound residents of the District of Columbia to have greater choices among institutions of higher education.
THE EXPANDED OPTIONS IN HIGHER EDUCATION FOR DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA STUDENTS PROGRAM.
In General.--From amounts appropriated under subsection (h), the Secretary shall award grants to eligible institutions that enroll eligible students to pay the difference between the tuition charged for in-State students and the tuition charged for out-of-State students on behalf of each eligible student enrolled in the eligible institution.
Ratable Reduction.--If the funds appropriated under subsection (h) for any fiscal year are not sufficient to award a grant in the amount determined under subsection (a) on behalf of each eligible student enrolled in an eligible institution, the amount of the tuition payment made on behalf of each eligible student shall be ratably reduced.
If additional sums become available for that fiscal year, the reduced grant amount shall be increased on the same basis as the grant amount was reduced (until the amount of the grant equals the amount determined under subsection (a)).
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Academic year.--The term ``academic year'' has the meaning given the term in section 481 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1088).
Eligible student.--The term ``eligible student'' means an individual who-- (A) has been a resident of the District of Columbia for not less than the 12 consecutive months preceding the academic year for which the tuition payment is sought; (B) is a member of a family that has an income level that is below the applicable income level at which eligibility for the Hope Scholarship and Lifetime Learning Credit is disallowed by reason of section 25A(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (C) begins the individual's undergraduate course of study within the 3 calendar years (excluding any period of service on active duty in the Armed Forces, or service under the Peace Corps Act (22 United States Code 2501 et seq.)
or subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes) of graduation from a secondary school, or obtaining the recognized equivalent of a secondary school diploma; (D) is enrolled or accepted for enrollment, on at least a half-time basis, in a degree, certificate, or other program (including a program of study abroad approved for credit by the institution at which such student is enrolled) leading to a recognized educational credential at an eligible institution; (E) if enrolled in an eligible institution, is maintaining satisfactory progress in the course of study the student is pursuing in accordance with section 484(c) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1091(c)); (F) has not completed the individual's first undergraduate baccalaureate course of study; and (G) has filed an application with an eligible institution.
Eligible institution.--The term ``eligible institution'' means an institution that-- (A) is a public institution of higher education located in the State of Maryland or the Commonwealth of Virginia; (B) is an institution of higher education as defined in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001); (C) is eligible to participate in the student financial assistance programs under title IV of such Act (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes); and (D) enters into an agreement with the Secretary containing such conditions as the Secretary may specify.
Secondary school.--The term ``secondary school'' has the meaning given that term under section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require an institution of higher education to alter the institution's admissions policies or standards in any manner to enable an eligible student to enroll in the institution.
Applications.--Each student desiring a tuition payment under this section shall submit an application to the eligible institution at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the eligible institution may require.
Administration of Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out the program under this section in consultation with the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
The Secretary may enter into a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement with another public or private entity to administer the program under this section if the Secretary determines that doing so is a more efficient way of carrying out the program.
Policies and procedures.--The Secretary, in consultation with institutions of higher education eligible for participation in the program authorized under this section, shall develop policies and procedures for the administration of the program.
Report.--The Secretary shall report to Congress annually regarding-- (1) the number of eligible students attending each eligible institution and the amount of the grant awards paid to those institutions on behalf of the eligible students; (2) the extent, if any, to which a ratable reduction was made in the amount of tuition payments made on behalf of eligible students; and (3) the progress in obtaining recognized academic credentials of the cohort of eligible students for each year.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Education to carry out this section $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect for academic years beginning on or after July 1, 2000.
ASSISTANCE TO THE UNIVERSITY OF THE DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
In General.--The Secretary of Education may provide financial assistance to the University of the District of Columbia to enable the University to carry out activities authorized under part B of title III of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1060 et sequentes).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $1,500,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
In General.--The Secretary may award grants to eligible institutions that enroll eligible students to pay the cost of tuition and fees at the eligible institutions on behalf of each eligible student enrolled in an eligible institution.
The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Grant Amount.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall award a grant under this section on behalf of each eligible student in an amount that is not greater than $2,000 for each eligible student per academic year.
In determining the amount of the tuition and fee payment made on behalf of eligible students for an academic year the Secretary shall consider the number of eligible students for the academic year and the amount of funds appropriated under subsection (f) for the academic year.
Proration.--The Secretary shall prorate grant awards under this section for students who attend school on less than a full time basis.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Eligible student.--The term ``eligible student'' means an individual who meets the requirements of subparagraphs (A) through (G) of section 3(c)(2).
Eligible institution.--The term ``eligible institution'' means an institution that-- (A)(i) is a private, nonprofit institution of higher education, as defined in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001), that is located in the District of Columbia or in a county adjacent to the District of Columbia; or (ii) is a proprietary institution of higher education, as defined in section 102(b) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1002(b)), that-- (I) provides a 2-year or 4-year program of instruction for which the institution awards an associate or baccalaureate degree; and (II) is located in the District of Columbia or in a county adjacent to the District of Columbia; (B) is eligible to participate in the student financial assistance programs under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1070 et sequentes); and (C) enters into an agreement with the Secretary containing such conditions as the Secretary may specify.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Application.--Each eligible student desiring a tuition and fee payment under this section shall submit an application to the eligible institution at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the eligible institution may require.
Administration of Program.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out the program under this section in consultation with the Mayor of the District of Columbia.
The Secretary may enter into a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement with another public or private entity to administer the program under this section if the Secretary determines that doing so is a more efficient way of carrying out the program.
Policies and procedures.--The Secretary, in consultation with institutions of higher education eligible for participation in the program authorized under this section, shall develop policies and procedures for the administration of the program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Education to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 5 succeeding fiscal years.
Such funds shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect for academic years beginning on or after July 1, 2000.