REQUIREMENTS RELATING TO DISPOSAL OF NAPALM AND OTHER MATERIALS OWNED OR CONTROLLED BY THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall carry out the requirements set forth in this section before disposing of napalm or other materials covered by this Act.
Public Education and Outreach.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 120 days before a project for the disposal of napalm or other materials covered by this Act begins, the Secretary of Defense shall inform the public about the disposal project in communities near the disposal site and along the disposal shipment route, through public outreach that includes briefings to elected officials, public safety agencies, and citizen groups.
The information provided shall include the master implementation plan developed by the Secretary under section 2.
Outreach office.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish an outreach office near the disposal site staffed by personnel of the Department of Defense.
Mobile outreach unit.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide for a mobile outreach unit to provide information to the public about the disposal project at various locations and events in communities near the disposal site.
Information repositories.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish repositories of information about the disposal project near the disposal site.
Citizens' advisory commission.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish a Citizens' Advisory Commission composed of local elected officials, officials from State and local public safety agencies, citizen groups, and personnel of the Department of Defense for the purpose of studying and commenting on issues of concern to citizens about the disposal project.
Protection of the Public and Workers.-- (1) Certification of emergency response entities.--Before carrying out a project for the disposal of napalm or other materials covered by this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall certify the adequacy of the training and response capabilities of entities, such as police departments, fire departments, and State hazardous materials teams, that are likely to respond first to emergencies near the disposal site and along the disposal shipment route.
Certification of public health and welfare.--The Secretary of Defense shall obtain from the Secretary of Health and Human Services a certification that the health and the welfare of the public and of workers are protected near the disposal site and along the disposal shipment route.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make such certification only after receiving advice from, and the concurrence of, appropriate State and local health and public safety agencies.
Certification of worker safety.--The Secretary of Defense shall obtain from the Occupational Safety and Health Administration a certification that the disposal site is safe for workers responsible for the disposal project and that the workers are properly trained to carry out the disposal project.
Protection of the Environment.-- (1) Environmental impact statement.--The Secretary of Defense shall complete an environmental impact statement for any project for the disposal of napalm or other materials covered by this Act.
Before completing the statement, the Secretary shall solicit comments relating to the scope of the statement from State and local governments and citizen groups.
Monitoring of air, soil, and water.--The Secretary of Defense shall provide funds for the Secretary of Health and Human Services to monitor, collect, and review samples of air, soil, and water near the disposal site and along the disposal shipment route to ensure the protection of human health and the environment during the disposal project.
Alternative Technologies.-- (1) Study.--Before carrying out a project for the disposal of napalm or other materials covered by this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall study alternative technologies for the disposal, in coordination with State and local governments and citizen groups.
Test.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct a test of alternative technologies for the disposal, to the extent possible.
National Academy of Sciences.-- (1) Advice.--The Secretary of Defense shall request the National Academy of Sciences to provide scientific and technical advice regarding disposal of napalm and other materials covered by this Act.
Investigation of safety and performance.--The Secretary of Defense shall request and provide funds for the National Academy of Sciences to investigate the safety and performance of any project for such disposal.
Requirement.--For any project for the disposal of napalm and other materials covered by this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall develop a master implementation plan.
Matters Included.--The plan shall include schedules for the disposal project and information on the manner in which the Secretary plans to achieve each of the requirements set forth in section 1.
Updates.--The Secretary shall update the plan each week with information about the progress being made in achieving the requirements set forth in section 1.
Availability.--The plan shall be available to the public in the information repositories referred to in section 1(b)(4).
This Act applies to the following materials, if they are owned or controlled by the Department of Defense: (1) Napalm.
Any material that includes polystyrene, gasoline, and benzene.
Ammunition larger than ammunition of a caliber for small arms.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) The term ``disposal'' means recycling, neutralization, burning, or permanent storage.
The term ``near'', with respect to a disposal site, means within 10 miles of the site.
This Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.