This Act may be cited as the ``Gay and Lesbian Youth Suicide Prevention Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on Gay and Lesbian Youth Suicide Prevention (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 31 members appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Members of the Commission shall include professionals and experts in the field of youth suicide prevention.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect the powers of the Commission, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Meetings.--The Commission shall, during a 6-month period, meet with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and advise various offices within the Department of Health and Human Services on an ongoing basis.
Chairperson.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall select a chairperson for the Commission from among the members of the Commission.
In General.--The Commission shall carry out activities to combat the epidemic of suicide among gay and lesbian youth, who account for 30 percent of completed youth suicides, as reported by the Department of Health and Human Services in the 1989 ``Report of the Secretary's Task Force on Youth Suicide''.
The Commission shall advise the Secretary of Health and Human Services and heads of other Federal and State youth service agencies concerning how to include the concerns of gay and lesbian youth in suicide prevention policies, programs, and research.
Goals of Commission.--The goals of the Commission shall be to-- (1) work to include the concerns of gay and lesbian youth in suicide prevention programs at the national and State level; (2) develop and make specific recommendations to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and heads of other relevant Federal and State agencies about how to stem the epidemic of gay and lesbian youth suicide; (3) work to expand research on youth suicide to include research on gay and lesbian youth suicide; and (4) work to amend existing youth suicide policies, guidelines, and programs to include policies, guidelines, and programs appropriate for gay and lesbian youth.
Interim Reports.--The Commission shall conduct regional public hearings around the United States to gather information from youths, family members of such youths, and professionals, about the problem of gay and lesbian youth suicide, on an ongoing basis.
The Commission shall prepare and submit an interim report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The interim report shall contain findings and conclusions of the Commission, based on the hearings.
Final Report.--The Commission shall prepare and submit a final report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The final report shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Information From Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Postal Services.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Use of Voluntary and Uncompensated Services.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary of Health and Human Services is authorized to accept voluntary and uncompensated services in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall serve on the Commission without compensation.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Detail of Government Employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The Chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
The Commission shall terminate 6 months after the date of the first meeting of the Commission.