This Act may be cited as the ``Heavy Duty Hybrid Vehicle Research, Development, and Demonstration Act of 2008''.
ADVANCED HEAVY DUTY HYBRID VEHICLE TECHNOLOGY RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, DEMONSTRATION, AND COMMERCIAL APPLICATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a competitive research, development, demonstration, and commercial application program (referred to in this Act as the ``program'') to provide grants to applicants to carry out projects to advance research and development and to demonstrate technologies for advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicles.
Applications.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall issue requirements for applying for grants under the program.
Selection criteria.--The Secretary shall establish selection criteria for awarding grants under the program.
In evaluating applications, the Secretary shall-- (A) consider the ability of applicants to successfully complete both phases described in subsection (c); and (B) give priority to applicants who are best able to-- (i) fill existing research gaps and achieve the greatest advances beyond the state of current technology; and (ii) achieve the greatest reduction in fuel consumption and emissions.
Partners.--An applicant for a grant under this section may carry out a project in partnership with other entities.
Schedule.-- (A) Application request.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register, and elsewhere as appropriate, a request for applications to undertake projects under the program.
Applications shall be due not later than 90 days after the date of such publication.
Application selection.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which applications for grants under the program are due, the Secretary shall select, through a competitive process, all applicants to be awarded a grant under the program.
Number of grants.--The Secretary shall determine the number of grants to be awarded under the program based on the technical merits of the applications received.
The number of grants awarded under the program shall not be less than 3 or more than 7, and at least half of the grants awarded shall be for plug-in hybrid technology.
Award amounts.--The Secretary shall award not more than $3,000,000 to each recipient per year for each of the 3 years of the project.
Program Requirements; Two Phases.--Each grant recipient shall be required to complete two phases: (1) Phase one.-- (A) In general.--In phase one, the recipient shall research and demonstrate advanced hybrid technology by producing or retrofitting one or more advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicles.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after the completion of phase one, the recipient shall submit to the Secretary a report containing data and analysis of-- (i) the performance of each vehicle in carrying out the testing procedures developed by the Secretary under subparagraph (E); (ii) the performance during such testing of each vehicle's components, including the battery, energy management system, charging system, and power controls; (iii) the projected cost of each vehicle, including acquisition, operating, and maintenance costs; and (iv) the emissions levels of each vehicle, including greenhouse gas levels.
Termination.--The Secretary may terminate the grant program with respect to the project of a recipient at the conclusion of phase one if the Secretary determines that the recipient cannot successfully complete the requirements of phase two.
Timing.--Phase one begins upon receipt of a grant under the program and has a duration of one year.
Testing procedures.--The Secretary shall develop standard testing procedures to be used by recipients in testing each vehicle.
Such procedures shall include testing a vehicle's performance under typical operating conditions.
Phase two.-- (A) In general.--In phase two, the recipient shall demonstrate advanced manufacturing processes and technologies by producing or retrofitting 50 advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicles.
Report.--Not later than 60 days after the completion of phase two, the recipient shall submit to the Secretary a report containing-- (i) an analysis of the technological challenges encountered by the recipient in the development of the vehicles; (ii) an analysis of the technological challenges involved in mass producing the vehicles; and (iii) the manufacturing cost of each vehicle, the estimated sale price of each vehicle, and the cost of a comparable non- hybrid vehicle.
Timing.--Phase two begins at the conclusion of phase one and has a duration of two years.
Research on Vehicle Usage and Alternative Drive Trains.--The Secretary shall conduct research into alternative power train designs for use in advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicles.
Such research shall compare the estimated cost, including operating and maintenance costs, emissions reductions, and fuel savings of each design with similar non- hybrid power train designs under the conditions in which these vehicles are typically used, including, for each vehicle type-- (1) number of miles driven; (2) time spent with the engine at idle; (3) horsepower requirements; (4) length of time the maximum or near maximum power output of the vehicle is needed; and (5) any other factors that the Secretary considers appropriate.
Report to the Congress.--Not later than 60 days after the Secretary receives the reports from grant recipients under subsection (c)(2)(B), the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report containing-- (1) an identification of the grant recipients and a description of the projects to be funded; (2) an identification of all applicants who submitted applications for the program; (3) all data contained in reports submitted by grant recipients under subsection (c); (4) a description of the vehicles produced or retrofitted by recipients in phase one and phase two of the project, including an analysis of the fuel efficiency of such vehicles; and (5) the results of the research carried out under subsections (d) and (h).
Coordination and Nonduplication.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall coordinate, and not duplicate, activities under this Act with other programs and laboratories of the Department of Energy and other Federal research programs.
Cost Sharing.--Section 988 of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 16352) shall apply to the program established pursuant to this section.
Electrical Grid Research Pilot Program.--The Secretary shall establish a pilot program through the National Laboratories and Technology Centers of the Department of Energy to research and test the effects on the domestic electric power grid of the widespread use of plug-in hybrid vehicles, including plug-in hybrid vehicles that are advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicles.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicle.--The term ``advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicle'' means a vehicle with a gross weight between 14,000 pounds and 33,000 pounds that is fueled, in part, by a rechargeable energy storage system.
Greenhouse gas.--The term ``greenhouse gas'' means-- (A) carbon dioxide; (B) methane; (C) nitrous oxide; (D) hydrofluorocarbons; (E) perfluorocarbons; or (F) sulfur hexafluoride.
Plug-in hybrid.--The term ``plug-in hybrid'' means a vehicle fueled, in part, by electrical power that can be recharged by connecting the vehicle to an electric power source.
Retrofit.--The term ``retrofit'' means the process of creating an advanced heavy duty hybrid vehicle by converting an existing, fuel-powered vehicle.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $16,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2009 through 2011 to carry out this section.
Of the funds authorized under paragraph (1), not more than $1,000,000 per fiscal year may be used for-- (A) carrying out the studies required under subsection (d); (B) carrying out the pilot program required under subsection (h); and (C) the administration of the program.
EXPANDING RESEARCH IN HYBRID TECHNOLOGY FOR LARGE VEHICLES.
Subsection (g)(1) of the United States Energy Storage Competitiveness Act of 2007 (enacted as section 641(g)(1) of the Energy Independence and Security Act of 2007 (42 United States Code 17231(g)(1))) is amended by inserting ``vehicles with a gross weight over 16,000 pounds,'' before ``stationary applications''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 24, 2008.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.