This Act may be cited as the ``Extended Disaster Mental Health Services Act of 2001''.
TITLE I--MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES PURSUANT TO PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCIES SEC.
GRANTS TO STATES AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS FOR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES AS RESPONSE TO PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCIES.
Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 290bb-31 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
GRANTS TO STATES AND POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS FOR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES AS RESPONSE TO PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCIES.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, may make grants to States and political subdivisions of States for the purpose of providing the mental health services described in subsection (b) in response to public health emergencies, including diseases or disorders that present such emergencies, natural disasters, major transportation accidents, technological disasters, and disasters resulting from terrorism.
Services.--The mental health services referred to in subsection (a) with respect to a public health emergency are the following: ``(1) Crisis counseling in the aftermath of such emergency.
In the case of children, adolescents, and adults at risk of developing mental health disorders as a result of such emergency-- ``(A) outreach and screening programs to identify such individuals; and ``(B) early intervention services, including counseling.
Mental health services beyond such crisis counseling (referred to in this section as `extended therapeutic services') that-- ``(A) are provided to individuals with diagnosed mental health disorders resulting from or exacerbated by the emergency, including disaster survivors, family members of victims, first responders, and others with such disorders; and ``(B) are provided by mental health professionals who are licensed or otherwise regulated by a State agency.
Assessments of the need for extended therapeutic services.
Casefinding and other outreach services to inform the public of the availability of crisis counseling and extended therapeutic services.
Relation to Other Sources of Funding.--A condition for the receipt of a grant under subsection (a) is that the applicant involved agree as follows: ``(1) With respect to activities for which the grant is authorized to be expended, the applicant will maintain expenditures of non-Federal amounts for such activities at a level that is not less than the level of such expenditures maintained by the applicant for the fiscal year preceding the first fiscal year for which the applicant receives such a grant.
The grant will not be expended to make payment for the provision of extended therapeutic services for an individual to the extent that payment has been made, or can reasonably be expected to be made, for the services-- ``(A) under a State compensation program, under an insurance policy, or under a Federal or State health benefits program; or ``(B) by an entity that provides health services on a prepaid basis.
The grant will not be expended to make payment for the provision of mental health services to the extent that such services are available pursuant to responses to the public health emergency involved by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, or by other Federal or State agencies or programs that provide for emergency medical services.
Statewide Mental Health Disaster Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--For fiscal year 2003 or any subsequent fiscal year, a condition for the receipt of a grant under subsection (a) by a State or a political subdivision is that, in accordance with criteria established by the Secretary, the State has developed a statewide plan for the provision of mental health services in response to public health emergencies.
The preceding sentence applies without regard to whether the State receives a grant under section 520L.
Certain criteria of secretary.--The criteria of the Secretary under paragraph (1) shall include criteria for coordinating the program under this section with programs of the Federal Emergency Management Agency and with other Federal or State programs regarding the provision of emergency medical services, including mental health services.
Administration of Grant Through State and Local Mental Health Agencies.--A condition for the receipt of a grant under subsection (a) is that the applicant involved agree that the grant and activities under the grant will be administered through the agency of the State or political subdivision (as the case may be) that has the principal responsibility for carrying out mental health programs.
Certain Requirements.--With respect to an application that, pursuant to section 501(l), is submitted to the Secretary for a grant under subsection (a), the Secretary may make the grant only if the application contains-- ``(1) a description of the purposes for which the applicant intends to expend the grant; ``(2) an assurance that the activities to be carried out under the grant are consistent with the State plan referred to in subsection (d)(1), as applicable, together with a description of the manner in which the grant activities will be coordinated with the State plan; ``(3) an assurance that the applicant will coordinate activities under the grant with other public or private providers of mental health services, together with a description of the manner in which the grant activities will be so coordinated; and ``(4) in the case of an application from a political subdivision, an assurance that the application was developed in consultation with the State agency referred to in subsection (e).
Duration of Grant.--The period during which payments are made to an applicant from a grant under subsection (a) may not exceed three years.
The provision of such payments are subject to annual approval by the Secretary of the payments and to the availability of appropriations for the fiscal year involved to make the payments.
This subsection may not be construed as establishing a limitation on the number of grants under such subsection that may be made to an applicant.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary may, directly or through grants or contracts, provide technical assistance to grantees under subsection (a) in carrying out the purpose described in such subsection.
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Allocation.--Of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year, the Secretary may obligate not more than 7 percent for the administrative expenses of the Secretary in carrying out this section.''.
TITLE II--STATEWIDE MENTAL HEALTH DISASTER PLANS SEC.
GRANTS TO STATES FOR STATEWIDE MENTAL HEALTH DISASTER PLANS.
Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 101 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
GRANTS TO STATES FOR STATEWIDE MENTAL HEALTH DISASTER PLANS.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, may make grants to States for the purpose of-- ``(1) developing, and periodically reviewing and as appropriate revising, statewide plans for providing mental health services in response to public health emergencies (including emergencies referred to section 520K(a)); ``(2) training personnel to implement such plan effectively; and ``(3) carrying out other activities determined appropriate by the Secretary to prepare for the provision of mental health services in response to such emergencies.
Certain Requirements.--A condition for the receipt of a grant under subsection (a) is that the State involved agree that the statewide plan under such subsection will with respect to public health emergencies include provisions for each of the following: ``(1) Providing the mental health services described in section 520K (relating to crisis counseling, outreach and screening programs, early intervention services, extended therapeutic services, needs assessments, and casefinding and other outreach services), taking into account the need for increased capacity to provide services pursuant to such emergencies.
As necessary, carrying out paragraph (1) with respect to special populations such as children, the elderly, individuals with disabilities, and individuals with pre- existing mental health disorders.
Coordinating the provision of mental health services with appropriate public and private providers of emergency medical services and with Federal, State, and local programs that provide funding for such services.
Coordinating with local educational agencies.
Providing information and education to the public during public health emergencies.
Providing, at times other than public health emergencies, information and education to the public regarding the statewide plan.
Designation of the State official who will have the principal responsibility for administering such plan, including the initial implementation of the plan.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
TITLE III--NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS RESPONSE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER SEC.
NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS RESPONSE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER.
Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 201 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS RESPONSE TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTER.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, shall establish within such center an administrative unit to be known as the National Mental Health Crisis Response Technical Assistance Center (referred to in this section as the `Technical Assistance Center').
Duties.--The purpose of the Technical Assistance Center is to carry out, in accordance with policies of the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, the following functions: ``(1) Provide consultation and technical assistance to the Director, and to State and local governmental providers of mental health services, on developing and implementing plans for providing appropriate mental health services in response to public health emergencies, including statewide plans under section 520L.
Provide technical expertise on planning, preparedness, and response evaluation activities.
Develop policy guidelines on mental health concerns related to crisis incidents and develop recommendations for proposed regulations and or legislative proposals.
Develop and conduct training events and conferences on mental health needs of disaster victims and witnesses.
Serve as the principal clearinghouse operated by the Secretary for the collection and dissemination of information concerning the mental health aspects of public health emergencies, including information in published documents, information on technical assistance resources, and information on relevant Internet sites.
Assist States in preparing for the behavioral health consequences of terrorism.
Provide onsite technical expertise during public health emergencies, when requested by a State.
Certain Authority.--The Technical Assistance Center may carry out the functions under subsection (b) directly or through grant or contract, subject to the approval of the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
TITLE IV--TRAINING GRANTS SEC.
Subpart 3 of part B of title V of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 301 of this Act, is amended by adding at the end the following section: ``SEC.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to provide for the training of mental health professionals with respect to the treatment of individuals who are victims of disasters.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a) an entity shall-- ``(1) be a-- ``(A) regional center of excellence; or ``(B) a mental health professional society; and ``(2) prepare and submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--An entity that receives a grant under this section shall use amounts received under the grant to provide for the training of mental health professionals to enable such professionals to appropriately diagnose individuals who are the victims of disasters with respect to their mental health and to provide for the proper treatment of the mental health needs of such individuals.
Training Materials and Procedures.--The Director of the Center for Mental Health Services, in consultation with the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health, the National Center for Post- Traumatic Stress Disorder, the International Society for Traumatic Stress Studies, and the heads of other similar entities, shall develop training materials and procedures to assist grantees under this section.
Definition.--In this section, the term `mental health professional' includes psychiatrists, psychologists, psychiatric nurses, mental health counselors, marriage and family therapists, social workers, pastoral counselors, school psychologists, licensed professional counselors, school guidance counselors, and any other individual practicing in a mental health profession that is licensed or regulated by a State agency.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005.
Program Management.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary may use amounts appropriated under subsection (f) for the administration of the program under this section.