This Act may be cited as the ``International Counterfeiting Prevention Act of 1996''.
INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON INTERNATIONAL COUNTERFEITING OF UNITED STATES CURRENCY.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Secretary of State shall establish, and appoint the members of, an interagency task force (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``task force'') to-- (A) monitor the use and holding of United States currency in foreign countries; (B) produce a statistically valid estimate of the amount of counterfeit United States currency that is produced, passed, and possessed outside the United States each year; and (C) coordinate the activities of the agencies represented on the task force in carrying out the duties described in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Composition of task force.--The task force shall consist of the following: (A) The Under Secretary of the Treasury for Enforcement, or a designee of the Under Secretary.
The Director of the United States Secret Service, or a designee of the Director.
The Director of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, or a designee of the Director.
Such other officers of the Department of the Treasury, including any officer in any bureau, office, or service within the department, as the Secretary of the Treasury may determine to be appropriate, or any designee of any such officer.
A member of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as designated by the Chairman of such Board, or a designee of such member.
The general counsel of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, or a designee of the general counsel.
Such other officers of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System as the Chairman of such Board may determine to be appropriate, or a designee of any such officer.
Such officers of the Department of State as the Secretary of State may determine to be appropriate, or a designee of any such officer.
Representation of other agencies and departments.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and the Secretary of State may include representatives of any other agency or department of the United States on the task force, with the concurrence of the head of such agency or department.
Appointment of members of task force.--The representative of any agency or department referred to in subparagraph (A) shall consist of-- (i) the head of such agency or department, or a designee of such head; and (ii) such other officers of such agency or department as the head of such agency or department may determine to be appropriate, or a designee of any such officer.
Chairperson.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall serve as the chairperson of the task force.
Evaluation Audit Plan.-- (1) In general.--The task force shall establish an effective international evaluation audit plan that is designed to enable the agencies represented on the task force to carry out the duties described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (a)(1) on a regular and thorough basis.
Submission of detailed written summary.--The task force shall submit a detailed written summary of the evaluation audit plan developed pursuant to paragraph (1) to the Congress before the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
1st evaluation audit under plan.--The task force shall begin the first evaluation audit pursuant to the evaluation audit plan no later than the end of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Subsequent evaluation audits.--At least 1 evaluation audit shall be performed pursuant to the evaluation audit plan during each 2-year period beginning after the date of the commencement of the evaluation audit referred to in paragraph (3).
Reports.-- (1) In general.--The task force shall submit a written report to the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate on the results of each evaluation audit conducted pursuant to subsection (b) within 90 days after the completion of the evaluation audit.
Contents.--In addition to such other information as the task force may determine to be appropriate, each report submitted to the Congress pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include the following information: (A) A detailed description of the evaluation audit process and the methods used to detect counterfeit currency.
The method used to determine the currency sample examined in connection with the evaluation audit and an analysis of the statistical significance of the sample examined.
A list of the countries, types of financial institutions, and other entities included.
The total amount of United States currency and the total quantity of each denomination found at each type of evaluation audit site.
The total amount of counterfeit United States currency and the total quantity of each counterfeit denomination found at each type of evaluation audit site.
An analysis of the types of counterfeit currency discovered and any recurring patterns of counterfeiting, including currency that fits the family of counterfeit currency designated by the United States Secret Service as C--14342.
Classification of information.-- (A) In general.--To the greatest extent possible, each report submitted to the Congress under this subsection shall be submitted in an unclassified form.
Classified and unclassified forms.--If, in the interest of submitting a complete report under this subsection, the task force determines that it is necessary to include classified information in the report, the report shall be submitted in a classified and an unclassified form.
LAW ENFORCEMENT AND SENTENCING PROVISIONS RELATING TO INTERNATIONAL COUNTERFEITING OF UNITED STATES CURRENCY.
Findings.--The Congress hereby finds the following: (1) United States currency is being counterfeited outside the United States.
The 103d Congress enacted, with the approval of the President on September 13, 1994, section 470 of title 18, United States Code, making such activity a crime under the laws of the United States.
The expeditious posting of agents of the United States Secret Service to overseas posts, which is necessary for the effective enforcement of section 470 and related criminal provisions, has been delayed.
While section 470 of title 18, United States Code, provides for a maximum term of imprisonment of 20 years as opposed to a maximum term of 15 years for domestic counterfeiting, the United States Sentencing Commission has failed to provide, in its sentencing guidelines, for an appropriate enhancement of punishment for defendants convicted of counterfeiting United States currency outside the United States.
Timely Consideration of Requests for Concurrence in Creation of Overseas Posts.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of State shall-- (A) consider in a timely manner the request by the Secretary of the Treasury for the placement of such number of agents of the United States Secret Service as the Secretary of the Treasury considers appropriate in posts in overseas embassies; and (B) reach an agreement with the Secretary of the Treasury on such posts as soon as possible and, in any event, not later than December 31, 1996.
Cooperation of treasury required.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall promptly provide any information requested by the Secretary of State in connection with such requests.
Reports required.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the Secretary of State shall each submit, by February 1, 1997, a written report to the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate explaining the reasons for the rejection, if any, of any proposed post and the reasons for the failure, if any, to fill any approved post by such date.
Enhanced Penalties for International Counterfeiting of United States Currency.--Pursuant to the authority of the United States Sentencing Commission under section 994 of title 28, United States Code, the Commission shall amend the sentencing guidelines prescribed by the Commission to provide an appropriate enhancement of the punishment for a defendant convicted under section 470 of title 18 of such Code.