This Act may be cited as the ``White Bluffs Protection Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The White Bluffs, located on the Columbia River from river mile 354 to river mile 376 in the State of Washington, are a scenic example of pristine landscapes that should be protected.
The White Bluffs have been eroding at a more rapid rate since the construction of the Columbia Basin Project by the Bureau of Reclamation.
Federal and local officials have identified the erosive action of the Columbia River and return flows associated with the Columbia Basin Project as two of the factors contributing to the movement of ancient landslide masses in the White Bluffs area.
The movement of large landslide masses of the White Bluffs may change the course of the Columbia River to some degree, damaging the opposite south shore and degrading the quality of Columbia River water by slide debris and aggradation of the Columbia River channel downstream, both of which could endanger salmon spawning grounds of the Hanford Reach.
The largest, closest source of Columbia Basin Project water to the White Bluffs is the product of two canal wasteways.
These two canal wasteways can be modified to reduce the standing water above the White Bluffs.
ACTIONS BY BUREAU OF RECLAMATION TO PROTECT WHITE BLUFFS, WASHINGTON.
Wasteway Modifications.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Bureau of Reclamation-- (1) may construct a channel for the Wahluke Branch 10 Wasteway of the Columbia Basin Project, that will effectively drain all standing water above the White Bluffs within the Wahluke Slope Habitat Management Area, Washington; and (2) may take such steps as are necessary to eliminate the White Bluffs Wasteway.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior, to remain available until expended-- (1) $4,000,000 to carry out subsection (a)(1); and (2) $1,000,000 to carry out subsection (a)(2).
STUDY OF THE WAHLUKE SLOPE.
In General.--Not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall enter into an agreement with the National Academy of Sciences to conduct a study of the land use options for the land owned by the Department of Energy within the Hanford Reservation known as Wahluke Slope in the State of Washington.
Study Contents.--The study under subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) Examination of the potential environmental, economic, and cultural impacts of various land use options for the Wahluke Slope region, such as agriculture (including grazing, mining, and farming), industry, recreation, specific preservation, and use as a buffer zone for the Department of Energy's radioactive waste management efforts.
Review of existing land use plans, environmental impact studies, and scientific and technical literature.
Convening of workshops, as necessary, to assess the following impacts (positive or negative) for each option: (A) The impact on current water rights, future water needs, and water management alternatives.
The impact on habitat and federally protected species.
The impact on the White Bluffs.
The impact on the local economy.
The Impact of existing archeological resources.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date on which the Secretary of the Interior enters into the agreement under subsection (a), the National Academy of Sciences shall submit a report concerning the study to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Use of previous studies.--The report under paragraph (1) may be based in part on, but may not be limited to, the work and scope of previous studies, including any of the following: (A) The Hanford Reach of the Columbia River comprehensive conservation study and environmental impact statement.
The Hanford Reach protection and management program's interim action plan.
The study known as the ``Red Zone'' study.
The Hanford remedial action and land use.
The Wahluke 2000 proposal.
The Nature Conservancy biological inventories.
Requirement.--The report under paragraph (1) shall set forth the findings, conclusions, and recommendations of the National Academy of Sciences regarding future land use options, including the need for any congressional action.
Suspension of Changes in Management or Use of Wahluke Slope.-- No change may be made in the management or use of the Wahluke Slope before the expiration of the one-year period beginning on the date of the submission of the report under subsection (c).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Interior $600,000 for the study under this section.