OFFICE OF PENSION PARTICIPANT ADVOCACY.
In General.--Title III of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1201 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subtitle D--Office of Pension Participant Advocacy ``SEC.
OFFICE OF PENSION PARTICIPANT ADVOCACY.
Establishment.-- ``(1) In general.--There is established in the Department of Labor an office to be known as the `Office of Pension Participant Advocacy'.
Pension participant advocate.--The Office of Pension Participant Advocacy shall be under the supervision and direction of an official to be known as the `Pension Participant Advocate' who shall-- ``(A) have demonstrated experience in the area of pension participant assistance, and ``(B) be selected by the Secretary after consultation with pension participant advocacy organizations.
The Pension Participant Advocate shall report directly to the Secretary and shall be entitled to compensation at the same rate as the highest rate of basic pay established for the Senior Executive Service under section 5382 of title 5, United States Code.
Functions of Office.--It shall be the function of the Office of Pension Participant Advocacy to-- ``(1) evaluate the efforts of the Federal Government, business, and financial, professional, retiree, labor, women's, and other appropriate organizations in assisting and protecting pension plan participants, including-- ``(A) serving as a focal point for, and actively seeking out, the receipt of information with respect to the policies and activities of the Federal Government, business, and such organizations which affect such participants, ``(B) identifying significant problems for pension plan participants and the capabilities of the Federal Government, business, and such organizations to address such problems, and ``(C) developing proposals for changes in such policies and activities to correct such problems, and communicating such changes to the appropriate officials, ``(2) promote the expansion of pension plan coverage and the receipt of promised benefits by increasing the awareness of the general public of the value of pension plans and by protecting the rights of pension plan participants, including-- ``(A) enlisting the cooperation of the public and private sectors in disseminating information, and ``(B) forming private-public partnerships and other efforts to assist pension plan participants in receiving their benefits, ``(3) advocate for the full attainment of the rights of pension plan participants, including by making pension plan sponsors and fiduciaries aware of their responsibilities, ``(4) give priority to the special needs of low and moderate income participants, and ``(5) develop needed information with respect to pension plans, including information on the types of existing pension plans, levels of employer and employee contributions, vesting status, accumulated benefits, benefits received, and forms of benefits.
Reports.-- ``(1) Annual report.--Not later than December 31 of each calendar year, the Pension Participant Advocate shall report to the Committees on Education and the Workforce and Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions and Finance of the Senate on its activities during the fiscal year ending in the calendar year.
Such report shall-- ``(A) identify significant problems the Advocate has identified, ``(B) include specific legislative and regulatory changes to address the problems, and ``(C) identify any actions taken to correct problems identified in any previous report.
The Pension Participant Advocate shall submit a copy of such report to the Secretary and any other appropriate official at the same time it is submitted to the committees of Congress.
Specific reports.--The Pension Participant Advocate shall report to the Secretary or any other appropriate official any time the Advocate identifies a problem which may be corrected by the Secretary or such official.
Reports to be submitted directly.--The report required under paragraph (1) shall be provided directly to the committees of Congress without any prior review or comment by any person other than the Secretary or any other Federal officer or employee.
Specific Powers.-- ``(1) Receipt of information.--Subject to such confidentiality requirements as may be appropriate, the Secretary and other Federal officials shall, upon request, provide such information (including plan documents) as may be necessary to enable the Pension Participant Advocate to carry out the Advocate's responsibilities under this section.
Appearances.--The Pension Participant Advocate may represent the views and interests of pension plan participants before any Federal agency, including, upon request of a participant, in any proceeding involving the participant.
Contracting authority.--In carrying out responsibilities under subsection (b)(5), the Pension Participant Advocate may, in addition to any other authority provided by law-- ``(A) contract with any person to acquire statistical information with respect to pension plan participants, and ``(B) conduct direct surveys of pension plan participants.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents for title III of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Subtitle D--Office of Pension Participant Advocacy ``3051.
Office of Pension Participant Advocacy''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on January 1, 2006.