This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Sweep Act of 1997''.
REQUIRING MAJORITY OF HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATE'S CONTRIBUTORS TO RESIDE IN DISTRICT.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) The number of persons from whom a House candidate accepts contributions with respect to an election cycle who are not residents of the congressional district involved may not exceed the number of persons from whom the candidate accepts contributions with respect to the election cycle who are residents of the congressional district involved.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to contributions from a national, State, district, or local political party committee (including any subordinate committee thereof).
In this subsection, the term `House candidate' means a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress.''.
BAN ON ACTIVITIES OF POLITICAL ACTION COMMITTEES IN FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
In General.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``ban on federal election activities by political action committees ``Sec.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, no political action committee may make contributions, solicit or receive contributions, or make expenditures for the purpose of influencing an election for Federal office.
Political Action Committee Defined.--In this section, the term `political action committee' means any political committee which is not-- ``(1) the principal campaign committee of a candidate; or ``(2) a national, State, district, or local political party committee (including any subordinate committee thereof).''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 301(4)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 431(4)(A)) is amended by inserting after ``persons'' the following: ``(but not including a partnership for purposes of section 323(b))''.
Section 316(b)(2) of such Act (2 United States Code 441b(b)(2)) is amended-- (A) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (B) by striking ``; and'' at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting a period; and (C) by striking subparagraph (C).
LIMIT ON CONTRIBUTIONS OF PERSONAL FUNDS OF CANDIDATE.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not accept contributions or loans of the candidate's personal funds (including funds of members of the candidate's immediate family) during a calendar year which in the aggregate exceed $50,000.''.
BAN ON USE OF SOFT MONEY.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes), as amended by section 3, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``limitations and reporting requirements for amounts paid for mixed political activities ``Sec.
In General.--Any payment by the national, State, or local committee of a political party (including any subordinate committee thereof) for a mixed political activity-- ``(1) shall be subject to limitation and reporting under this Act as if such payment were an expenditure; and ``(2) may be paid only from an account that is subject to the requirements of this Act.
Mixed Political Activity Defined.--As used in this section, the term `mixed political activity' means an activity which is both for the purpose of influencing an election for Federal office and for any purpose unrelated to influencing an election for Federal office, including voter registration, absentee ballot programs, and get-out- the-vote programs.''.
AVAILABILITY OF FREE BROADCAST TIME FOR CANDIDATES ADOPTING VOLUNTARY SPENDING LIMITS.
Voluntary Limits Described.--Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes), as amended by sections 3 and 5, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``eligibility for reduced broadcast rates for candidates limiting expenditures ``Sec.
Eligibility.--At the request of a candidate for election as a Member of, or Resident Commissioner or Delegate to, the House of Representatives, the Commission shall issue a certification that the candidate is eligible with respect to an election cycle for reduced broadcast rates under section 315(c) of the Communications Act of 1934 if the candidate certifies that the total amount of expenditures made in support of the candidate's election during the cycle will not exceed $600,000.
Process for Certification.-- ``(1) Certification of benefits.-- ``(A) Deadline for response to requests.--The Commission shall respond to a candidate's request for certification under this subsection not later than 5 days after the candidate submits the request.
Requests.--Any request for certification submitted by a candidate shall contain-- ``(i) such information and be made in accordance with such procedures as the Commission may provide by regulation; and ``(ii) a verification signed by the candidate and the treasurer of the principal campaign committee of such candidate stating that the information furnished in support of the request, to the best of their knowledge, is correct and fully satisfies the requirement of this title.
Grounds for determination.--The Commission shall make an initial determination of a candidate's eligibility for certification under this section based on the candidate's filings under this title.
Any subsequent determination shall be based on relevant additional information submitted in such form and manner as the Commission may require.
Withdrawal of certification.--If the Commission determines that a candidate for whom a certification has been issued under this section no longer meets the requirements for such certification, the Commission shall revoke the candidate's certification.
Penalty for Spending in Excess of Limit.--Any candidate for whom a certification has been issued under this section with respect to an election cycle who makes expenditures during the cycle in an amount greater than the amount of the limit described in subsection (a) shall pay to the Commission an amount equal to twice the difference between the total amount of expenditures made in support of the candidate's election during the cycle and the amount of the limit.''.
Free Broadcast Time.-- (1) In general.--Section 315 of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 315) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking ``within the meaning of this subsection'' and inserting ``within the meaning of this subsection and subsection (c)''; (B) in subsection (b), by striking ``The charges'' and inserting ``Except as provided in subsection (c), the charges''; (C) by redesignating subsections (c) and (d) as subsections (d) and (e); and (D) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) A candidate for election as a Member of, or Resident Commissioner or Delegate to, the House of Representatives for whom a certification is in effect under section 325 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 shall be entitled to receive a total of 30 minutes of free broadcast time from broadcasting stations within the State or an adjacent State, of which at least 20 minutes shall be made available between 7:00 p.m. and 11:00 p.m. on any day that falls on Monday through Friday.
A candidate may not request that more than 15 minutes of free broadcast time be aired pursuant to this subsection by any one broadcasting station.
In the case of an election where only 1 candidate qualifies to be on the ballot, no time shall be required to be provided by a licensee pursuant to this subsection.
(A) The amount of broadcast time that shall be provided pursuant to this subsection to the candidate of a minor party shall be equal to the number of minutes allocable to the House district involved multiplied by the percentage of the number of popular votes received by the candidate of that party in the preceding general election for the House of Representatives in the district.
In subparagraph (A), the term `minor party' means, with respect to an election for Member of, or Resident Commissioner or Delegate to, the House of Representatives, a political party-- ``(i) whose candidate for such office in the preceding general election in the district involved received 5 percent or more but less than 25 percent of the number of popular votes received by all candidates for the office; or ``(ii) whose candidate for such office in the current general election in the district involved has obtained the signatures of at least 5 percent of the district's registered voters, as determined by the chief voter registration official of the State, in support of a petition for an allocation of free broadcast time under this subsection.
The Commission shall by regulation exempt from the requirements of this subsection-- ``(A) a licensee whose signal is broadcast substantially nationwide; and ``(B) a licensee for whom the Commission determines that meeting the requirements will impose a significant financial hardship.''.
Meeting requirement as condition of granting or renewal of license.--Section 307 of such Act (47 United States Code 307) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) The continuation of an existing license, the renewal of an expiring license, and the issuance of a new license shall be expressly conditioned on the agreement by the licensee or the applicant to meet the requirements of section 315(c).''.
PROHIBITING CONTRIBUTIONS BY NONCITIZEN INDIVIDUALS.
Section 319(b)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441e(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``and who is not lawfully admitted'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
BAN ON CASH CONTRIBUTIONS.
Section 321 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441g) is amended to read as follows: ``ban on contribution of currency ``Sec.
No person may make any contribution of currency of the United States or currency of any foreign country to any candidate or political committee with respect to any campaign for election to Federal office.''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO MASS MAILINGS SENT BY MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
In General.--Section 3210(a)(6) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(G) Effective with respect to mailings made during sessions of Congress beginning after December 31, 1999, for purposes of applying any provision of law with respect to a Member of, or Member-elect to, the House-- ``(i) `90 days' shall be substituted for `60 days' each place it appears in subparagraph (A); and ``(ii) `100 pieces' shall be substituted for `500 pieces' in subparagraph (E).''.
Conforming Amendments.--Section 3210(a)(6) of title 39, United States Code, as amended by subsection (a), is further amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A) by striking ``It'' and inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (G), it''; and (2) in subparagraph (E) by striking ``As'' and inserting ``Subject to subparagraph (G), as''.
REPORT ON EFFECTS OF CHANGES.
Not later than 3 months after the first general elections for the House of Representatives which are held after December 31, 1998, the Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives shall submit a report to the President and to Congress analyzing the effects on such elections of this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections held after December 31, 1998.