This Act may be cited as the ``American Dream Assistance Act of 1992''.
PENALTY-FREE WITHDRAWALS FOR FIRST-TIME HOMEBUYERS.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 72(t) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exceptions to 10-percent additional tax on early distributions from qualified retirement plans) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Distributions from individual retirement plans for first home purchases.--Distributions to an individual from an individual retirement plan which are qualified first-time homebuyer distributions (as defined in paragraph (6)).''
First-Time Homebuyer Distributions.--Section 72(t) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) Qualified first-time homebuyer distributions.--For purposes of paragraph (2)(D)-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified first-time homebuyer distribution' means any payment or distribution received by an individual to the extent such payment or distribution is used by the individual before the close of the 60th day after the day on which such payment or distribution is received to pay qualified acquisition costs with respect to a principal residence of a first-time homebuyer who is such individual or the child of such individual.
Qualified acquisition costs.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified acquisition costs' means the costs of acquiring, constructing, or reconstructing a residence.
Such term includes any usual or reasonable settlement, financing, or other closing costs.
First-time homebuyer; other definitions.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) First-time homebuyer.--The term `first-time homebuyer' means any individual if such individual (and if married, such individual's spouse) had no present ownership interest in a principal residence during the 3- year period ending on the date of acquisition of the principal residence to which this paragraph applies.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' has the same meaning as when used in section 1034.
Date of acquisition.--The term `date of acquisition' means the date-- ``(I) on which a binding contract to acquire the principal residence to which subparagraph (A) applies is entered into, or ``(II) on which construction or reconstruction of such a principal residence is commenced.
Special rule where delay in acquisition.-- If-- ``(i) any amount is paid or distributed from an individual retirement plan to an individual for purposes of being used as provided in subparagraph (A), and ``(ii) by reason of a delay in the acquisition of the residence, the requirements of subparagraph (A) cannot be met, the amount so paid or distributed may be paid into an individual retirement plan as provided in section 408(d)(3)(A)(i) without regard to section 408(d)(3)(B), and, if so paid into such other plan, such amount shall not be taken into account in determining whether section 408(d)(3)(A)(i) applies to any other amount.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments and distributions after the date of the enactment of this Act.
PARENT'S GUARANTEE OF CHILD'S LOAN NOT GIFT FOR GIFT TAX PURPOSES.
In General.--Section 2503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining taxable gifts) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h) Exclusion for Guarantee By Parent of Loan to Child or Child's Business, Etc.-- ``(1) In general.--The mere making of a qualified guarantee shall not be treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
Qualified guarantee.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified guarantee' means any guarantee by an individual of a loan to-- ``(A) any lineal descendent of such individual or any spouse of such a lineal descendent, or ``(B) any business enterprise all of the interests in which (other than any interest as a creditor) are owned by individuals described in subparagraph (A).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to guarantees made before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act.