This Act may be cited as the ``Persian Gulf War Veterans Health and Services Enhancement Act''.
TOLL-FREE HOTLINE FOR PERSIAN GULF WAR VETERAN HEALTH INFORMATION.
In General.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall maintain an information system involving the use of a toll-free telephone number to provide veterans of the Persian Gulf War and their family members (and other members of the public at the Secretary's discretion) with information regarding the following: (1) The Persian Gulf War Veterans Health Registry established by the Persian Gulf War Veterans' Health Status Act (38 United States Code 527 note).
Access to health services and health-related benefits provided by or under the auspices of the Department of Veterans Affairs, including-- (A) marriage and family counseling available under section 121 of the Veterans' Medical Programs Amendments of 1992 (38 United States Code 1712A note); (B) health care available under section 1710(e)(1)(C) of title 38, United States Code; and (C) health examinations, consultation, and counseling available under section 703 of the Persian Gulf War Veterans' Health Status Act (38 United States Code 527 note).
Compensation and benefits related to disabilities resulting from service in the Persian Gulf War, including disabilities resulting from illness that resulted from such service.
Significant developments in research relating to the health consequences of service in the Persian Gulf War.
Any other information that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Date of Establishment of Information System.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish the information system required by subsection (a) not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
OUTREACH TO VETERANS OF PERSIAN GULF WAR.
Section 702(f) of the Persian Gulf War Veterans' Health Status Act (38 United States Code 527 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) Ongoing Outreach to Individuals Listed in Registry.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall notify each individual listed in the Registry, or, in the case of such an individual who is deceased, the surviving spouse, children, or parents of such individual, at least quarterly, by newsletter or by other means that the Secretary determines to be appropriate, of-- ``(A) the status and findings of federally sponsored research relating to the illnesses of individuals who served as members of the Armed Forces in the Persian Gulf theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or to the illnesses of the family members of such individuals; ``(B) compensation and benefits, including health care and other health-related benefits, that may be provided by the Department of Veterans Affairs or the Department of Defense to an individual who served as a member of the Armed Forces in the Persian Gulf theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War or, in the case of such an individual who is deceased, to the surviving spouse, children, or parents of such an individual; and ``(C) any other information that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Consultation with veterans service organizations.--In preparing the newsletter or other means used to conduct the notification required by paragraph (1), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall consult with veterans' service organizations.
Date that quarterly notifications begin.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make the first of the periodic notifications required by paragraph (1) not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of the Persian Gulf War Veterans Health and Services Enhancement Act.''.
EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO PROVIDE PRIORITY HEALTH CARE TO VETERANS OF THE PERSIAN GULF WAR.
Hospital and Nursing Home Care.--Section 1710(e)(3) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``December 31, 1994'' and inserting ``December 31, 1998''.
Outpatient Care.--Section 1712(a)(1)(D) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``December 31, 1994'' and inserting ``December 31, 1998''.
EXTENSION OF MARRIAGE AND FAMILY COUNSELING AVAILABILITY FOR PERSIAN GULF WAR VETERANS.
In General.--Section 121(a) of the Veterans' Medical Programs Amendments of 1992 (38 United States Code 1712A note) is amended by striking ``September 30, 1994'' and inserting ``December 31, 1998''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 121(g) of the Veterans' Medical Programs Amendments of 1992 (38 United States Code 1712A note) is amended by striking ``and 1994'' and inserting ``through 1999''.