This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Lands Transportation Improvement Act''.
COOPERATIVE FEDERAL LANDS TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 2 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 205 the following: ``SEC.
COOPERATIVE FEDERAL LANDS TRANSPORTATION PROGRAM.
Findings and Purpose.-- ``(1) Findings.--Congress finds that public roads owned by States-- ``(A) can provide valuable assistance to the Federal Government in ensuring adequate and safe transportation to, in, and across federally owned land and Indian reservations; and ``(B) supplement the efforts of the Federal Government in developing and maintaining roads to serve federally owned land and Indian reservations.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to further the Federal interest in State-owned or State-maintained roads that provide transportation to, in, or across federally owned land or Indian reservations by establishing the Cooperative Federal Lands Transportation Program.
Program.--There is established the Cooperative Federal Lands Transportation Program (referred to in this section as the `program').
Funds available for the program may be used for projects, or portions of projects, on State-owned or State-maintained highways that cross, are adjacent to, or lead to federally owned land or Indian reservations, as determined by the State.
Such projects shall be proposed by a State and selected by the Secretary.
A project proposed by a State under this section shall be on a highway owned or maintained by the State and may be a highway construction or maintenance project eligible under this title or any project of a type described in section 204(h).
Distribution of Funds for Projects.-- ``(1) In general.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary-- ``(i) after consultation with the Administrator of General Services, the Secretary of the Interior, and the heads of other agencies as appropriate, shall determine the percentage of the total land in each State that is owned by the Federal Government or that is held by the Federal Government in trust; ``(ii) shall determine the sum of the percentages determined under clause (i) for States with respect to which the percentage is 4.5 or greater; and ``(iii) shall determine for each State included in the determination under clause (ii) the percentage obtained by dividing-- ``(I) the percentage for the State determined under clause (i); by ``(II) the sum determined under clause (ii).
Adjustment.--The Secretary shall-- ``(i) reduce any percentage determined under subparagraph (A)(iii) that is greater than 7.5 percent to 7.5 percent; and ``(ii) redistribute the percentage points equal to any reduction under clause (i) among other States included in the determination under subparagraph (A)(ii) in proportion to the percentages for those States determined under subparagraph (A)(iii).
Availability to states.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), for each fiscal year, the Secretary shall make funds available to carry out eligible projects in a State in an amount equal to the amount obtained by multiplying-- ``(A) the percentage for the State, if any, determined under paragraph (1); by ``(B) the funds made available for the program for the fiscal year.
Selection of projects.--The Secretary may establish deadlines for States to submit proposed projects for funding under this section, except that in the case of fiscal year 1998 the deadline may not be earlier than January 1, 1998.
For each fiscal year, if a State does not have pending, by that deadline, applications for projects with an estimated cost equal to at least 3 times the amount for the State determined under paragraph (2), the Secretary may distribute, to 1 or more other States, at the Secretary's discretion, \1/3\ of the amount by which the estimated cost of the State's applications is less than 3 times the amount for the State determined under paragraph (2).
Transfers.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a State and the Secretary may agree to transfer amounts made available to a State under this section for use in carrying out projects on any Federal lands highway that is located in the State.
Special rule.--This paragraph applies to a State that contains a national park that was visited by more than 2,500,000 people in 1996 and comprises more than 3,000 square miles of land area, including surface water, that is located in the State.
For such a State, 50 percent of the amount that would otherwise be made available to the State for each fiscal year under the program shall be made available only for eligible highway uses in the national park and within the borders of the State.
For the purpose of making allocations under section 202(c), the Secretary may not take into account the past or future availability, for use on park roads and parkways in a national park, of funds made available for use in a national park by this paragraph.''.
Definition of Federal Lands Highway Investment.--Section 101(a) of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following: ``The term `Federal lands highway investment' means funds authorized for the Federal lands highways program or the Cooperative Federal Lands Transportation Program under chapter 2.
''; and (2) by reordering the undesignated paragraphs so that they are in alphabetical order.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 2 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 205 the following: ``206.
Cooperative Federal Lands Transportation Program.''.
There is authorized to be appropriated out of the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account), for the Cooperative Federal Lands Transportation Program under section 206 of title 23, United States Code, $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998 through 2002.