This Act may be cited as the ``Prescription Drug Consumer Information Act of 2003''.
PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS.
Amendments to the Public Health Service Act Relating to the Group Market.-- (1) In general.--Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-4 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS.
``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a group health plan, and a health insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, shall not enter into a contract with any pharmacy benefit manager (in this section referred to as a `PBM') to manage the prescription drug coverage provided under such plan or insurance coverage, or to control the costs of such prescription drug coverage, unless the PBM satisfies the following requirements: ``(1) The PBM is not owned by a pharmaceutical manufacturing company.
The PBM agrees to pass along any cost savings negotiated with a pharmacy to the group health plan or the health insurance issuer.
The PBM agrees to make public on an annual basis the percent of manufacturer's rebates received by the PBM that is passed back to the group health plan or the health insurance issuer on a drug-by-drug basis.
The PBM agrees to provide, at least annually, the group health plan or the health insurance issuer with all financial and utilization information requested by the plan or issuer relating to the provision of benefits to eligible enrollees through the PBM and all financial and utilization information relating to services provided to the plan or issuer.
A PBM providing information under this paragraph may designate that information as confidential.
Information designated as confidential by a PBM and provided to a plan or issuer under this paragraph may not be disclosed to any person without the consent of the PBM.
The PBM agrees to provide, at least annually, the group health plan or the health insurance issuer with all financial terms and arrangements for remuneration of any kind that apply between the PBM and any prescription drug manufacturer or labeler, including formulary management and drug-switch programs, educational support, claims processing and pharmacy network fees that are charged from retail pharmacies and data sales fees.''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by this subsection shall apply to group health plans and health insurance issuers in connection with group health plans for plan years beginning on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Amendment to the Public Health Service Act Relating to the Individual Market.-- (1) In general.--The first subpart 3 of part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 300gg-51 et seq.)
is amended-- (A) by redesignating such subpart as subpart 2; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS.
``The provisions of section 2707 shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as they apply to a group health plan and a health insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage under that section.''.
Effective date.--The amendment made by paragraph (1)(B) shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974.-- (1) In general.--Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1185 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PHARMACY BENEFIT MANAGERS TRANSPARENCY REQUIREMENTS.
``The provisions of section 2707 of the Public Health Service Act shall apply to a group health plan, and a health insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, in the same manner as such provisions apply to a group health plan and a health insurance issuer providing health insurance coverage under that section.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 713 the following: ``Sec.
Pharmacy benefit managers transparency requirements.''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply with respect to plan years beginning on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
DISCLOSURE OF RETAIL PRICES OF PHARMACEUTICALS.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations requiring a pharmacy to disclose the retail cost of a prescription drug upon request by a consumer.