As used in this Act: (1) School district.--The term ``School District'' means the Lame Deer High School District No.
, Rosebud County, Montana.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tribe.--The term ``Tribe'' means the Northern Cheyenne Tribe.
NORTHERN CHEYENNE LAND TRANSFER.
Conveyance of Lands.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary shall convey by patent to the School District all right, title, and interest of the United States and the Tribe in the lands described in subsection (b) for use by the School District only for the purposes of constructing and operating on the lands a public high school and related facilities.
Description of Lands.-- (1) General legal description.--The lands described in this paragraph are within the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation, as follows: The W\1/2\ of SE\1/4\ and the E\1/2\ of SW\1/4\ of section 10, township 3 south, range 41 east, M.P.M.
Narrative description.--Such lands may be described as follows: Beginning at the south \1/4\ corner of such section 10, thence south 89 degrees 56 minutes west 393.31 feet, on and along the south line of such section 10 to the true point of beginning, thence south 89 degrees 56 minutes west 500 feet, on and along such section line, thence north 00 degrees 00 minutes east, 575.0 feet, thence north 54 degrees 9 minutes 22 seconds east, 2,382.26 feet, thence south 23 degrees 44 minutes 21 seconds east, 622.56 feet, thence south 51 degrees 14 minutes 40 seconds west, 2,177.19 feet, to the true point of beginning, containing in all 40.0 acres, more or less.
The patent issued by the Secretary under this Act shall be issued subject to the following conditions: (1) Title to all coal and other minerals, including oil, gas, and other natural deposits, within the lands described in section 2(b) shall remain with the Secretary to be held in trust for the Tribe, as provided in Public Law 90-424 (82 United States Statutes at Large 424).
The lands described in section 2(b) conveyed to the School District may be used only by the School District and only for the purposes of constructing and operating on the lands a public high school and related facilities.
If, on the termination of the 8-year period beginning on the date of issuance of the patent, classes have not commenced in a permanent public high school facility established on the lands described in section 2(b) conveyed to the School District, or if such classes commence at the facility during such period, but the facility subsequently permanently ceases operating as a public high school-- (A) all right, title, and interest to the lands described in section 2(b) conveyed to the School District, free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, shall automatically revert to the Secretary to be held in trust for the Tribe; and (B) the Secretary shall void the patent and the patent shall have no further force or effect.
(A) At any time after the conclusion of any litigation pending as of the date of enactment of this Act (including any trial and, if any, appellate proceedings) that challenges the decision made by the Superintendent of Public Instruction for the State of Montana on November 9, 1993, granting the petition to create the School District, and with the prior approval of the Superintendent of Public Instruction-- (i) the Tribe shall have the right to request the Secretary to void the patent in accordance with subparagraph (C); and (ii) if the Tribe makes such request and meets the requirements of subparagraph (C), the Tribe may enter into a lease with the School District pursuant to the Act of August 9, 1995 (69 United States Statutes at Large 539, chapter 615; (25 United States Code 415(a))-- (I) covering the lands described in section 2(b); (II) of a term of 25 years, with a right to renew for an additional 25-year period; and (III) under which the lands described in section 2(b) shall be leased rent free to the School District for the exclusive purpose of constructing and operating a public high school and related facilities on such lands.
Any lease entered into pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall, notwithstanding subparagraph (A)(II), terminate upon the termination of the period specified in paragraph (3) if, by such date, classes have not commenced in a permanent public high school facility established on the lands described in section 2(b) conveyed to the School District, or if, during such period, such classes commence at the facility, but the facility subsequently permanently ceases operating as a public high school.
If the Tribe seeks and obtains approval of the Superintendent of Public Instruction of the State of Montana, the Tribe may enter into a lease, if the lease is signed by the Tribe and approved by the Secretary.
Such lease shall comply with the requirements of this paragraph.
At such time as the Tribe enters into a lease under this paragraph, the Secretary shall void the patent, and, subject to the leasehold interest offered to the School District, title to the lands described in section 2(b), free and clear of all liens and encumbrances, shall automatically revert to the Secretary in trust for the Tribe.
The Tribe may at any time irrevocably relinquish the right of the Tribe to enter into a lease under this paragraph by resolution of the Northern Cheyenne Tribal Council that explicitly provides for the relinquishment of the right.
EFFECT OF ACCEPTANCE OF PATENT.
Upon the acceptance by the School District of a patent issued by the Secretary under this Act, the School District, and any party who may subsequently acquire any right, title, or interest in the lands described in section 2(b) by or through the School District, shall be subject to the terms and conditions set forth in paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 3.