SHORT TITLE; REFERENCES TO TITLE 38, UNITED STATES CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans' Appeals Improvement Act of 1993''.
References.--Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this Act an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of title 38, United States Code.
COMPOSITION OF THE BOARD OF VETERANS' APPEALS.
Board Members and Personnel.--Section 7101(a) is amended to read as follows: ``(a)(1) There is in the Department a Board of Veterans' Appeals (hereafter in this chapter referred to as the `Board').
The Board is under the administrative control and supervision of a Chairman directly responsible to the Secretary.
The members of the Board shall be the Chairman, a Vice Chairman, such number of Deputy Vice Chairmen as the Chairman may designate under subsection (b)(4), and such number of other members as may be found necessary to conduct hearings and consider and dispose of matters properly before the Board in a timely manner.
The Board shall have such other professional, administrative, clerical, and stenographic personnel as are necessary to conduct hearings and consider and dispose of matters properly before the Board in a timely manner.''.
Appointment and Removal of Board Members.--Section 7101(b) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2)(A), by striking ``other members of the Board (including the Vice Chairman)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Board members other than the Chairman''; (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by striking ``paragraph'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``subparagraph''; and (3) by striking out paragraph (4) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new paragraph (4): ``(4) The Secretary shall designate one Board member as Vice Chairman based upon recommendations of the Chairman.
The Chairman may designate one or more Board members as Deputy Vice Chairmen.
The Vice Chairman and any Deputy Vice Chairman shall perform such functions as the Chairman may specify.
The Vice Chairman shall serve as Vice Chairman at the pleasure of the Secretary.
Any Deputy Vice Chairman shall serve as Deputy Vice Chairman at the pleasure of the Chairman.''.
Acting Board Members.--Section 7101(c) is amended-- (1) by striking out paragraph (1) and inserting in lieu thereof the following new paragraph (1): ``(1) The Chairman may from time to time designate one or more employees of the Department to serve as acting Board members.
''; (2) by striking out paragraph (2); (3) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2); and (4) in paragraph (2), as so redesignated-- (A) by striking out ``temporary Board members designated under this subsection and the number of''; and (B) by striking out ``section 7102(a)(2)(A)(ii) of this title'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraph (1) of this section''.
Chairman's Annual Report.--Section 7101(d)(2) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking out ``year; and'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``year;''; (2) in subparagraph (E), by striking out ``year.''
and inserting in lieu thereof ``year; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(F) the names of those employees of the Department designated under subsection (c)(1) to serve as acting Board members during that year and the number of cases each such acting Board member participated in during that year.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 7101(d)(3)(B) is amended by striking out ``section 7103(d)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``section 7101(b)''.
Section 7101(e) is amended in the first sentence by striking out ``a temporary or'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``an''.
ASSIGNMENT OF MATTERS BEFORE THE BOARD.
Section 7102 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Assignment of matters before the Board ``The Chairman may determine any matter before the Board, or rule on any motion in connection therewith, or may assign any such matter or motion to any other Board member or a panel of members for determination.
Any such assignment by the Chairman may not be reviewed by any other official or by any court, whether by an action in the nature of mandamus or otherwise.''.
DETERMINATIONS BY THE BOARD.
In General.--Section 7103(a) is amended to read as follows: ``(a) When the Chairman retains a matter or submits it to another Board member or a panel of members for determination in accordance with section 7102 of this title, or to an expanded panel of Board members in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, the Chairman, other member, or panel of members may: ``(1) Issue an order dismissing any appeal, in whole or in part, which fails to allege specific error of fact or law in the determination being appealed or in which the determination being appealed has become moot.
Each order of dismissal shall include a written statement of the Board's findings and conclusions, and the reasons or bases for those findings and conclusions, in support of the dismissal.
Issue an order remanding the case, in whole or in part, to the agency of original jurisdiction for such additional development as the Chairman, other member, or panel of members may consider necessary for proper disposition of the case.
Render a written decision with respect to any issues not dismissed or remanded, which decision shall constitute the Board's final disposition of the issues so decided.
Such decisions shall be based on the entire record in the proceeding, upon consideration of all evidence and material of record, and upon applicable provisions of law and regulation.
The Board shall be bound in its decisions, including allowances made under the provisions of subsection (d) of this section, by the regulations of the Department, the instructions of the Secretary, and the precedent opinions of the chief legal officer of the Department.
Each decision of a Board member or a panel of members shall include-- ``(A) a written statement of the Board's findings and conclusions, and the reasons or bases for those findings and conclusions, on all material issues of fact and law presented on the record; and ``(B) an order granting appropriate relief or denying relief.
Decisions by a panel of Board members, except as otherwise provided in subsection (b), shall be made by a majority of the members of the panel.''.
Reconsideration.--Section 7103(b) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) The decision of a Board member or a panel of members is final, unless the Chairman orders reconsideration of the case, and a claim disallowed by the Board may not thereafter be reopened or allowed except as provided in section 5108 of this title and subsection (d) of this section.
If the Chairman orders reconsideration in a case, the case shall be considered upon reconsideration by a panel of members other than the Chairman if one member originally decided the case or by an expanded panel of members other than the Chairman if a panel originally decided the case.
When a panel considers a case after a motion for reconsideration has been granted, the decision of a majority of the panel members shall constitute the final decision of the Board, except as provided in subsection (d).
If the expanded panel cannot reach a majority decision, the Chairman may either assign additional members other than the Chairman to the panel or vote with the members of the expanded panel so as to create a majority decision.
Either the expanded panel majority or the majority made with the vote of the Chairman shall constitute the final decision of the Board, except as provided in subsection (d).''.
Administrative Allowance; Notice of Determination.--Section 7103 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Whenever a Board member other than the Chairman or Vice Chairman is of the opinion that a prior, otherwise final denial of a claim should be revised or amended to allow the claim in whole or in part, based on a difference of opinion as to how the evidence should be evaluated rather than on any error in the prior decision, the Board member shall recommend such allowance to the Chairman or Vice Chairman.
The Chairman or Vice Chairman, whether upon the recommendation of any other Board member or upon the Chairman's or Vice Chairman's own motion, if of the opinion that a prior, otherwise final denial of a claim should be revised or amended to allow the claim in whole or in part, based on a difference of opinion as to how the evidence should be evaluated rather than on any error in the prior decision, shall approve the award of any benefit, or any increase therein, on the basis of such difference of opinion.
The discretionary exercise of the authority provided to the Chairman and Vice Chairman under this subsection shall not be reviewed by any other official or by any court, whether by an action in the nature of mandamus or otherwise.
After reaching a determination under any of the provisions of this section, the Board shall promptly mail a copy of its written decision to the appellant and the appellant's authorized representative (if any) at the last known address of the appellant and at the last known address of such representative (if any), respectively.''.
JURISDICTION OF THE BOARD.
Section 7104 is amended-- (1) by striking out ``(a)''; (2) by striking out ``211(a)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``511(a)''; and (3) by striking out all after ``made by the Board.''.
Section 7105(d) is amended by striking out paragraph (5).
Section 7109 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Medical opinions ``(a) A Board member or a panel of members before whom a matter which involves a medical question is pending may, in the discretion of the member or panel, request an opinion on that medical question from-- ``(1) an employee of the Board who is licensed to practice medicine in any State; ``(2) an employee of the Veterans Health Administration who is licensed to practice medicine in any State and who has been designated by the Under Secretary for Health to provide such an opinion; or ``(3) an employee of any Federal department or agency who is licensed to practice medicine in any State and who has been designated, in accordance with arrangements made by the Secretary with the head of any such Federal department or agency, to provide such an opinion.
When, in the judgment of a Board member or a panel of members assigned a matter for determination in accordance with section 7102 of this title, the medical complexity or controversy involved in that matter warrants expert medical opinion in addition to, or in lieu of, that available within the Department or within another Federal department or agency, the Board may secure an advisory medical opinion from one or more independent medical experts who are not employees of the Department or of another Federal department or agency.
The Secretary shall make necessary arrangements with recognized medical schools, universities, or clinics to furnish such advisory medical opinions at the request of the Chairman.
Any such arrangement shall provide that the actual selection of the expert or experts to give the advisory opinion in an individual case shall be made by an appropriate official of such institution.
For purposes of this section, an employee of a medical school, university, or clinic shall not be considered an employee of the Department or another Federal department or agency just because the medical school, university, or clinic receives grants from, or provides contract services to, the Department or another Federal department or agency.
Any opinion provided under this section shall be in writing and made a part of the record.
The Board shall notify a claimant that an advisory medical opinion has been requested under this section with respect to the claimant's case and shall mail to the claimant and the claimant's authorized representative (if any) at the last known address of the claimant and at the last known address of such representative (if any) a copy of such opinion when the Board receives it.
An opportunity for response by or on behalf of the claimant shall be provided following the mailing of the copy (or copies) of such advisory medical opinion.''.
Section 7110 is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Hearings ``(a) The Board shall decide any appeal only after affording the appellant an opportunity for a hearing.
A hearing docket shall be maintained and formal recorded hearings shall be held by such member or members of the Board as the Chairman may designate.
Such member or members designated by the Chairman to conduct the hearing will participate in making the final determination in the claim.
An appellant may request a hearing before the Board at either its principal location or a regional office of the Department.
Any hearing held at a regional office of the Department shall be scheduled for hearing in the order in which the requests for hearing in that area are received by the Department at the place specified by the Department for the filing of requests for such hearings.
At the request of the Chairman, the Secretary may provide suitable facilities and equipment to the Board or other components of the Department to enable an appellant located at a facility within the area served by a regional office to participate, through voice transmission, or picture and voice transmission, by electronic or other means, in a hearing with a Board member or members sitting at the Board's principal location.
When such facilities and equipment are available, the Chairman may, at his or her discretion, afford the appellant an opportunity to participate in a hearing before the Board through the use of such facilities and equipment in lieu of a hearing held by personally appearing before a Board member or members as provided in subsection (c).''.
The table of contents at the beginning of chapter 71 is amended by-- (1) striking ``7102.
Assignment of members of Board.''
and inserting in lieu thereof ``7102.
Assignment of appellate matters.
''; (2) striking ``7109.
and inserting in lieu thereof ``7109.
''; and (3) striking ``7110.
and inserting in lieu thereof ``7110.
EFFECTIVE DATES OF AWARDS BASED ON DIFFERENCE OF OPINION.
Section 5110 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(o) The effective date of the award of any benefit, or any increase therein, pursuant to section 7103(d) of this title on the basis of a difference of opinion shall be-- ``(1) if the award resulted from review initiated by an application to reopen the claim for the benefit in question under the provisions of section 5108 of this title, fixed in accordance with the facts found but shall not be earlier than the date the Department of Veterans Affairs received such application; or ``(2) if the award resulted from review of the final determination undertaken by the Department of Veterans Affairs solely on its own initiative, the date the Chairman or Vice Chairman of the Board of Veterans' Appeals approved the award.