This Act may be cited as the ``Women Veterans Health Equity Act of 1996''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Health care for veterans has traditionally been considered in terms of male veterans.
Women constitute nearly 5 percent of the total veteran population, a percentage that is growing.
There are currently 1,200,000 female veterans in the United States, a number which is steadily increasing.
Thirty percent of women using Department of Veterans Affairs facilities report some form of sexual assault or sexual trauma during their military service.
TIMELY AND APPROPRIATE HEALTH CARE SERVICES FOR WOMEN.
Ensured Provision of Services.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that each health-care facility under the direct jurisdiction of the Secretary is able, through services made available either by individuals appointed to positions in the Veterans Health Administration or under contracts or other agreements made under section 7409, 8111, or 8153 of title 38, United States Code, or title II of Public Law 102-585, to provide in a timely and appropriate manner women's health services (as defined in section 1701(10) of title 38, United States Code (as added by section 4) to any veteran described in section 1710(a)(1) of title 38, United States Code, who is eligible for such services.
Health Care Services To Be Provided Directly When Cost Effective.--(1) The Secretary shall ensure that each health-care facility under the direct jurisdiction of the Secretary shall provide women's health services directly (rather than by contract or other agreement) when it is cost effective to do so.
The Secretary shall ensure that each such facility is provided appropriate equipment, treatment facilities, and staff to carry out paragraph (1) and to ensure that the quality of care provided under that paragraph is in accordance with professional standards.
Conforming Repeal.--Section 302 of the Veterans' Health Care Amendments of 1983 (Public Law 98-160; 97 United States Statutes at Large 1004; 38 United States Code 1701 note) is repealed.
Women's Health Services.--Section 1701 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6)(A)(i), by inserting ``women's health services,'' after ``preventive health services,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(10) The term `women's health services' means health care services provided to women.
Such term includes counseling and services relating to the following: ``(A) Papanicolaou tests (pap smear).
Breast examinations and mammography.
The treatment, management, and prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.
Menopause, osteoporosis, senility, and other conditions relating to aging.
Physical and psychological conditions arising out of acts of sexual violence or sexual intimidation.
Well-baby care and pediatrics.
Physical and psychological conditions that result from homelessness.''.
Contracts for Women's Health Services.--Section 1703(a) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(9) Women's health services for veterans on an ambulatory or outpatient basis.''.
Repeal of Superseded Authority.--Section 106 of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 1710 note) is amended-- (1) by striking out subsection (a); and (2) by striking out ``(b) Responsibilities of Directors of Facilities.--'' before ``The Secretary''.
Training of Primary Care Physicians.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that primary care physicians of the Department of Veterans Affairs are trained and prepared to ask the appropriate questions in regard to the possibility that a patient who is a woman veteran may have experienced sexual assault or sexual trauma while in active military, naval, or air service.
Pregnancy Care for Women Veterans With Service-Connected Disability.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make available to any pregnant veteran who has a service-connected disability pregnancy care services, including pre-natal, delivery, and post-natal care.
OUTREACH SERVICES FOR HOMELESS WOMEN VETERANS.
Section 7722(e) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary shall take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that homeless women veterans are included in such outreach programs and outreach services.
Such programs and services for women veterans shall include the following: ``(1) Crisis counseling and psychological testing for Post- Traumatic Stress Disorder and other manic depressive illnesses.
Transportation for outreach assistance.
Priority placement for inpatient services.
Follow-up and after-care treatment.''.
SAFE AND EFFECTIVE TREATMENT FOR WOMEN PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS.
Safe and Effective Treatment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that women veterans who receive psychiatric treatment from the Secretary, particularly in the case of women who are sexually traumatized, receive such treatment (on both an inpatient and outpatient basis) in a safe and effective manner that recognizes the privacy needs of such women.
The Secretary shall ensure strict confidentiality for women veterans receiving such treatment.
Services to be provided women veterans who require such treatment shall include the following: (1) Private counseling.
A comprehensive medical examination and evaluation.
Partnerships To Provide Temporary Shelter.--As part of a program of treatment under subsection (a), the Secretary shall establish partnerships with nonprofit entities to provide temporary housing for homeless women veterans until their mental condition is stabilized.
In General.--(1) Subchapter II of chapter 73 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Mammography quality standards ``(a) A mammogram may not be performed at a Department facility unless that facility is accredited for that purpose by a private nonprofit organization designated by the Secretary.
An organization designated by the Secretary under this subsection shall meet the standards for accrediting bodies established under section 354(e) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b(e)).
The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, shall prescribe quality assurance and quality control standards relating to the performance and interpretation of mammograms and use of mammogram equipment and facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs consistent with the requirements of section 354(f)(1) of the Public Health Service Act.
Such standards shall be no less stringent than the standards prescribed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 354(f) of the Public Health Service Act.
(1) The Secretary, to ensure compliance with the standards prescribed under subsection (b), shall provide for an annual inspection of the equipment and facilities used by and in Department health care facilities for the performance of mammograms.
Such inspections shall be carried out in a manner consistent with the inspection of certified facilities by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 354(g) of the Public Health Service Act.
The Secretary may not provide for an inspection under paragraph (1) to be performed by a State agency.
The Secretary shall ensure that mammograms performed for the Department under contract with any non-Department facility or provider conform to the quality standards prescribed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services under section 354 of the Public Health Service Act.
For the purposes of this section, the term `mammogram' has the meaning given such term in paragraph (5) of section 354(a) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b(a)).''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7318 the following new item: ``7319.
Deadline for Prescribing Standards.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall prescribe standards under subsection (b) of section 7319 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), not later than the end of the 120-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Implementation Report.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the Secretary's implementation of section 7319 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a).
The report shall be submitted not later than 120 days after the later of (1) the date on which the Secretary prescribes the quality standards required under subsection (b) of that section, or (2) the date of the enactment of this Act.
Section 108 of the Women Veterans Health Programs Act of 1992 (title I of Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 1710) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' at the beginning of the text of the section; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b)(1) Each coordinator of women's services under subsection (a) shall serve in that capacity on a full-time basis, with the duties of that position being that official's principal responsibility.
The Secretary shall ensure that (subject to the availability of appropriations) sufficient resources are provided to each such coordinator to enable that coordinator to carry out the functions of the coordinator under this section and shall ensure that each such coordinator has direct access to the Chief of Staff of each Department medical facility in that coordinator's region.''.
PATIENT PRIVACY FOR WOMEN PATIENTS.
Identification of Deficiencies.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct a survey of each medical center under the jurisdiction of the Secretary to identify deficiencies relating to patient privacy afforded to women patients in the clinical areas at each such center which may interfere with appropriate treatment of such patients.
Correction of Deficiencies.--The Secretary shall ensure that plans and, where appropriate, interim steps, to correct the deficiencies identified in the survey conducted under subsection (a) are developed and are incorporated into the Department's construction planning processes and given a high priority.
Reports to Congress.--The Secretary shall compile an annual inventory, by medical center, of deficiencies identified under subsection (a) and of plans and, where appropriate, interim steps, to correct such deficiencies.
The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives, not later than October 1, 1997, and not later than October 1 each year thereafter through 2000 a report on such deficiencies.
The Secretary shall include in such report the inventory compiled by the Secretary, the proposed corrective plans, and the status of such plans.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall carry out a program of advertising in mass media to inform women veterans of the health services available to them through the Department of Veterans Affairs.