This Act may be cited as the ``Gulf of Maine Conservation and Cooperation Act of 1994''.
The Congress makes the following findings regarding the Gulf of Maine: (1) The Gulf of Maine is a critically important environmental and economic resource shared by the United States and Canada.
The Gulf of Maine supports abundant and diverse marine wildlife populations, including 100 species of birds, 73 species of fish, 26 species of whales, dolphins, and porpoises, 1,600 types of bottom-dwelling organisms, and endangered species such as the bald eagle, roseate tern, humpback whale, and sperm whale.
The Gulf of Maine holds substantial value as a recreation resource for people today and its value as a recreation resource will likely increase in the future.
Nearly \1/3\ of the United States population, comprising approximately 75,600,000 people, live within a 1-day drive of the Gulf of Maine.
The Gulf of Maine contains 2 United States national parks and 1 Canadian national park, and it contains a United States national marine sanctuary.
The Gulf of Maine provides substantial commercial benefits to the United States and Canada.
Its commercial fishing industry, including aquaculture, produces more than $800,000,000 in revenues annually and employs 20,000 people.
Aquaculture is a growing multimillion dollar industry in the region.
Tourism and recreation in the Gulf of Maine region generate millions of dollars in revenue each year and provide employment for thousands.
The Gulf of Maine attracts 10,000,000 visitors annually.
In addition, the Gulf of Maine is home to many economically important maritime facilities, such as ports and shipyards.
Studies conducted by national and State governments and other agencies have determined that, without prudent, coordinated management, the future development and use of the resources of the Gulf of Maine may have significant adverse impacts on the environment and economy of the bordering States, the adjacent region, and the United States.
Environmental threats to the Gulf of Maine are too extensive and complex to be managed by any single State, provincial, or Federal agency.
Existing threats include-- (A) high levels of toxic contaminants in the deep basin sediments of the Gulf of Maine, which indicate that toxic contaminants are distributed throughout the Gulf of Maine ecosystem; (B) bacterial contamination that has closed more than \1/3\ of the shellfish beds in the Gulf of Maine, resulting in significant economic losses; and (C) increasing loss of habitat in the Gulf of Maine region, which results in diminished estuarine and coastal habitats essential for migratory waterfowl and commercially valuable fish species.
The natural resources of the Gulf of Maine are interconnected, forming an ecosystem that transcends political boundaries.
It is therefore important that the States, provinces, and Federal Governments cooperate with one another and coordinate their public policies, research, and management activities related to the protection of the resources of the Gulf of Maine.
Interjurisdictional cooperation and coordination of efforts, policies, and programs can maximize the efficient use of limited fiscal resources in the Gulf of Maine region, and further the goal of protecting the resources of the Gulf of Maine and stimulating its economy over the long-term.
The Gulf of Maine Council on the Marine Environment, established in 1989 by the States of Maine, Massachusetts, and New Hampshire and the Canadian Provinces of New Brunswick and Nova Scotia (in this Act referred to as the ``Gulf of Maine Council''), is well-equipped to assist in the coordination of policies and activities of the multiple agencies and scientific, environmental, fishing, and marine trade organizations active in the Gulf of Maine region.
It has laid a cooperative, regionally based foundation for future efforts to protect, conserve, and sustainably develop the Gulf of Maine.
The Gulf of Maine Council has developed innovative and constructive strategies and programs to maintain and enhance marine environmental quality and to allow for sustainable resource use, such as the Gulf of Maine Action Plan 1991-2000 and the Gulf of Maine Environmental Quality Monitoring Plan.
It is the policy of the United States that-- (1) United States Government activities relating to conserving the natural resources of the Gulf of Maine and encouraging sustainable development in the region should be maintained and strengthened; and (2) the environmental and economic interests of the American people are well-served by United States Government cooperation and coordination with the Gulf of Maine Council.
GULF OF MAINE INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--The President shall establish a Gulf of Maine Inter-Agency Task Force (in this Act referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Purpose.--The purpose of the Task Force is to provide a vehicle for improved interagency cooperation and coordination, and to improve and enhance the efficiency and effectiveness of Federal activities conducted for the purpose of the conservation and sustainable development of the natural resources of the Gulf of Maine.
Duties.--The duties of the Task Force include the following: (A) Meeting on a regular basis, but not less than 2 times each year.
Sharing among Task Force members information about agency programs operating in the Gulf of Maine region.
Providing updates on agency programs and activities relating to the natural resources of the Gulf of Maine, including scientific research activities and programs.
Identifying opportunities for interagency cooperation and coordination to further the purpose of the Task Force.
Developing plans, to the maximum extent practicable, for interagency cooperation and coordination efforts that will further the purpose of the Task Force, and for joint programs, activities, and initiatives among agencies of the United States, the Gulf of Maine Council, States, and the Government of Canada.
Membership.-- (1) Specified agency representatives.--The Task Force shall consist of the following members: (A) 2 members appointed by the Secretary of Commerce; (B) 1 member appointed by the Secretary of the Interior; (C) 1 member appointed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency; and (D) 1 member appointed by the Secretary of the Army from among personnel of the Corps of Engineers.
Other agency representatives.--The Task Force may also include a representative appointed by the President to represent any other Federal department or agency, on a temporary or permanent basis.
Department of commerce representatives.--At least 1 of the members of the Task Force appointed by the Secretary of Commerce shall be selected from personnel of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, and one of those members shall be selected from personnel of an office or agency related to sustainable economic development.
Gulf of Maine Coordinator.--The Task Force shall be chaired by the Gulf of Maine Coordinator, who shall be designated by the Secretary of Commerce from among the members of the Task Force.
The term of a member as the Gulf of Maine Coordinator shall be 2 years.
The Secretary may not designate for consecutive terms as the Gulf of Maine Coordinator any member, or any members appointed under subsection (b)(1) by the same official.
The duties of the Coordinator shall be as follows: (1) The Gulf of Maine Coordinator (or a designee of the Coordinator) shall, upon invitation by the Gulf of Maine Council, attend meetings of the Gulf of Maine Council, and report on Federal activities and programs relating to the Gulf of Maine Council.
The Task Force may authorize the Gulf of Maine Coordinator (or a designee of the Coordinator) to represent the Task Force and the officials who appoint members of the Task Force under subsection (b), in negotiations with the Gulf of Maine Council on agreements, memoranda of understanding, a sustainable development strategy, or other cooperative activities and programs.
Annual Report.--Each year, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit to the Congress, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Army, and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, a report on the meetings, findings, activities, recommendations, initiatives, and plans of the Task Force.
The report may also describe other examples of cooperation and coordination among agencies in the Gulf of Maine.
FEDERAL COOPERATION AND COORDINATION WITH THE GULF OF MAINE COUNCIL ON THE MARINE ENVIRONMENT.
Statement of Policy.--Each of the officials who appoint a member of the Task Force under section 4(b) shall, to the maximum extent practicable, cooperate and coordinate their activities related to natural resources of the Gulf of Maine with the Gulf of Maine Council on the Marine Environment.
Authority for Agreements.--The Secretary of Commerce, after consultation with the officials who appoint a member of the Task Force under section 4(b), may enter into agreements and memoranda of understanding with the Gulf of Maine Council to enhance efforts to conserve the natural resources of the Gulf of Maine.
Sustainable Development Strategy.--The Secretary of Commerce, after consultation with other Federal natural resource agencies, and upon a request by the Gulf of Maine Council, may work with the Gulf of Maine Council, industry representatives, representatives of organized labor groups, fishing groups, community organizations, environmental organizations, State and local public officials, and others to develop a sustainable development strategy for the Gulf of Maine.
Consistency of Federal Activities With Council and State Management Activities.--Each of the officials that appoints a member of the Task Force under section 4(b) shall conduct their activities which directly affect the ecological health of the Gulf of Maine in a manner which is, to the maximum extent practicable, consistent with-- (1) the goals and policies of the Gulf of Maine Council; and (2) the goals and policies related to protection of the natural resources of the Gulf of Maine of each State bordering the Gulf of Maine in which the activities are conducted.
Financial Contributions to Gulf of Maine Council.-- (1) Grant authority.--To help fulfill the purposes of this Act, each of the officials that appoints a member of the Task Force under section 4(b), subject to the availability of appropriations, may make grants in accordance with this subsection to the Gulf of Maine Council, for programs and projects related to the conservation of the natural resources of the Gulf of Maine or to sustainable economic development in the Gulf of Maine region.
Matching.--The amount of a grant under this subsection may not exceed 75 percent of the total cost of the program or project carried out with the grant.
In determining the amount of the non-Federal contribution for purposes of this paragraph, the Secretary shall include the value of in-kind contributions from non-Federal sources.
Limit on use for administration.--Not more than 10 percent of the amount of a grant under this section may be used for administrative expenses.
Limit on total annual grants.--The total amount of grants under this subsection in any fiscal year before fiscal year 2000 may not exceed $1,000,000.
GULF OF MAINE RESEARCH.
New Authority.--The Regional Marine Research Board for the Gulf of Maine region shall cooperate with the Gulf of Maine Council and the States bordering the Gulf of Maine in efforts to promote the environmental and economic health of the Gulf of Maine region.
Regional Marine Research Plans.--The Regional Marine Research Board for the Gulf of Maine region may, in consultation with the Gulf of Maine Council and subject to the approval of the Secretary of Commerce, revise schedules for the development of research plans under section 404 of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (16 United States Code 1447c) as appropriate to ensure the effective coordination of the plans and programs carried out under such section with the activities and plans carried out under this Act.
RELATION TO MAGNUSON FISHERY CONSERVATION AND MANAGEMENT ACT.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to modify or supersede any authority or requirement established under the Magnuson Fishery Conservation and Management Act (16 United States Code 1801 et sequentes).