This Act may be cited as the ``Microenterprise Development Act of 1994''.
AUTHORIZATION OF MICROENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT ASSISTANCE.
Chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Microenterprise Development Assistance.--(a) The Congress finds the following: ``(1) A strong microenterprise sector is a fundamental condition of economic pluralism.
Microenterprise development programs offer an important mechanism to alleviate poverty, develop private enterprise, and create employment.
The very poor, particularly poor women, in the developing world often do not advance economically because they cannot obtain investment capital to secure their asset base or expand their otherwise viable microenterprise activities.
The development of sustainable microenterprise institutions which provide credit, training, and mobilize domestic savings are therefore critical components to a broad- based economic growth strategy.
Microenterprise credit also offers a tool to leverage foreign assistance resources because unlike grants credit can be continually recycled generating new benefits to program participants.
Interest income on a credit portfolio can be used to finance recurring costs assuring the long-term continuity of development assistance.
Because microenterpise development credit programs foster self-reliance, such programs reduce the dependency of program participants and indigenous institutions on foreign assistance.
The purposes of this section are-- ``(1) to provide for the continuation and expansion of the commitment of the United States Agency for International Development to microenterprise development programs; ``(2) to make microenterprise development a part of the mainstream of the overall economic growth strategy of the United States Agency for International Development; and ``(3) to improve the access of microenterprise credit to the very poor, particularly poor women, in developing countries.
(1) In carrying out this part, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development is authorized to provide assistance for programs of credit and other assistance for microenterprises in developing countries.
Assistance authorized under paragraph (1) shall be provided through-- ``(A) United States and indigenous private and voluntary organizations; ``(B) United States and indigenous credit unions and cooperative organizations; and ``(C) other indigenous governmental and nongovernmental organizations; that have a capacity to develop and implement microenterprise programs.
A significant portion of assistance authorized under paragraph (1) shall be used for poverty lending programs which-- ``(A) meet the needs of the very poor members of society, particularly poor women; and ``(B) provide loans of $300 or less in 1994 United States dollars to such poor members of society.
The Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development shall strengthen appropriate mechanisms, including mechanisms for central microenterprise programs, for the purpose of-- ``(A) providing technical support for field missions of the United States Agency for International Development; ``(B) strengthening the institutional development of the intermediary organizations described in paragraph (2); and ``(C) sharing information relating to the provision of assistance authorized under paragraph (1) between such field missions and intermediary organizations.
In order to maximize the sustainable development impact of the assistance authorized under subsection (c)(1), the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development shall establish a monitoring system that-- ``(1) establishes performance goals for such assistance and expresses such goals in an objective and quantifiable form, to the extent feasible; ``(2) establishes performance indicators to be used in measuring or assessing the achievement of the goals and objectives of such assistance; and ``(3) provides a basis for recommendations for adjustments to such assistance to enhance the sustainable development impact of such assistance, particularly the impact of such assistance on the very poor, particularly poor women.