This Act may be cited as the ``Nonviolent Futures for Children Act''.
It is the purpose of this Act to reduce and prevent the incidence of violence involving children through grant programs that encourage prevention, intervention, and the rehabilitation of youth offenders.
The accomplishment of this larger purpose will be advanced through the following short-term goals: (1) Teach children to resolve conflicts peacefully, teach older youth life skills, enhance self-esteem among all children, and make schools safer places to learn.
Work with the families of school children through parenting education.
Educate teachers and other education professionals in violence prevention techniques, and train such teachers and professionals to identify and assist high-risk children.
Create partnerships between local schools and community-based organizations or agencies to develop supportive programs for youth in order to meet the academic as well as after-school and social needs of youth.
Assist and rehabilitate youth offenders by providing funds for community-based programs.
The Congress finds that-- (1) youth are disproportionately represented among the victims of violence, for example-- (A) United States teenagers are more than twice as likely as adults to be victims of violent crime; and (B) firearm homicide is the second leading cause of death for all youth, aged 15 to 24; (2) child abuse and neglect are increasing at alarming rates, for example-- (A) child abuse fatalities increased nearly 50 percent between 1986 and 1992; (B) more than one-half of such fatalities resulted from physical abuse; and (C) child abuse and neglect reports have increased 50 percent since 1985; and (3) violence is cyclical, for example-- (A) being abused or neglected as a child increases the likelihood of arrest for violent crime by 38 percent, of juvenile arrest by 53 percent, and of adult arrest by 38 percent; (B) two-thirds of men who abuse their wives are from violent childhood homes and about one-half of such men were abused as children; and (C) eighty-four percent of prison inmates were abused as children.
GRANTS FOR PREVENTION ACTIVITIES.
Program Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants on a competitive basis to eligible local educational agencies to enable such agencies to pay the Federal share of the cost of providing preventive services and interventions intended to reduce the incidence of violence.
Grant duration.--A grant under this section shall be awarded for a period of not less than 3 years nor more than 5 years.
Eligible Local Educational Agency.--For the purpose of this section, the term ``eligible local educational agency'' means a local educational agency that-- (1) receives assistance under chapter 1 of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; (2) serves an area in which there is a high rate of violence affecting children and youth; and (3)(A) in the case of a local educational agency conducting activities described in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of subsection (f)(2), enters into a partnership agreement with at least one community-based organization or agency, such as a business, labor organization, professional society, government agency, university or nonprofit entity, to carry out such activities; (B) in the case of a local educational agency conducting activities described in subparagraph (D) of subsection (f)(2), demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary in the application submitted under subsection (d) a commitment for participation in such activities from a local law enforcement agency; and (C) in the case of a local educational agency conducting activities described in subparagraph (E) of subsection (f)(2), enters into a partnership agreement with at least one community-based organization or agency described in subparagraph (A) to carry out such activities, which agreement shall require such agency or organization to provide substantive training, work experience, or job placement services after the job training described in such subparagraph (E) is complete.
Payments; Federal Share; Limitation.-- (1) Payments.--The Secretary shall pay to each eligible local educational agency having an application approved under subsection (d) the Federal share of the cost of the activities described in the application.
Federal share.--The Federal share-- (A) for the first year for which an eligible local educational agency receives assistance under this section shall be 80 percent; (B) for the second such year shall be 70 percent; and (C) for the third and each succeeding such year shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of payments under this section may be in cash or in kind fairly evaluated, including planned equipment or services.
Applications.--Each eligible local educational agency desiring a grant under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time, in such manner and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Each such application shall include-- (1) an assessment of the extent and nature of the violence affecting children and youth in the community served by such agency; (2) an assurance that the applicant has written policies regarding violence, school safety, and student discipline; (3) a description of the activities to be carried out with the grant funds, and how such activities will help address the problem of youth violence in the community; (4) the applicant's plan to involve parents, teachers, school personnel, youth and others from the community in the applicant's effort to address youth violence; (5) coordination with other school reform and improvement efforts; (6) an assurance that grant funds will be used to supplement and not supplant State and local funds available to reduce and prevent the incidence of violence involving children; and (7) such other information the Secretary may require.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible local educational agencies serving areas with-- (1) a high concentration of disadvantaged students; and (2) a high rate of violence affecting children and youth.
Use of Funds.-- (1) School-based activities.--A local educational agency receiving a grant under this section may use such grant funds to provide one or more of the following school-based activities: (A) Peer education or peer mediation, to teach youth to resolve conflicts through peer influence.
Conflict resolution training, to teach youth conflict management skills, including how to defuse a potentially violent situation.
Social skills training, with an emphasis on building self-esteem, improving interpersonal relationships and communication skills, and decreasing aggressive behavior.
Youth designed and developed programs, to address the problem of violence.
Parenting education, as age-appropriate, to prepare students for adult responsibilities of rearing children, including instruction in child development and family dynamics.
Postsecondary educational opportunity projects, including-- (i) exposure to postsecondary educational opportunities, including academic and vocational opportunities; (ii) information on assistance available under title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965, including financial aid, programs assisted under chapter 1 of subpart 2 of part A of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (Federal TRIO Programs), and early intervention programs; (iii) early identification of students at- risk; and (iv) other support services.
Remodeling and security personnel, including minor remodeling to reduce the risk of violence, such as removing lockers, installing better lights, controlling access to stairwells, acquiring and installing metal detectors, hiring security personnel, and reimbursing law enforcement authorities for services.
School-community partnership activities.--A local educational agency receiving a grant under this section may use such grant funds to provide one or more of the following school-community partnership activities: (A) After-school programs for youth which, at a minimum, shall include academic support programs, sports, arts, crafts, community service and recreation activities.
Mentoring programs to pair adults with children and youth to provide one-to-one assistance, attention and guidance.
Parenting skills courses, offered with the support of parents in the community, to provide parents of students served by the eligible local educational agency with parenting skills training.
Professional training, to train education professionals and school personnel in violence prevention, conflict resolution, anger management, and peer mediation techniques, and to identify high-risk youth and refer such youth for appropriate services.
Job training and placement programs, including-- (i) the provision of incentives for participants to complete their secondary education; (ii) the provision of job training with subsequent employment placement in a position which directly utilizes the training provided; and (iii) the exposure to postsecondary educational opportunities, including academic and vocational opportunities.
Limitation.--An eligible local educational agency receiving a grant under this section in any fiscal year shall not use more than-- (A) 10 percent of such grant funds in such fiscal year for the activities described in subsection (f)(1)(G) of this section; and (B) 5 percent of such grant funds in such fiscal year for administrative expenses associated with activities assisted under this section.
Special rule.--In developing professional training programs described in paragraph (2)(D), an eligible local educational agency is encouraged-- (A) to contract for services with organizations demonstrating expertise in such programs; and (B) to work with other representatives of organizations and agencies, including court personnel, social workers, representatives of law enforcement, and medical, mental health, and other health professionals.
GRANTS FOR PROGRAMS TO SERVE OUT-OF-SCHOOL YOUTH AND YOUTH OFFENDERS.
Program Authorized.-- (1) Authority.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall award grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible entities to enable such agencies to pay the Federal share of the cost of establishing community-based programs that-- (i) assist out-of-school youth and rehabilitate youth offenders; and (ii) provide opportunities for such youth to continue their education or obtain job training.
Consultation.--The Secretary shall consult with the Attorney General in developing program guidelines and awarding grants under this section.
Grant duration.--A grant under this section shall be awarded for a period of not less than 3 years nor more than 5 years.
Eligible Entities.--For the purpose of this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means either a State educational agency or a local educational agency that enters into a partnership agreement to carry out the program assisted under this section with at least one community-based youth organization and the appropriate juvenile justice agency serving such State educational agency or local educational agency.
Payments; Federal Share; Limitation.-- (1) Payments.--The Secretary shall pay to each eligible entity having an application approved under subsection (d) the Federal share of the cost of the activities described in the application.
Federal share.--The Federal share-- (A) for the first year for which an eligible entity receives assistance under this section shall be 80 percent; (B) for the second such year shall be 70 percent; and (C) for the third and each succeeding such year shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of payments under this section may be in cash or in kind fairly evaluated, including planned equipment or services.
Application.--Each eligible entity desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Each such application shall include-- (1) an assessment of the population of out-of-school youth and youth offenders to be served; (2) a description of the program to be carried out with the grant funds, and how such program will help meet the needs of out-of-school youth and youth offenders; (3) a description of members of the partnership described in subsection (b) that are involved in the program, such member's roles and functions in carrying out the program, and the strength of such member's commitment to the goals of the program; (4) the applicant's plan to involve parents, employers, teachers and other school personnel, and community members in designing and carrying out the program; (5) an assurance that the grant funds will be used to supplement and not supplant State and local funds available to provide opportunities for out-of-school youth and rehabilitate youth offenders; (6) a description of the ability of the community-based youth organization participating in the partnership described in subsection (b) to link youth with other social services as needed; and (7) such other information the Secretary may require.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities serving areas with-- (1) a high concentration of out-of-school youth or youth offenders; and (2) a high rate of violence affecting children and youth.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under this section shall use such grant funds to provide a community-based program for out-of-school youth and youth offenders, which program shall include one or more of the following elements: (1) A system designed to provide peer and adult support and redirection.
Incentives for out-of-school youth and youth offenders to continue their education through continuing secondary education, vocational training, school-to-work programs, postsecondary education or other opportunities.
Assessment of such youths' needs, and referrals by the community-based youth organization participating in the partnership described in subsection (b) to appropriate services.
Job training and placement opportunities.
Access to mentoring services.
Other services, as approved by the Secretary, designed to provide rehabilitative opportunities for such youth.
The Secretary shall prescribe annual reporting requirements for eligible entities receiving assistance under this Act, including requirements regarding-- (1) the characteristics of the youth served under this Act; (2) the incidence of violence in the area served by a local educational agency receiving assistance under this Act; and (3) the accomplishments of the activities assisted under this Act, and assessment of such activities by students and youth served by such activities.
The terms used in this Act shall have the meaning given to such terms in section 1471 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 in each fiscal year to carry out this Act.
Limitation.--Not more than 20 percent of the funds appropriated in any fiscal year pursuant to the authority of subsection (a) shall be available to award grants pursuant to section 5 in such fiscal year.