This Act may be cited as the ``Black Canyon National Park and Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area Act of 1999''.
Congress finds that-- (1) Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument was established for the preservation of its spectacular gorges and additional features of scenic, scientific, and educational interest; (2) the Black Canyon and adjacent upland include a variety of unique ecological, geological, scenic, historical, and wildlife components enhanced by the serenity and rural western setting of the area; (3) the Black Canyon and adjacent land provide extensive opportunities for educational and recreational activities, and are publicly used for hiking, camping, and fishing, and for wilderness value, including solitude; (4) adjacent public land downstream of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument has wilderness value and offers unique geological, paleontological, scientific, educational, and recreational resources; (5) public land adjacent to the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument contributes to the protection of the wildlife, viewshed, and scenic qualities of the Black Canyon; (6) some private land adjacent to the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument has exceptional natural and scenic value, that, would be threatened by future development pressures; (7) the benefits of designating public and private land surrounding the national monument as a national park include greater long-term protection of the resources and expanded visitor use opportunities; and (8) land in and adjacent to the Black Canyon of the Gunnison Gorge is-- (A) recognized for offering exceptional multiple use opportunities; (B) recognized for offering natural, cultural, scenic, wilderness, and recreational resources; and (C) worthy of additional protection as a national conservation area, and with respect to the Gunnison Gorge itself, as a component of the national wilderness system.
In this Act: (1) Conservation area.--The term ``Conservation Area'' means the Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area, consisting of approximately 57,725 acres surrounding the Gunnison Gorge as depicted on the Map.
Map.--The term ``Map'' means the map entitled ``Black Canyon National Park and Gunnison Gorge NCA--1/22/99''.
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the Black Canyon National Park established under section 4 and depicted on the Map.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ESTABLISHMENT OF BLACK CANYON NATIONAL PARK.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established the Black Canyon National Park in the State of Colorado, as generally depicted on the Map.
Availability of map.--The Map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the National Park Service of the Department of the Interior.
Redesignation of monument.-- (A) Termination of black canyon designation.--The designation of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument in existence on the date of enactment of this Act is terminated.
Transfer.--All land and interests within the boundary of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument are incorporated in and made part of the Black Canyon National Park, including-- (i) land and interests within the boundary of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument as established by section 2(a) of the first section of Public Law 98-357; and (ii) any land and interests identified on the Map and transferred by the Bureau of Land Management under this Act.
Reference to park.--Any reference to the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument shall be deemed a reference to Black Canyon National Park.
Funds.--Any funds made available for the purposes of the Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Monument shall be available for purposes of the Park.
Authority.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall manage the Park subject to valid rights, in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (1) the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes); (2) the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes); and (3) other applicable provisions of law.
Grazing.-- (1) Grazing permitted.--The Secretary may permit grazing within the Park, if the use of the Park for grazing is permitted on the date of enactment of this Act.
Grazing plan.--The Secretary shall prepare a grazing management plan to administer any grazing activities within the Park.
ACQUISITION OF PROPERTY AND MINOR BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENTS.
Additional Acquisitions.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may acquire land or interests in land depicted on the Map as proposed additions.
Method of acquisition.-- (A) In general.--Land or interests in land may be acquired by-- (i) donation; (ii) transfer; (iii) purchase with donated or appropriated funds; or (iv) exchange.
Consent.--No land or interest in land may be acquired without the consent of the owner of the land.
Boundary Revision.--After acquiring land for the Park, the Secretary shall-- (1) revise the boundary of the Park to include newly- acquired land within the boundary; and (2) administer newly-acquired land subject to applicable laws (including regulations).
Boundary Survey.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete an official boundary survey of the Park.
Hunting on Privately Owned Lands.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may permit hunting on privately owned land added to the Park under this Act, subject to limitations, conditions, or regulations that may be prescribed by the Secretary.
Termination of authority.--On the date that the Secretary acquires fee ownership of any privately owned land added to the Park under this Act, the authority under paragraph (1) shall terminate with respect to the privately owned land acquired.
EXPANSION OF THE BLACK CANYON OF THE GUNNISON WILDERNESS.
Expansion of Black Canyon.--The Black Canyon of the Gunnison Wilderness, as established by subsection (b) of the first section of Public Law 94-567 (90 United States Statutes at Large 2692), is expanded to include the parcel of land depicted on the Map as ``Tract A'' and consisting of approximately 4,460 acres.
Administration.--The Black Canyon of the Gunnison Wilderness shall be administered as a component of the Park.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE GUNNISON GORGE NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA.
In General.--There is established the Gunnison Gorge National Conservation Area, consisting of approximately 57,725 acres as generally depicted on the Map.
Management of Conservation Area.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management, shall manage the Conservation Area to protect the resources of the Conservation Area in accordance with-- (1) this Act; (2) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (3) other applicable provisions of law.
Withdrawal of Land.--Subject to valid rights in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, all Federal land and interests within the Conservation Area acquired by the United States are withdrawn from-- (1) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (2) location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws.
Permitted Uses.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall permit hunting, trapping, and fishing within the Conservation Area in accordance with applicable laws (including regulations) of the United States and the State of Colorado.
Exception.--The Secretary, after consultation with the Colorado Division of Wildlife, may issue regulations designating zones where and establishing periods when no hunting or trapping shall be permitted for reasons concerning-- (A) public safety; (B) administration; or (C) public use and enjoyment.
Use of Motorized Vehicles.--In addition to the use of motorized vehicles on established roadways, the use of motorized vehicles in the Conservation Area shall be allowed-- (1) to the extent the use is compatible with off-highway vehicle designations as described in the management plan in effect on the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) to the extent the use is practicable under a management plan prepared under this Act.
Conservation Area Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 4 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (A) develop a comprehensive plan for the long-range protection and management of the Conservation Area; and (B) transmit the plan to-- (i) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate; and (ii) the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Contents of plan.--The plan-- (A) shall describe the appropriate uses and management of the Conservation Area in accordance with this Act; (B) may incorporate appropriate decisions contained in any management or activity plan for the area completed prior to the date of enactment of this Act; (C) may incorporate appropriate wildlife habitat management plans or other plans prepared for the land within or adjacent to the Conservation Area prior to the date of enactment of this Act; (D) shall be prepared in close consultation with appropriate Federal, State, county, and local agencies; and (E) shall use information developed prior to the date of enactment of this Act in studies of the land within or adjacent to the Conservation Area.
Boundary Revisions.--The Secretary may make revisions to the boundary of the Conservation Area following acquisition of land necessary to accomplish the purposes for which the Conservation Area was designated.
DESIGNATION OF WILDERNESS WITHIN THE CONSERVATION AREA.
Gunnison Gorge Wilderness.-- (1) In general.--Within the Conservation Area, there is designated as wilderness, and as a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System, the Gunnison Gorge Wilderness, consisting of approximately 17,700 acres, as generally depicted on the Map.
Administration.-- (A) Wilderness study area exemption.--The approximately 300-acre portion of the wilderness study area depicted on the Map for release from section 603 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1782) shall not be subject to section 603(c) of that Act.
Incorporation into national conservation area.--The portion of the wilderness study area described in subparagraph (A) shall be incorporated into the Conservation Area.
Administration.--Subject to valid rights in existence on the date of enactment of this Act, the wilderness areas designated under this Act shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes).
State Responsibility.--As provided in section 4(d)(7) of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1133(d)(7)), nothing in this Act or in the Wilderness Act shall affect the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Colorado with respect to wildlife and fish on the public land located in that State.
The land identified as tract B on the Map, consisting of approximately 1,554 acres, is withdrawn-- (1) from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (2) from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and (3) from operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws.
Effect on Water Rights.--Nothing in this Act shall-- (1) constitute an express or implied reservation of water for any purpose; or (2) affect any water rights in existence prior to the date of enactment of this Act, including any water rights held by the United States.
Additional Water Rights.--Any new water right that the Secretary determines is necessary for the purposes of this Act shall be established in accordance with the procedural and substantive requirements of the laws of the State of Colorado.
STUDY OF LANDS WITHIN AND ADJACENT TO CURECANTI NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall conduct a study concerning land protection and open space within and adjacent to the area administered as the Curecanti National Recreation Area.
Purpose of Study.--The study required to be completed under subsection (a) shall-- (1) assess the natural, cultural, recreational and scenic resource value and character of the land within and surrounding the Curecanti National Recreation Area (including open vistas, wildlife habitat, and other public benefits); (2) identify practicable alternatives that protect the resource value and character of the land within and surrounding the Curecanti National Recreation Area; (3) recommend a variety of economically feasible and viable tools to achieve the purposes described in paragraphs (1) and (2); and (4) estimate the costs of implementing the approaches recommended by the study.
Submission of Report.--Not later than 3 years from the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress that-- (1) contains the findings of the study required by subsection (a); (2) makes recommendations to Congress with respect to the findings of the study required by subsection (a); and (3) makes recommendations to Congress regarding action that may be taken with respect to the land described in the report.
Acquisition of Additional Land and Interests in Land.-- (1) In general.--Prior to the completion of the study required by subsection (a), the Secretary may acquire certain private land or interests in land as depicted on the Map entitled ``Proposed Additions to the Curecanti National Recreation Area,'' dated 09/15/98, totaling approximately 1,065 acres and entitled ``Hall and Fitti properties''.
Method of acquisition.-- (A) In general.--Land or an interest in land under paragraph (1) may be acquired by-- (i) donation; (ii) purchase with donated or appropriated funds; or (iii) exchange.
Consent.--No land or interest in land may be acquired without the consent of the owner of the land.
Boundary revisions following acquisition.-- Following the acquisition of land under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall-- (i) revise the boundary of the Curecanti National Recreation Area to include newly- acquired land; and (ii) administer newly-acquired land according to applicable laws (including regulations).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.