This Act may be cited as the ``Trust Fund Restoration Act of 1995''.
In this Act: (1) Airport and airway trust fund.--The term ``Airport and Airway Trust Fund'' means the Airport and Airway Trust Fund established by section 9502 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Harbor maintenance trust fund.--The term ``Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund'' means the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund established by section 9505 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Highway trust fund.--The term ``Highway Trust Fund'' means the Highway Trust Fund established by section 9503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Inland waterways trust fund.--The term ``Inland Waterways Trust Fund'' means the Inland Waterways Trust Fund established by section 9506 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
BUDGETARY TREATMENT OF HIGHWAY TRUST FUND, AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND, INLAND WATERWAYS TRUST FUND, AND HARBOR MAINTENANCE TRUST FUND.
In General.--The receipts and disbursements of the Highway Trust Fund, the Airport and Airway Trust Fund, the Inland Waterways Trust Fund, and the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund-- (1) shall not be included in the totals of-- (A) the budget of the United States Government as submitted by the President under section 1105 of title 31, United States Code; or (B) the congressional budget (including allocations of budget authority and outlays provided in the congressional budget); (2) shall not be-- (A) considered to be part of any category (as defined in section 250(c)(4) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 900(c)(4))) of discretionary appropriations; or (B) subject to the discretionary spending limits established under section 251(b) of the Act (2 United States Code 901(b)); (3) shall not be subject to sequestration under section 251(a) of the Act (2 United States Code 901(a)); and (4) shall be exempt from any general budget limitation imposed by statute on expenditures and net lending (budget outlays) of the United States Government.
Disbursements Subject to Appropriations.--The disbursements referred to in subsection (a) shall be subject to appropriations.
SAFEGUARDS AGAINST DEFICIT SPENDING OUT OF AIRPORT AND AIRWAY TRUST FUND.
In General.--Chapter 471 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 47129 the following: ``Sec.
Safeguards against deficit spending ``(a) Estimates of Unfunded Aviation Authorizations and Net Aviation Receipts.--Not later than March 31 of each year, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall estimate-- ``(1) the amount that would (but for this section) constitute the unfunded aviation authorizations at the termination of the first fiscal year that begins after that March 31; and ``(2) the net aviation receipts at the termination of the fiscal year referred to in paragraph (1).
Procedure if Excess Unfunded Aviation Authorizations.--If, with respect to a fiscal year, the Secretary determines that the amount described in subsection (a)(1) exceeds the amount described in subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall determine the amount of the excess.
Adjustment of Authorizations if Unfunded Authorizations Exceed Receipts.-- ``(1) Determination of percentage.--If the Secretary determines, in accordance with subsection (b), that there is an excess amount with respect to a fiscal year, the Secretary shall determine the percentage that the excess amount is of the sum of-- ``(A) the amounts authorized to be appropriated from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund for the next fiscal year; and ``(B) the amounts available for obligation from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund for the next fiscal year.
Adjustment of authorizations.--If the Secretary determines, in accordance with subsection (b), that there is an excess amount with respect to a fiscal year, each amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund for the next fiscal year shall be reduced by the percentage determined in accordance with paragraph (1).
Availability of Amounts Previously Withheld.-- ``(1) Adjustment of authorizations.--Any amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund that is reduced under subsection (c)(2) shall be further adjusted in accordance with paragraph (2) if, after an adjustment has been made under subsection (c)(2) for a fiscal year, the Secretary determines that, with respect to the fiscal year-- ``(A) the amount described in subsection (a)(1) does not exceed the amount described in subsection (a)(2); or ``(B) an excess amount determined under subsection (b) is less than an excess amount determined as a result of a previous determination.
Adjustment.--Each amount that is subject to a further adjustment under paragraph (1) shall be increased by an equal percentage determined by the Secretary under paragraph (3).
Percentage.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the percentage referred to in paragraph (2) shall be the maximum percentage that does not cause the amount described in subsection (a)(1) to exceed the amount described in subsection (a)(2).
Limitation.--The amount of any increase determined under this subsection may not exceed the amount of the corresponding reduction under subsection (c)(2).
Apportionment.--The total amount of any increases determined for a fiscal year under paragraph (3) shall be made available to the Secretary for apportionment.
The Secretary shall apportion the amount in accordance with this subsection.
Period of availability.--Any funds apportioned under paragraph (4) shall remain available for the period for which the funds would be available if the apportionment were made under appropriations and obligations for the fiscal year in which the funds are apportioned under paragraph (4).
Reports.--The Secretary shall report to Congress-- ``(1) any estimate made under subsection (a); and ``(2) any determination made under subsection (b), (c), or (d).
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Airport and airway trust fund.--The term `Airport and Airway Trust Fund' means the Airport and Airway Trust Fund established by section 9502 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Net aviation receipts.--The term `net aviation receipts' means, with respect to any period, the amount by which-- ``(A) the receipts (including interest) of the Airport and Airway Trust Fund during the period; exceeds ``(B) the amounts to be transferred during the period from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund under section 9502(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (other than under section 9502(d)(1) of the Code).
Secretary.--The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Unfunded aviation authorizations.--The term `unfunded aviation authorization' means, at any time, the amount by which-- ``(A) the total amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund that has not been appropriated or obligated; exceeds ``(B) the amount available in the Airport and Airway Trust Fund at that time to make the appropriation or to liquidate the obligation (after all other unliquidated obligations at that time that are payable from the Airport and Airway Trust Fund have been liquidated).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 471 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end of subchapter I the following: ``47130.
Safeguards against deficit spending.''.
SAFEGUARDS AGAINST DEFICIT SPENDING OUT OF INLAND WATERWAYS TRUST FUND AND HARBOR MAINTENANCE TRUST FUND.
Estimates of Unfunded Inland Waterways Authorizations and Net Inland Waterways Receipts.--Not later than March 31 of each year, the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall estimate-- (1) the amount that would (but for this section) constitute the unfunded inland waterways authorizations and unfunded harbor maintenance authorizations at the termination of the first fiscal year that begins after that March 31; and (2) the net inland waterways receipts and net harbor maintenance receipts at the termination of the fiscal year referred to in paragraph (1).
Procedure if Excess Unfunded Authorizations.--If, with respect to a fiscal year, the Secretary determines with respect to a Trust Fund that the amount described in subsection (a)(1) exceeds the amount described in subsection (a)(2), the Secretary shall determine the amount of the excess.
Adjustment of Authorizations if Unfunded Authorizations Exceed Receipts.-- (1) Determination of percentage.--If the Secretary determines, in accordance with subsection (b), that there is an excess amount with respect to a fiscal year, the Secretary shall determine the percentage that the excess amount is of the sum of-- (A) the amounts authorized to be appropriated from the Trust Fund for the next fiscal year; and (B) the amounts available for obligation from the Trust Fund for the next fiscal year.
Adjustment of authorizations.--If the Secretary determines, in accordance with subsection (b), that there is an excess amount with respect to a fiscal year, each amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from the Trust Fund for the next fiscal year shall be reduced by the percentage determined in accordance with paragraph (1).
Availability of Amounts Previously Withheld.-- (1) Increase of authorizations.--Any amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from a Trust Fund that is reduced under subsection (c)(2) shall be further adjusted in accordance with paragraph (2) if, after an adjustment has been made under subsection (c)(2) for a fiscal year with respect to the Trust Fund, the Secretary determines that, with respect to the Trust Fund and the fiscal year-- (A) the amount described in subsection (a)(1) does not exceed the amount described in subsection (a)(2); or (B) an excess amount determined under subsection (b) is less than an excess amount determined as a result of a previous determination.
Adjustment.--Each amount that is subject to a further adjustment under paragraph (1) shall be increased by an equal percentage determined by the Secretary under paragraph (3).
Percentage.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the percentage referred to in paragraph (2) shall be the maximum percentage that does not cause the amount described in subsection (a)(1) to exceed the amount described in subsection (a)(2) with respect to the Trust Fund.
Limitation.--The amount of any increase determined under this subsection may not exceed the amount of the corresponding reduction under subsection (c)(2).
Reports.--The Secretary shall report to Congress-- (1) any estimate made under subsection (a); and (2) any determination made under subsection (b), (c), or (d).
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Net harbor maintenance receipts.--The term ``net harbor maintenance receipts'' means, with respect to any period, the receipts (including interest) of the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund during the period.
Net inland waterways receipts.--The term ``net inland waterways receipts'' means, with respect to any period, the receipts (including interest) of the Inland Waterways Trust Fund during the period.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Army.
Trust fund.--The term ``Trust Fund'' means the Inland Waterways Trust Fund or the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund, as the case may be.
Unfunded harbor maintenance authorizations.--The term ``unfunded harbor maintenance authorizations'' means, at any time, the amount by which-- (A) the total amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund that has not been appropriated or obligated; exceeds (B) the amount available in the Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund at that time to make the appropriation.
Unfunded inland waterways authorizations.--The term ``unfunded inland waterways authorizations'' means, at any time, the amount by which-- (A) the total amount authorized to be appropriated or available for obligation from the Inland Waterways Trust Fund that has not been appropriated or obligated; exceeds (B) the amount available in the Inland Waterways Trust Fund at that time to make the appropriation.
An officer or employee of the United States Government who fails to comply with this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall be subject to the penalties specified in section 1350 of title 31, United States Code.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall apply to authorizations and obligations made for fiscal years 1996 and thereafter.