This Act may be cited as the ``National Health Information Infrastructure Act of 2003''.
NATIONAL HEALTH INFORMATION INFRASTRUCTURE.
National Health Information Officer.-- (1) Appointment.--By not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall appoint an individual as the National Health Information Officer for the Department of Health and Human Services.
General duties.--Such Officer shall report directly to the Secretary and shall be responsible for developing and maintaining ongoing national leadership in the planning, development, and adoption of a national health information infrastructure.
The Secretary may assign to the Officer other duties that would promote the goals of this Act.
Strategic plan.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the National Health Information Officer shall, in cooperation with key stakeholders, develop a strategic plan to create a comprehensive national health information infrastructure that encompasses public-sector and private-sector health information activities.
Such plans shall include a national agenda to guide policymaking, technology investments, research, and integration with ongoing public health, healthcare, and health information technology activities and a timeline for the specific duties described in subsection (d)(1).
Limited term of office.--The National Health Information Officer shall serve for a term of 5 years, after which, unless extended by Act of Congress, the office shall terminate.
Goals.--The goals of the national health information infrastructure are-- (1) to maximize positive outcomes in clinical care; (2) to minimize preventable medical errors, especially in hospitals and in the administration of contraindicated drugs; (3) to reduce redundant paperwork, such as the repeated taking of patient histories; (4) to decrease costs from duplicative or otherwise unnecessary testing or procedures; and (5) to establish a compatible information technology architecture that increases health care quality and cost- savings, enhances security of information, and avoids the financing and development of health information technology systems that are not readily compatible.
Collaboration With Stakeholders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall assure that activities of the Department of Health and Human Services that relate to the national health information infrastructure are undertaken after consultation with and based on the recommendations of the parties described in paragraph (3).
Periodic meetings.--The Secretary, through the National Health Information Officer, shall convene as a group the parties described in paragraph (3).
Such group shall meet periodically and collaborate to make recommendations to such Officer and the Secretary on the matters described in subsection (d).
Parties represented.--The parties described in this paragraph are experts from the fields of medical information, information technology, medical continuous quality improvement, and medical records security and privacy, appropriate staff experts from Federal agencies (including those within the Department of Health and Human Services) and representatives of the following: (A) The National Committee on Vital and Health Statistics, the National Institutes of Standards and Technology, the National Library of Medicine, and the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.
Individual and institutional health care clinical providers, including a teaching hospital and physicians.
Clinical and health services researchers.
Private organizations with expertise in medical informatics.
A State or local public health department.
The health care information technology industry and national alliances formed to achieve standards- based health care information systems.
Duties.--In carrying out subsection (a), the National Health Information Officer shall advise the Secretary on the following, in order to promote the goals described in subsection (b): (1)(A) Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, an assessment of-- (i) the best current practices in the development, purchase, and maintenance of medical information technology; and (ii) currently existing legal requirements for communication standards.
Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, recommendations for a uniform health information system interface, and methods for its adoption, to ensure compatibility between and among old and new information systems.
Recommendations for health and healthcare data standards (such as vocabulary and messaging), communications standards, and other medical standards (including a common lexicon) necessary to achieve the interoperability of health information systems.
Coordination of the evolution of the national health information infrastructure and working with other key stakeholders in the public and private sectors to develop a strategic plan that will ensure the interoperability of all elements of such infrastructure.
Coordination of spending across Federal agencies relating to the establishment of such infrastructure.
Development of policies to ensure compliance with all standards adopted under part C of title XI, including promotion of patient control of protected health information.
Avoidance of confusion and potential non-compliance with currently existing legal requirements.
Detail of Federal Employees.--Upon the request of the Secretary, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, without reimbursement from the National Health Information Officer, any of the personnel of such agency to such Officer to assist the Officer in carrying out duties of the Officer under this section.
Any such detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
Use of Funds Consistent With National Agenda.--The Secretary shall develop a process (such as requiring the approval of the National Health Information Officer) to assure that to the greatest extent feasible funds of the Department of Health and Human Services granted or spent for health information systems are used to further the national agenda developed pursuant to subsection (a)(3).
Authorization of Appropriations and Sunset.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2004 to carry out this section.
DATA AND COMMUNICATIONS STANDARDS FOR INTEROPERABILITY.
In General.--Based on the recommendations provided under section 2(d)(1)(B), the Secretary shall develop or adopt (and shall periodically review and update) voluntary, national data and communications standards that promote the interoperability of health information technology systems across all public and private health care settings.
The Secretary shall ensure thorough testing of data and communications standards before their implementation.
In developing or adopting such standards, the Secretary shall take into account-- (1) the ability of such standards to enable clinically- specific data collection in order to promote evidence-based medicine and the electronic exchange of patient medical record information; and (2) the costs of compliance and the savings and other benefits from improved efficiency and quality in health care delivery.
Reports.-- (1) Initial report.--No later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report that includes a comprehensive national health information infrastructure strategic plan and information on progress on the assessments, the recommendations for the interface, and the recommendations for standards, under section 2(d).
Subsequent reports.--During each of the 2 years after the year in which the report is submitted under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit to Congress an annual report relating to additional recommendations, best practices, results of information technology improvements, analyses of private sector efforts to implement the data and communications standards established under this section, and such other matters as may help ensure the most rapid dissemination of best practices in health care information technology.
Contract Authority.--The Secretary is authorized to enter into contracts-- (1) for services and activities necessary to carry out this section and section 2; and (2) to the extent practicable, to test the standards under consideration under this section.
Dissemination.--The Secretary shall provide for the reviewing, updating, and disseminating the standards developed under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for each fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2004 to carry out this section.