This Act may be cited as the ``Nigerian Advance Fee Fraud Prevention Act of 1998''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Nigerian advance fee fraud, known internationally as ``4-1-9'' fraud after the section of the Nigerian penal code which addresses fraud schemes, has reached epidemic proportions.
Such frauds generally involve a company or individual that receives an unsolicited letter from a Nigerian claiming to be a senior civil servant of the Nigerian Government, usually from the Nigerian National Petroleum Corporation.
The Nigerian perpetrator of the fraud explains that the entity of the Nigerian Government concerned is seeking a reputable foreign company or individual to use its account to deposit funds ranging from $10,000,000 to $60,000,000, which the Nigerian Government overpaid on a contract.
The intended victims of such frauds are typically asked to provide company letterhead and bank account information which they are told will be used to show completion of the contract.
The victim's letterhead is actually used to forge letters to other prospective victims and to forge letters of recommendation for travel visas from the United States Embassy in Lagos, Nigeria.
Victims of such frauds are pressured to send money for unforeseen taxes, fees to the Nigerian Government, and attorney fees.
Victims of such frauds are requested to travel to Nigeria to complete the fraudulent transaction, and are told a visa is not necessary to enter the country.
The perpetrators of such frauds often bribe airport officials to bypass a victim of such fraud through immigration, and use the victim's illegal entry into the country as leverage to coerce the victim into releasing more funds to the perpetrators.
Violence and threats of physical harm have also been used to pressure victims of such frauds.
15 foreign businessmen, including 2 United States citizens, have been murdered after traveling to Nigeria in pursuit of a 4-1-9 scam.
Financial losses incurred by United States citizens and reported to the United States Secret Service exceed $100,000,000.
The money derived from these schemes is often used to fund other illegal activities, including drug trafficking and violent crimes.
The United States Secret Service has established ``Operation 4-1-9'', which is designed to target these schemes, and the Secret Service receives over 100 telephone calls and 300 to 500 pieces of mail from victims of such schemes every day.
Perpetrators of 4-1-9 frauds are rarely prosecuted or jailed by the Nigerian Government, and money lost is rarely recovered.
The Nigerian Government is suspected of playing a role in these schemes, at least insofar as it has not made any serious efforts to curb the schemes, enforce its own laws against the schemes, or apprehend and prosecute the perpetrators.
EFFORTS TO END THE NIGERIAN ADVANCE FEE FRAUD.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the United States should work with the international community to ensure the prosecution of Nigerian scam artists involved in the advance fee frauds described in section 2; and (2) the United States should take all steps necessary to educate the public about such advance fee fraud, and to prevent future occurrences of such fraud.
Reports to Congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Treasury shall jointly submit to the Congress a report which includes the following information: (1) Actions undertaken by the Nigerian Government to cooperate with international officials in apprehending and extraditing persons responsible for committing advance fee fraud described in section 2 and preventing future occurrences of such fraud.
Efforts undertaken to inform United States citizens about such advance fee fraud.
Efforts undertaken to ensure the coordination of activities by the United States Government relating to such fraud.
Efforts undertaken to work with the international community to combat such fraud and apprehend the perpetrators.
Other measures being undertaken, and which will be undertaken, to ensure and promote an end to such advance fee fraud, including the imposition of economic and other sanctions on the Government of Nigeria.