This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness in Prescription Drug Prices Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Senior citizens are the major consumers of prescription drugs in the United States and are paying the highest prices for prescription drugs.
The discriminatory pricing practices of major drug manufacturers results in senior citizens paying over twice the price that drug manufacturers charge their most-favored customers, such as Health Maintenance Organizations (HMOs) and hospital chains.
Medicare beneficiaries without prescription drug coverage represent the most vulnerable segment of prescription drug customers.
Making prescription drugs available to them at lower prices would lower the health care costs for this population, improve the health and well-being of this population and consequently, lower the cost to the taxpayers of the Medicare program.
Authorizing the wholesale purchase of prescription drugs at the Federal Supply Schedule prices plus administrative costs will result in a benefit to the Medicare population without cost to the taxpayers.
Authorizing similar benefits through hospice programs will assist in extending the benefits of lower prescription drug prices to those with terminal illnesses.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to protect Medicare beneficiaries from discriminatory pricing by drug manufacturers and to make prescription drugs available to Medicare beneficiaries at substantially reduced prices, by allowing pharmacies to purchase drugs for Medicare beneficiaries at the substantially reduced price available under the Federal Supply Schedule.
Agreements To Participate.--Any qualified pharmacy may enter into an agreement with the Secretary that enables the pharmacy to sell covered outpatient drugs to Medicare beneficiaries at a reduced price, by authorizing the pharmacy to operate as a participating pharmacy under this Act.
Right of Participating Pharmacies To Obtain Drugs.--An agreement under this section shall entitle the participating pharmacy to purchase any covered outpatient drug that is listed on the Federal Supply Schedule of the General Services Administration at the participating pharmacy discount price for that drug determined under subsection (d).
Quantity of Drugs Purchased.--An agreement under this section shall permit the participating pharmacy to purchase under this Act as much of a covered outpatient drug as is sold by the pharmacy to Medicare beneficiaries.
Participating Pharmacy Discount Price.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall determine a participating pharmacy discount price for each covered outpatient drug.
Determination.--The participating pharmacy discount price for a covered outpatient drug shall be determined by adding-- (A) the price at which the drug is available to Federal agencies from the Federal Supply Schedule under section 8126 of title 38, United States Code; plus (B) an amount that reflects the administrative costs incurred by the Secretary in administering this Act.
Special Rule for Medicare Beneficiaries Enrolled in a Hospice Program.--In the case of a Medicare beneficiary who makes an election to receive hospice care under section 1812(d)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395d(d)(1)) provided by, or under arrangements made by, a particular hospice program under part A of title XVIII of such Act, the hospice program may enter into agreements with a participating pharmacy to procure for and deliver to such a Medicare beneficiary covered outpatient drugs at a reduced price under this section.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer this Act in a manner that uses existing methods of obtaining and distributing drugs to the maximum extent possible, consistent with efficiency and cost effectiveness.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue such regulations as may be necessary to implement this Act.
REPORTS TO CONGRESS REGARDING EFFECTIVENESS OF ACT.
In General.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall report to the Congress regarding the effectiveness of this Act in-- (1) protecting Medicare beneficiaries from discriminatory pricing by drug manufacturers; and (2) making prescription drugs available to Medicare beneficiaries at substantially reduced prices.
Consultation.--In preparing such reports, the Secretary shall consult with public health experts, affected industries, organizations representing consumers and older Americans, and other interested persons.
Recommendations.--The Secretary shall include in such reports any recommendations they consider appropriate for changes in this Act to further reduce the cost of covered outpatient drugs to Medicare beneficiaries.
In this Act: (1) Covered outpatient drug.--The term ``covered outpatient drug'' has the meaning given that term in section 1927(k)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396r-8(k)(2)).
Medicare beneficiary.--The term ``Medicare beneficiary'' means an individual entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act or enrolled under part B of such title, or both.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
The Secretary shall implement this Act as expeditiously as practicable and in a manner consistent with the obligations of the United States.