This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Budget Autonomy Act of 2007''.
TERMINATION OF FEDERAL MANDATES OVER LOCAL BUDGET PROCESS AND FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT OF DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA.
Termination of Mandates.-- (1) In general.--Part D of title IV of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (sec.
204.41 et sequentes, D.C. Official Code) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart 3--Termination of Federal Mandates ``termination of federal mandates ``Sec.
Budget and Financial Management Governed Under District Law.--Effective with respect to fiscal year 2008 and each succeeding fiscal year which is not a control year-- ``(1) the provisions of subpart 1 and subpart 2 shall not apply; and ``(2) the process by which the District of Columbia develops and enacts the budget for the District government for a fiscal year, and the activities carried out with respect to the financial management of the District government for a fiscal year, shall be established under such laws as may be enacted by the District.
No Effect on Existing Obligations.--Nothing in this section may be construed to relieve the District of Columbia of any contractual or other financial obligations incurred by the District under a budget enacted for a fiscal year prior to fiscal year 2008.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to part D of title IV the following: ``Subpart 3--Termination of Federal Mandates ``Sec.
Termination of Federal mandates.''.
Elimination of Congressional Review Period For Budget Acts.-- Section 602(c) of such Act (sec.
206.02(c), D.C. Official Code) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting ``paragraphs (2) and (4)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of any Act adopting the annual budget for the District of Columbia government for fiscal year 2008 or any succeeding fiscal year which is not a control year, such Act shall take effect upon the date prescribed by such Act.''.
TERMINATION OF FEDERAL MANDATES OVER BORROWING OF MONEY.
Termination of Mandates.-- (1) In general.--Part E of title IV of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (sec.
204.61 et sequentes, D.C. Official Code) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart 6--Termination of Federal Mandates ``termination of federal mandates ``Sec.
Borrowing Governed Under District Law.--Except as provided in subsection (b), effective with respect to fiscal year 2008 and each succeeding fiscal year which is not a control year-- ``(1) the provisions of subparts 1 through 5 shall not apply; and ``(2) the process and rules by which the District of Columbia issues bonds or otherwise borrows money shall be established under such laws as may be enacted by the District.
Exception for Certain Provisions.--Subsection (a) does not apply with respect to the following sections: ``(1) Section 482 (relating to the full faith and credit of the District).
Section 484 (relating to the nonapplicability of the full faith and credit of the United States).
Section 485 (relating to the tax treatment of bonds and notes).
Section 486 (relating to legal investment in bonds and notes).
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section may be construed-- ``(1) to relieve the District of Columbia of any obligation incurred with respect to bonds or other forms of borrowing issued prior to fiscal year 2008; or ``(2) to waive the application to the District of Columbia of any other Federal law governing the borrowing of funds by States or units of local government, including the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of contents of such Act is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to part E of title IV the following: ``Subpart 6--Termination of Federal Mandates ``Sec.
Termination of Federal mandates.''.
Repeal of Cap on Amount of District Borrowing.--Section 603(b) of such Act (sec.
206.03(b), D.C. Official Code) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Paragraphs (1) through (3) shall not apply with respect to fiscal year 2008 or any succeeding fiscal year which is not a control year.''.
OTHER CONFORMING AMENDMENTS RELATING TO CHANGES IN FEDERAL ROLE IN BUDGET PROCESS.
Federal Authority Over Budget-Making Process.--Section 603(a) of the District of Columbia Home Rule Act (sec.
206.03, D.C. Official Code) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``for a fiscal year which is a control year''.
Restrictions Applicable During Control Years.--Section 603(d) of such Act (sec.
206.03(d), D.C. Official Code) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) In the case of a fiscal year which is a control year, the Council may not approve, and the Mayor may not forward to the President, any budget which is not consistent with the financial plan and budget established for the fiscal year under subtitle A of title II of the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Act of 1995.''.
Definition.--Section 603(f) of such Act (sec.
206.03(f), D.C. Official Code) is amended to read as follows: ``(f) In this section, the term `control year' has the meaning given such term in section 305(4) of the District of Columbia Financial Responsibility and Management Assistance Act of 1995.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to fiscal year 2008 and each succeeding fiscal year.