This Act may be cited as the ``Hazardous Waste Facilities Public Accountability Act of 1996''.
Section 3004(o)(7) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6924(o)(7)) is amended to read as follows: ``(7)(A) The Administrator shall not authorize a State program unless, within 12 months after the date of the enactment of the Hazardous Waste Facilities Public Accountability Act of 1996, the State promulgates standards for the acceptable location of new treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, and the expansion of treatment, storage, and disposal facilities, as may be necessary to protect human health and the environment.
The standards shall include requirements related to adverse geologic settings such as flood plains and seismic impact zones; unstable terrain such as karst terrain; ecological resources such as wetlands and wildlife habitat; proximity to residences, schools, hospitals, churches and synagogues; complex hydrogeology; and vulnerable significant ground water resources.
If a State does not promulgate such siting standards sufficient to protect human health and the environment, the Administrator shall promulgate such standards with respect to the State.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `complex hydrogeology' means an area where 1 or more of the following activities cannot be performed fully and adequately: ``(i) Sufficient ground water characterization to determine ground water and surface water flow and ascertain upgradient and downgradient directions.
The installation of a ground water monitoring network which will detect releases into ground water from a monitored unit at the earliest opportunity.
Characterization of the nature and extent of potential releases from a monitored unit.
Determination of what corrective actions are appropriate in response to a release, and conducting the corrective actions that may be required.''.
Section 3006 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6926) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) State Program Support.--(1) Within 12 months after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations requiring that the owner or operator of any facility required to obtain an operating or post-closure permit under this subtitle pay an annual fee, or the equivalent over some other period, sufficient to cover all reasonable (direct and indirect) costs required to develop and administer the permit program requirements of this title, including the reasonable costs of each of the following: ``(A) Reviewing and acting upon any application for such a permit.
Implementing and enforcing the terms and conditions of any such permit, including corrective action terms and conditions (but not including any court costs associated with any enforcement action).
Waste sampling, analyses, demonstrations, and environmental monitoring.
Preparing generally applicable regulations or guidance.
Implementing and enforcing interim status requirements, including corrective action orders (but not including any court costs associated with any enforcement action).
The Administrator shall not authorize a State program under this section, or allow a State program to retain authorization under this section, unless the State demonstrates that it will collect, in the aggregate, a dollar amount that the Administrator determines, after notice and opportunity for public comment, adequately reflects the reasonable costs of the permit program.
At least every 2 years the Administrator shall review each authorized State program to determine whether the program is in compliance with this subsection.
The Administrator shall publish such determination in the Federal Register, after notice and opportunity for public comment.
If the Administrator determines, pursuant to paragraph (2), that the fee provisions of a State program do not meet the requirements of this subsection, or if the Administrator determines that the State is not adequately administering or enforcing an approved program, the Administrator may, in addition to taking any other action authorized under this subtitle, collect reasonable fees from the owner or operator of the facilities identified in paragraph (1).
The fees shall be designed solely to cover the Administrator's costs of administering the provisions of the permit program promulgated by the Administrator.
In addition to any penalties that may be imposed under other law, any owner or operator that fails to pay fees imposed by the Administrator under paragraph (4), within a reasonable time to be determined by the Administrator, shall pay a penalty of 50 percent of the fee amount to the Administrator, plus interest on the fee amount computed in accordance with section 6621(a)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to computation of interest on underpayment of Federal taxes).
To carry out activities of the Administrator for which fees are collected under this subsection, an amount equal to the total amount of any fees, penalties, and interest collected by the Administrator during any fiscal year under this subsection is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator.
Any amounts appropriated pursuant to this paragraph are authorized to remain available until expended.
In imposing fees on facilities under this subsection, the Administrator may take into account the size and complexity of the facilities, and other relevant factors.''.
Section 3005 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6925) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Qualifications of Permittees.--A person may not obtain a permit for any facility under this title or renew any such permit, obtain authorization to expand the facility, or transfer ownership of the facility to any other person, unless the person demonstrates the following with respect to the person, any firm engaged to operate the facility, the parent firm of the person and any firm engaged to operate the facility, and any firms controlled by the parent firm or the operating firm of the person: ``(1) Each such entity is in compliance with Federal and State environmental and public health statutes and regulations.
Each such entity has paid all outstanding fines or penalties imposed on the entity for violations of such statutes and regulations.
Each such entity has made available a disclosure statement to the public at the site, and at local public libraries in the jurisdiction where the facility would be sited if a permit were obtained.
The disclosure statement shall include the following items of formation with respect to the entity: ``(A) A list of each conviction for fraud or any criminal offense during the immediately preceding 10 years in connection with obtaining or attempting to obtain a contract.
A list of each conviction for a violation of a State or Federal antitrust law during the immediately preceding 10 years, including convictions relating to unlawful price-fixing, allocation of customers among competitors, and bid-rigging.
A list of each citation during the immediately preceding 5 years for a permit violation under a Federal, State, or local environmental statute.
A list of each citation during the immediately preceding 5 years for failure to conduct proper cleanup, reclamation, or closure of a site or forfeiture of a bond for such a failure.