This Act may be cited as the ``Persian Gulf War Veterans Health Care and Research Act of 1998''.
HEALTH CARE FOR VETERANS OF WAR.
Authority To Provide Priority Care.--Section 1710(e) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by adding at the end of paragraph (1) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), a veteran who served on active duty in a theater of combat operations (as determined by the Secretary in consultation with the Secretary of Defense) during a period of war after the Vietnam era, or in combat against a hostile force during a period of hostilities (as defined in section 1712A(a)(2)(B) of this title) after the date of the enactment of this subparagraph, is eligible for hospital care, medical services, and nursing home care under subsection (a)(2)(F) for any illness, notwithstanding that there is insufficient medical evidence to conclude that such condition is attributable to such service.
''; (2) in paragraph (2)(B), by inserting ``or (1)(D)'' after ``paragraph (1)(C)''; (3) in paragraph (3)-- (A) by striking out ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A); (B) by striking out ``December 31, 1998.''
in subparagraph (B) and inserting in lieu thereof ``December 31, 2001; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) in the case of care for a veteran described in paragraph (1)(D), after a period of five years beginning on the date of the veteran's discharge or release from active military, naval, or air service.
''; and (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) When the Secretary first provides care for veterans using the authority provided in paragraph (1)(D), the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the experience under that authority.
The report shall cover the period of the first three years during which that authority is used and shall be submitted not later than nine months after the end of that three-year period.
The Secretary shall include in the report any recommendations of the Secretary for extension of that authority.''.
Enrollment Priority.--Section 1705(a)(4) of such title is amended-- (1) by striking out ``and'' after ``permanently housebound'' and inserting in lieu thereof a comma; and (2) by inserting ``, and veterans described in subparagraph (F) of section 1710(a)(2) of this title'' after ``disabled''.
NATIONAL CENTER FOR THE STUDY OF WAR-RELATED ILLNESSES.
In General.--(1) Chapter 73 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 7322 the following new section: ``Sec.
National Center for the Study of War-Related Illnesses ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary, acting through the Under Secretary for Health, shall establish and operate in the Veterans Health Administration a National Center for the Study of War-Related Illnesses (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Center').
The Center shall, as appropriate, coordinate its activities with those of the National Center on Post-Traumatic-Stress Disorder established pursuant to section 110(c) of the Veterans' Health Care Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-528).
Purposes.--The purposes of the Center shall be to promote improvement of clinical, research, and educational activities of the Veterans Health Administration with respect to war-related illnesses, including medically unexplained illnesses.
Functions.--In carrying out the purposes of the Center, the Under Secretary shall ensure that the Center-- ``(1) promotes the training of health care and related personnel in, and research into, the causes, mechanisms, and treatment of war-related illnesses; ``(2) serves as a resource center for, and promotes and seeks to coordinate the exchange of information regarding, research and training activities carried out by the Department, the Department of Defense, and other Federal and non-Federal entities; and ``(3) coordinates with the Department of Defense and other interested Federal departments and agencies in the conduct of research, training, and treatment and the dissemination of information pertaining to war-related illnesses.
Staff.--The Under Secretary shall ensure that the staff of the Center has an appropriate range and breadth of expertise so as to enable the Center to bring an interdisciplinary approach to the study and treatment of war-related illnesses.
Coordination Between Departments.--(1) In order to ensure needed coordination between the Department and the Department of Defense in carrying out the mission of the Center, the officials identified in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 8111(b)(2) of this title shall-- ``(A) meet regularly to review pertinent policies, procedures, and practices of their respective departments relating to such coordination and to identify actions that could be taken to change policies, procedures, and practices to improve such coordination; and ``(B) take all appropriate steps to carry out those actions identified under paragraph (1).
The Secretary and the Secretary of Defense shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress an annual joint report, not later than April 1 each year, on the activities under paragraph (1) during the preceding year.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7322 the following new item: ``7323.
National Center for the Study of War-Related Illnesses.''.
Effective Date.--The National Center for the Study of War- Related Illnesses required to be established by section 7323 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall be established not later than October 1, 1999.
ASSESSMENT OF EFFECTIVENESS OF CARE OF PERSIAN GULF WAR VETERANS.
Assessment by National Academy of Sciences.--Not later than November 1, 1998, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall enter into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences for the conduct of a review of a methodology which could be used by the Department of Veterans Affairs for determining the efficacy of treatments furnished to, and health outcomes (to include functional status) of, Persian Gulf War veterans who have been treated for illnesses which may be associated with their service in the Persian Gulf War.
Action on Report.--Not later than 180 days after receiving the final report of the National Academy of Sciences under subsection (a), the Secretary shall-- (1) if scientifically feasible, develop an appropriate mechanism to monitor and study the effectiveness of treatments furnished to, and health outcomes of, Persian Gulf War veterans who suffer from diagnosed and undiagnosed illnesses which may be associated with their service in the Persian Gulf War; and (2) submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the implementation of this subsection.
CONTRACT FOR INDEPENDENT RECOMMENDATIONS ON RESEARCH AND FOR DEVELOPMENT OF CURRICULUM ON CARE OF PERSIAN GULF WAR VETERANS.
Section 706 of the Persian Gulf War Veterans' Health Status Act (title VII of Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 527 note) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Research Review and Development of Medical Education Curriculum.--(1) In order to further understanding of the health consequences of military service in the Persian Gulf theater of operations and of new research findings with implications for improving the provision of care for veterans of such service, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs and the Secretary of Defense shall seek to enter into an agreement with the National Academy of Sciences under which the Institute of Medicine of the Academy would-- ``(A) develop a curriculum pertaining to the care and treatment of veterans of such service who have ill-defined or undiagnosed illnesses for use in the continuing medical education of both general and specialty physicians who provide care for such veterans; and ``(B) periodically review and provide recommendations regarding the research plans and research strategies of the Departments relating to the health consequences of military service in the Persian Gulf theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War, including recommendations that the Academy considers appropriate for additional scientific studies to resolve areas of continuing scientific uncertainty relating to the health consequences of any aspects of such military service.
Not later than 6 months after the Institute of Medicine provides the Secretaries the curriculum developed under paragraph (1), the Secretaries shall provide for the conduct of continuing education programs using the curriculum developed under paragraph (1).
Such programs shall include instruction which seeks to emphasize use of appropriate protocols of diagnosis, referral, and treatment of such veterans.''.
REVISION TO PROCESS FOR DETERMINING PRIORITIES FOR HEALTH- RELATED RESEARCH ON THE PERSIAN GULF WAR.
Section 707 of the Persian Gulf War Veterans' Health Status Act (title VII of Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 527 note) is amended by striking out subsection (b) and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``(b) Public Advisory Committee.--Not later than January 1, 1999, the head of the department or agency designated under subsection (a) shall establish an advisory committee consisting of members of the general public, to include Persian Gulf War veterans and representatives of such veterans, to provide advice to the head of that department or agency on proposed research studies, research plans, or research strategies relating to the health consequences of military service in the Persian Gulf theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War.
The department or agency head shall consult with such advisory committee on a regular basis.
Reports.--(1) Not later than March 1 of each year, the head of the department or agency designated under subsection (a) shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on-- ``(A) the status and results of all such research activities undertaken by the executive branch during the previous year; ``(B) research priorities identified during that year; and ``(C) recommendations of the public advisory committee established under subsection (b) that were not adopted during that year and the reasons for not adopting each such recommendation.
(A) Not later than 120 days after submission of the epidemiological research study conducted by the Department of Veterans Affairs entitled `VA National Survey of Persian Gulf Veterans--Phase III', the head of the department or agency designated under subsection (a) shall submit to the congressional committees specified in paragraph (1) a report on the findings under that study.
With respect to any findings of that study which identify scientific evidence of a greater relative risk of illness or illnesses in family members of veterans who served in the Persian Gulf War theater of operations than in family members of veterans who did not so serve, the head of the department or agency designated under subsection (a) shall seek to ensure that appropriate research studies are designed to follow up on such findings.
Public Availability of Research Findings.--The head of the department or agency designated under subsection (a) shall ensure that the findings of all research conducted by or for the executive branch relating to the health consequences of military service in the Persian Gulf theater of operations during the Persian Gulf War (including information pertinent to improving provision of care for veterans of such service) are made available to the public through peer-reviewed medical journals, the Internet World Wide Web, and other appropriate media.''.
DESIGNATION OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL CENTER IN ASPINWALL, PENNSYLVANIA.
The Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Aspinwall, Pennsylvania, is hereby designated as the ``H. John Heinz III Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center''.
Any reference to that medical center in any law, regulation, map, document, record, or other paper of the United States shall be considered to be a reference to the ``H. John Heinz III Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center''.
DESIGNATION OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL CENTER IN GAINESVILLE, FLORIDA.
The Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in Gainesville, Florida, is hereby designated as the ``Malcom Randall Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center''.
Any reference to that medical center in any law, regulation, map, document, record, or other paper of the United States shall be considered to be a reference to the ``Malcom Randall Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center''.
MANAGEMENT OF SPECIALIZED TREATMENT AND REHABILITATIVE PROGRAMS.
Standards of Job Performance.--Section 1706(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2), by striking out ``April 1, 1997, April 1, 1998, and April 1, 1999'', and inserting in lieu thereof ``April 1, 1999, April 1, 2000, and April 1, 2001''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3)(A) To ensure compliance with paragraph (1), the Under Secretary for Health shall prescribe objective standards of job performance for employees in positions described in subparagraph (B) with respect to the job performance of those employees in carrying out the requirements of paragraph (1).
Those job performance standards shall include measures of workload, allocation of resources, and quality-of-care indicators.
Positions described in this subparagraph are positions in the Veterans Health Administration that have responsibility for allocating and managing resources applicable to the requirements of paragraph (1).
The Under Secretary shall develop the job performance standards under subparagraph (A) in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Prosthetics and Special Disabilities Programs and the Committee on Care of Severely Chronically Mentally Ill Veterans.''.
Effective Date.--The standards of job performance required by paragraph (3) of section 1706(b) of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall be prescribed not later than January 1, 1999.
EXTENSION OF AUTHORITY TO COUNSEL AND TREAT VETERANS FOR SEXUAL TRAUMA.
Section 1720D(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``December 31, 1998'' in paragraphs (1) and (3) and inserting in lieu thereof ``December 31, 2001''.
AUTHORIZATION OF CONSTRUCTION OF A SPINAL CORD INJURY CENTER AT THE TAMPA, FLORIDA, VAMC.
Authorization.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs may carry out a major medical facility project for construction of a spinal cord injury center at the Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Tampa, Florida, in an amount not to exceed $46,300,000.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Veterans Affairs for fiscal year 1999 for the Construction, Major Projects, account $20,000,000 to be available for the project authorized in subsection (a).
Source of Funds.--The project authorized in subsection (a) may be carried out using -- (A) funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (b); (B) funds appropriated for Construction, Major Projects, for a fiscal year before fiscal year 1999 that remain available for obligation; and (C) funds appropriated for Construction, Major Projects, for a fiscal year before fiscal year 1999 for a category of activity not specific to a project.
Passed the House of Representatives August 3, 1998.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.