This Act may be cited as the ``Children's Health Coverage Improvement Act of 1999''.
REQUIRING OFFER OF CHILDREN'S-ONLY COVERAGE UNDER GROUP HEALTH PLANS.
In General.--Part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after section 713 the following new section: ``SEC.
PROVIDING OPTION OF CHILDREN'S ONLY COVERAGE.
Requirement for Option.--Each group health plan shall provide, as at least one benefit option under the plan, health benefits coverage for qualified children (as defined in subsection (b)).
Qualified Child Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified child' means, with respect to a group health plan, an individual who is under 19 years of age and is a dependent of a participant who is enrolled for benefits under such plan.
A group health plan may treat other individuals as qualified children under the plan.
Terms of Option.-- ``(1) Timing.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the option under subsection (a) by a group health plan shall be made at such times as the person (of whom the qualified child is a dependent) is permitted to elect coverage under the plan.
Transition.--A group health plan shall also make such offer available at the time this section first becomes effective.
May require enrollment of all qualified children in a family.--The offer under this section, made with respect to an individual who is the qualified child of a participant, may be conditioned upon the election of the option by all qualified children of the participant.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 713 the following new item: ``Sec.
Providing option of children's only coverage.''.
PROVISIONS OF CHILDREN-ONLY COVERAGE UNDER COBRA CONTINUATION PROVISIONS.
In General.--Part 6 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after section 609 the following new section: ``SEC.
SPECIAL RULES FOR CHILDREN ONLY COVERAGE.
``In carrying out sections 601 through 608, the following additional rules shall apply: ``(1) The term `continuation coverage' shall include, in addition to the coverage otherwise required, at least one option of benefits coverage that meets the terms and conditions of section 714.
The premium for the continuation coverage described in paragraph (1) shall be established only with regard to such coverage.
The election of continuation coverage described in paragraph (1) shall be available with respect to qualified beneficiaries who previously had such coverage before the date of the qualifying event or were covered under family coverage before such date.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 609 the following new item: ``Sec.
Special rules for children only coverage.
In General.--Except as provided in this section, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning after the first day of the first month that begins more than 9 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Special Rule for Collective Bargaining Agreements.--In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and one or more employers ratified before the date of the enactment of this Act, section 714 of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of-- (1) the date on which the last of the collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of the enactment of this Act), or (2) the effective date provided under subsection (a), For purposes of paragraph (1), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement of such part shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.
Timely Regulations.--The Secretary of Labor shall first issue by not later than 3 months before the effective date provided under subsection (a), such regulations as may be necessary to carry out the amendments made by this Act.