This Act may be cited as the ``Victims' Rights Constitutional Amendment Implementation Act of 1997''.
In General.--Except as provided in section 3, each victim of a Federal felony offense or any other Federal crime of violence (as defined in section 16 of title 18, United States Code) shall have the following rights: (1) To notice of, and not to be excluded from, all public proceedings relating to the offense.
To be heard, if present, and to submit a written statement at all public proceedings, relating to the offense, to determine a release from custody, an acceptance of a negotiated plea, or a sentence.
To the rights described in the preceding portion of this section at a parole proceeding that is not public, to the extent those rights are afforded to the convicted offender.
To notice of any release or escape from custody relating to the offense.
To seek relief from an unreasonable delay of the final disposition of the proceedings relating to the offense.
To an order of restitution from the convicted offender pursuant to law.
To consideration for the safety of the victim in determining any release from custody.
To notice of the rights established by this section.
The right to be treated with fairness and with respect for the victim's dignity and privacy.
The right to confer with the attorney for the Government in the case.
Affected Proceedings.--The rights established by this section shall apply in-- (1) Federal criminal proceedings (other than military criminal proceedings), including juvenile justice proceedings; (2) collateral proceedings such as habeas corpus; and (3) similar proceedings in the courts of any district or territory of the United States not within a State.
Remedies.-- (1) Standing.--The victim shall have standing in the proceeding to assert the rights established by this section.
Disciplinary proceedings.--A knowing violation of a right provided in subsection (a) shall be grounds for disciplinary proceedings by the appropriate Federal governmental and professional disciplinary authorities.
Contempt.--A knowing violation of a right provided in subsection (a) may be treated by the court having jurisdiction as a contempt of court.
Judicial remedies.--This section does not create a cause of action or defense in favor of any person arising out of the failure to accord to a victim a right provided in subsection (a), and nothing in this section-- (A) provides grounds for the victim to overturn a charging decision, a conviction, or a sentence; to obtain a stay of trial; or to compel a new trial; or (B) provides grounds for the accused or convicted offender to obtain any form of relief.
Exceptions.--The rights provided under section 2 do not apply-- (1) to informing victims about the release of an alleged or convicted offender-- (A) to go under cover to gather evidence on behalf of law enforcement authorities; or (B) to participate in a witness protection program; (2) to the extent that the court-- (A) determines with respect to a right that the number of victims is so great as unreasonably to delay the proceedings if that right were accorded to each of them; and (B) takes reasonable measures to allow that right to be exercised by representative victims; or (3) if the responsible official determines the victim is a suspect in the case.
Limitations.-- (1) Right to notice; when violated.--The rights to notice under this Act are not violated if the proper authorities make a reasonable effort, but are unable to provide the notice, or if the failure of the victim to make a reasonable effort to make those authorities aware of the victim's whereabouts prevents that notice.
Right to counsel for victims.--This Act does not create any right to counsel at public expense for any victim.
Rights of victims of uncharged offenses.--The decision to charge a defendant with an offense shall not be construed to make the rights under section 2(a) apply to a victim of any related, but uncharged, offense.
Designation of Responsible Officials.--The courts, and the head of each department and agency of the United States engaged in the detection, investigation, prosecution, or adjudication of crimes to which this Act applies, shall designate by names and office titles the persons who will be responsible for identifying the victims of crime, assuring the implementation of the rights provided in section 2, and performing the services described in subsection (c), at each stage of a criminal case.
Identification of Victims.--At the earliest opportunity after the detection of a crime at which it may be done without interfering with an investigation, a responsible official shall-- (1) identify the victim or victims of a crime; (2) inform the victims of their right to receive, on request, the services described in subsection (c); and (3) inform each victim of the name, title, and business address and telephone number of the responsible official to whom the victim should address a request for each of the services described in subsection (c).
Description of Services.--(1) A responsible official shall-- (A) inform a victim of the place where the victim may receive emergency medical and social services; (B) inform a victim of any restitution or other relief to which the victim may be entitled under this or any other law and manner in which such relief may be obtained; (C) inform a victim of public and private programs that are available to provide counseling, treatment, and other support to the victim; and (D) assist a victim in contacting the persons who are responsible for providing the services and relief described in subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C).
A responsible official shall arrange for a victim to receive reasonable protection from a suspected offender and persons acting in concert with or at the behest of the suspected offender.
During the investigation and prosecution of a crime, a responsible official shall provide a victim the earliest possible notice of-- (A) the status of the investigation of the crime, to the extent it is appropriate to inform the victim and to the extent that it will not interfere with the investigation; (B) the arrest of a suspected offender; (C) the filing of charges against a suspected offender; (D) the scheduling of each court proceeding that the victim is either required to attend or, under section 2, is entitled to attend; (E) the release or detention status of an offender or suspected offender; (F) the acceptance of a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the rendering of a verdict after trial; and (G) the sentence imposed on an offender, including the date on which the offender will be eligible for parole.
During court proceedings, a responsible official shall ensure that a victim is provided a waiting area removed from and out of the sight and hearing of the defendant and defense witnesses.
After trial, a responsible official shall provide a victim the earliest possible notice of-- (A) the scheduling of a parole hearing for the offender; (B) the escape, work release, furlough, or any other form of release from custody of the offender; and (C) the death of the offender, if the offender dies while in custody.
At all times, a responsible official shall ensure that any property of a victim that is being held for evidentiary purposes be maintained in good condition and returned to the victim as soon as it is no longer needed for evidentiary purposes.
The Attorney General or the head of another department or agency that conducts an investigation of a sexual assault shall pay, either directly or by reimbursement of payment by the victim, the cost of a physical examination of the victim which an investigating officer determines was necessary or useful for evidentiary purposes.
A responsible official shall provide the victim with general information regarding the corrections process, including information about work release, furlough, probation, and eligibility for each.
Remedies.-- (1) Disciplinary proceedings.--A pattern and practice of knowing failures to provide the service described in subsection (c) shall be grounds for disciplinary proceedings by the appropriate Federal governmental and professional disciplinary authorities.
No cause of action or defense.--This section does not create a cause of action or defense in favor of any person arising out of the failure of a responsible person to provide information as required by subsection (b) or (c).
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``responsible official'' means a person designated pursuant to section 4(a) to perform the functions of a responsible official under that section; and (2) the term ``victim'' means a person (but not including any governmental entity) that has suffered direct physical, emotional, or pecuniary harm as a result of the commission of a crime, including-- (A) in the case of a victim that is an institutional entity, an authorized representative of the entity; and (B) in the case of a victim who is under 18 years of age, incompetent, incapacitated, or deceased, one of the following (in order of preference): (i) A spouse.
Another person designated by the court.
Sections 502 and 503 of the Crime Control Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 10606 and 10607) are repealed.