This Act may be cited as the ``Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area Establishment Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish the Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area to conserve, protect, and enhance for the benefit and enjoyment of present and future generations the landscapes, native wildlife and vegetation, and prehistoric, historic, scenic, and traditional human values of the conservation area (including ranching, hunting, sightseeing, camping and hiking).
In this Act: (1) Conservation area.--The term ``conservation area'' means the Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area established by section 2.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the Bureau of Land Management.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SHIVWITS PLATEAU NATIONAL CONSERVATION AREA, ARIZONA.
In General.--There is established the Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area in the State of Arizona.
Areas Included.--The Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area shall be comprised of approximately 381,800 acres of land administered by the Secretary in Mohave County, Arizona, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area--Proposed'', numbered ____, dated ____.
Map and Legal Description.-- (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a map and legal description of the conservation area.
Force and effect.--The map and legal description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act.
Public availability.--Copies of the map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in-- (A) the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management; and (B) the appropriate office of the Bureau of Land Management in Arizona.
MANAGEMENT OF CONSERVATION AREA.
In General.--The Secretary shall manage the conservation area in a manner that conserves, protects, and enhances all of the values specified in section 2 under the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes), this Act, and other applicable law.
Hunting and Fishing.--The Secretary shall permit hunting and fishing in the conservation area in accordance with the laws of the State of Arizona.
Grazing.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall permit the grazing of livestock in the conservation area.
Applicable law.--The Secretary shall ensure that grazing in the conservation area is conducted in accordance with all laws (including regulations) that apply to the issuance and administration of grazing leases on other land under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.
Forest Restoration.--The Secretary shall develop and carry out forest restoration projects on Ponderosa Pine forests and Pinion- Juniper forests in the conservation area, with the goal of restoring the land in the conservation area to presettlement condition.
Advisory Committee.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory committee for the conservation area, to be known as the ``Shivwits Plateau National Conservation Area Advisory Committee'', the purpose of which shall be to advise the Secretary with respect to the preparation and implementation of the management plan required by section 6.
Representation.--The advisory committee shall be comprised of 9 members appointed by the Secretary, of whom-- (A) 1 shall be a grazing permittee in good standing with the Bureau of Land Management who has maintained a grazing allotment within the boundaries of the conservation area for not less than 5 years; (B) 1 shall be the chairperson of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians; (C) 1 shall be an individual with a recognized background in ecological restoration, research, and application, to be appointed from among nominations made by Northern Arizona University; (D) 1 shall be the Arizona State Land Commissioner; (E) 1 shall be an Arizona State Game and Fish Commissioner; (F) 1 shall be an official of the State of Utah (other than an elected official), to be appointed from among nominations made by the Arizona Strip Regional Planning Task Force; (G) 1 shall be a representative of a recognized environmental organization; (H) 1 shall be a local elected official from the State of Arizona, to be appointed from among nominations made by the Arizona Strip Regional Planning Task Force; and (I) 1 shall be a local elected official from the State of Utah, to be appointed from among nominations made by the Arizona Strip Regional Planning Task Force.
Terms.-- (A) In general.--A member of the advisory committee shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, except that, of the members first appointed, 3 members shall be appointed for a term of 1 year and 3 members shall be appointed for a term of 2 years.
Reappointment.--A member may be reappointed to serve on the advisory committee on expiration of the member's term.
Existing Management Plans.--The Secretary shall manage the conservation area under resource management plans in effect or the date of enactment of this Act, including the Arizona Strip Resource Management Plan, the Parashant Interdisciplinary Plan, and the Mt.
Future Management Plans.-- Future revisions of management plans for the conservation area shall be adopted in compliance with the goals and objectives of this Act.
In General.--The Secretary may acquire State or private land or interests in land within the boundaries of the conservation area only by-- (1) donation; (2) purchase with donated or appropriated funds from a willing seller; or (3) exchange with a willing party.
Exchanges.-- (1) In general.--During the 2-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall make a diligent effort to acquire, by exchange, from willing parties all State trust lands, subsurface rights, and valid mining claims within the conservation area.
Inverse condemnation.--If an exchange requested by a property owner is not completed by the end of the period, the property owner that requested the exchange may, at any time after the end of the period-- (A) declare that the owner's State trust lands, subsurface rights, or valid mining claims within the conservation area have been taken by inverse condemnation; and (B) seek compensation from the United States in United States district court.
Valuation of Private Property.-- (1) In general.--The United States shall pay the fair market value for any property acquired under this section.
Assessment.--The value of the property shall be assessed as if the conservation area did not exist.
MINERAL ASSESSMENT PROGRAM AND RELATIONSHIP TO MINING LAWS.
Assessment Program.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall assess the oil, gas, coal, uranium, and other mineral potential on Federal land in the conservation area.
Peer Review.--The mineral assessment program shall-- (1) be subject to review by the Arizona State Department of Mines and Mineral Resources; and (2) shall not be considered to be complete until the results of the assessment are approved by the Arizona State Department of Mines and Mineral Resources.
Relation to Mining Laws.--Subject to valid existing rights, the public land within the conservation area is withdrawn from mineral location, entry, and patent under chapter 6 of the Revised Statutes (commonly known as the ``General Mining Law of 1872'') (30 United States Code section 21 et sequentes).
Mineral leasing.--The Secretary shall permit the removal of-- (1) nonleasable minerals from land or an interest in land within the national conservation area in the manner prescribed by section 10 of the Act of August 4, 1939 (43 United States Statutes at Large 38); and (2) leasable minerals from land or an interest in lands within the conservation area in accordance with the Act of February 25, 1920 (commonly known as the ``Mineral Lands Leasing Act of 1920'') (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes) or the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands (30 United States Code 351 et sequentes).
Disposition of Funds From Permits and Leases.-- (1) Receipts from permits and leases.--Receipts derived from permits and leases issued on land in the conservation area under the Act of February 25, 1920 (30 United States Code 181 et sequentes) or the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands (30 United States Code 351 et seq.
), shall be disposed of as provided in the applicable Act.
Receipts from disposition of nonleasable minerals.-- Receipts from the disposition of nonleasable minerals within the conservation area shall be disposed of in the same manner as proceeds of the sale of public land.
EFFECT ON WATER RIGHTS.
Nothing in this Act-- (1) establishes a new or implied reservation to the United States of any water or water-related right with respect to land included in the conservation area; or (2) authorizes the appropriation of water, except in accordance with the substantive and procedural law of the State of Arizona.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.