This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Export Enhancement Act of 1994''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) United States exports are concentrated very heavily among a very few large companies.
Only 2 percent of United States businesses account for 85 percent of United States exports.
Small businesses remain a large untapped resource of potential export growth for the United States economy.
However, small businesses with competitive products frequently face high transactions costs and inadequate information about foreign markets which limit their ability to export.
There is a significant need for export assistance services targeted to smaller exporters.
Over 95 percent of United States exporters have annual export sales of less than $5,000,000, and 72 percent of United States export shipments are worth less than $20,000.
There are over 150 Federal export promotion programs fragmented among 19 different Federal agencies.
Federal export promotion activities are characterized by duplication of effort, overlap, inefficient dissemination of services and information, turf battles, and confusion among both providers and users of assistance.
The Trade Promotion Coordinating Committee concluded that ``for many small and medium-sized firms, getting through the bureaucracy may be as great a hurdle as foreign market barriers''.
The National Performance Review concluded that the Federal Government must reallocate its resources to sectors that have clearly shown growth potential while it works to make its services more accessible to clients.
State-based and private sector organizations frequently have better, more timely information about which companies are ready to export, and exactly what type of help they need, than do Federal providers of export assistance.
State-based providers of export assistance, including State departments of trade, local industry associations, international freight forwarding companies, local and regional banks, chambers of commerce, and world trade centers, have good local networks to deliver services but their resources are limited in comparison to the Federal Government.
Effective outreach by export assistance providers is key to providing useful service to small businesses.
For all companies seeking to export, trade finance is a necessity, and the Federal Government must find ways to help the private sector to deliver trade finance in a useful and profitable way.
Partnerships between the Federal Government and State- based providers of export assistance can more effectively focus export assistance on small businesses.
By combining the funds and international resources of the Federal Government with the local networks of State-based providers of export assistance, such partnerships can provide a sharper focus on long-term export market development than do traditional trade promotion activities.
EXPANDING FEDERAL FINANCIAL SUPPORT FOR STATE-BASED EXPORT ENHANCEMENT ACTIVITIES.
The Market Development Cooperator Program.--There is authorized to be appropriated $40,000,000 to provide grants to qualified entities for activities described in section 2303 of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988.
The Foreign Buyer Program.--There is authorized to be appropriated $2,000,000 to provide financial support, on a shared basis, to small businesses to increase the number of small businesses participating in activities described in section 2304 of the Export Enhancement Act of 1988.
Trade Missions.-- (1) The International Trade Administration (ITA) shall establish a grant program to provide financial support, on a shared basis, for foreign trade missions run by State governments and designed primarily for participation by small and medium-sized businesses.
ITA shall make available for this program no less money than is available for foreign trade missions run by the Federal Government.
In the selection of trade missions to which the ITA will provide financial support, ITA shall consider the extent to which a proposed trade mission will advance the State's economic development and export promotion strategies.
DISCRETIONARY FUNDS WITHIN THE INTERNATIONAL TRADE ADMINISTRATION.
In order to better fulfill its mandate to promote exports of goods and services of the United States, particularly by small- and medium- sized businesses, the International Trade Administration shall make it a priority to expand financial support for State-based export enhancement activities, using discretionary funds within its budget.
Such financial support may include matching grants for new or experimental State-based export enhancement programs that are not specifically authorized by Congress but that have the potential to facilitate exporting by small businesses.
IMPROVING INFORMATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE AVAILABLE TO HELP SMALL BUSINESSES COMPLY WITH EXPORT CONTROL REQUIREMENTS.
Not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, Federal agencies involved in administering controls and regulations concerning the export of goods and services from the United States shall, in consultation with small businesses, State departments of trade, State-based industry trade associations, international freight forwarding companies, and other State-based providers of export assistance to small businesses, establish and implement a plan to-- (1) consolidate information regarding rules and restrictions on exports and make it available in a format that is easily accessible by small businesses that seek to export; and (2) create an outreach program to inform small businesses seeking to export of relevant rules and restrictions on exports and to provide technical assistance for complying with those rules and restrictions.
IMPROVING EFFICIENCY TO REALIZE SAVINGS TO PAY FOR IMPROVED SMALL BUSINESS EXPORT ASSISTANCE.
Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the International Trade Administration, in consultation with other Federal agencies that provide export assistance services (including trade finance and insurance), shall submit to Congress a plan to consolidate or eliminate programs that provide substantially similar export assistance services or provide export assistance services to substantially similar recipients.
The plan shall identify savings of not less than $100,000,000 per year, to be achieved primarily through improved efficiency, streamlining, and targeting of resources to sectors with high export potential.