This Act may be cited as the ``Motor Carrier Fuel Cost Equity Act of 2000''.
In General.--Chapter 137 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Fuel surcharge ``(a) Mandatory Fuel Surcharge.-- ``(1) Assessment of surcharge.--Any motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder subject to jurisdiction under chapter 135 regularly providing truck-load transportation service shall assess under each contract or agreement for such service the payor of transportation charges a surcharge under this section, or a surcharge or other fuel cost adjustment permitted under section 13715, for fuel used in the transportation provided to such payor commencing when an increase in the price of such fuel surpasses the benchmark in paragraph (2).
A surcharge assessed under this section by the motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder shall be calculated on the basis of mileage or percentage of revenue (whichever basis the motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder elects) and shall be the amount necessary to compensate the motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder or other person responsible for paying for fuel for the difference in the price of fuel between the Current Fuel Price and the Fuel Price Norm determined under paragraph (2).
Benchmark.-- ``(A) In general.--The benchmark referred to in paragraph (1) is the difference between the Current Fuel Price and the Fuel Price Norm, when such difference exceeds $0.05.
Current fuel price.--The Current Fuel Price referred to in paragraph (1) and subparagraph (A) shall be determined from the latest weekly Energy Information Administration's Average Retail On-Highway Diesel Prices, National United States Reports Average, as published by the Department of Energy.
Fuel price norm.--The Fuel Price Norm referred to in paragraph (1) and subparagraph (A) shall be determined by calculating the latest 52-week average of the Average Retail On-Highway Diesel Prices referred to in subparagraph (B).
Implementation.--The surcharge referred to in subsection (a)(1) shall be-- ``(1) calculated on the date the shipment is tendered to the motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder; ``(2) itemized separately on the motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder's invoices; and ``(3) paid by the payor of the related transportation charges.
Factors.--For purposes of calculating a surcharge under this section-- ``(1) average fuel economy is 5 miles per gallon for calendar year 2000 and shall be determined on January 1 of such year thereafter by the Secretary of Transportation; and ``(2) mileage means the number of paid miles driven as determined under the Department of Defense, Military Traffic Management Command's `Defense Table of Official Distances'.
Limitation on Authority.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, any action to enforce this section under section 14704 may only be brought by the motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder that provided the transportation services against the payor of the transportation charges or by the payor of the transportation charges against the motor carrier, broker, of freight forwarder that provided the transportation services.
In such action, a court shall only have the authority to determine whether a fuel surcharge assessed under this section has been assessed or paid.
A court shall not have the authority in such action to review any other charges imposed by the provider of the transportation services.
Neither the Secretary of Transportation nor the Surface Transportation Board shall have regulatory or enforcement authority relating to provisions of this section.
Effective Period.--Subsections (a) through (d) and section 13715 shall be in effect beginning the 60th day following the date of the enactment of this section and ending September 30, 2003.
Negotiated fuel adjustments ``(a) In General.--Nothing in section 13714 shall be construed to abrogate provisions relating to fuel cost adjustments in any transportation contract or agreement in effect on the date of the enactment of the Motor Carrier Fuel Cost Equity Act of 2000 and any renewal of such a contract or agreement thereafter.
Nothing in this section and sections 13714 and 14102 shall be construed to prohibit any motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder from including any reasonable privately negotiated fuel cost adjustment provision in any contract or agreement to provide transportation.
Continuation of Authority.--Nothing in section 13714 shall impair the ability of any person to enter into any contract or agreement after the date of the enactment of the Motor Carrier Fuel Cost Equity Act of 2000 that provides for a fuel adjustment under this section or section 13714 during any period in which no fuel surcharge is required under section 13714.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 137 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``13714.
Section 14102 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Mandatory Pass-Through to Cost Bearer.-- ``(1) In general.--A motor carrier, broker, or freight forwarder providing transportation or service using motor vehicles not owned by it and using fuel not paid for by it-- ``(A) shall pass through to the person responsible for paying for fuel any fuel surcharge required pursuant to section 13714, or fuel cost adjustment permitted under section 13715, or provided for in transportation contracts or agreements; ``(B) shall disclose in writing to the person responsible for paying for fuel the amount of all freight rates and charges and fuel surcharges under section 13714 and fuel cost adjustments permitted under section 13715 applicable to such transportation or service; and ``(C) is prohibited from-- ``(i) intentionally reducing compensatory transportation costs (other than the fuel surcharge) to the person responsible for paying for fuel for the purpose of adjusting for or avoiding the pass through of the fuel surcharge; and ``(ii) intentionally imposing a fuel cost adjustment in accordance with section 13715 for the purpose of avoiding any payment under this section or section 13714.
Limitation on authority.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this part, the person responsible for paying for fuel may only bring an action to enforce this section under section 14704 against the motor carrier, freight forwarder, or broker providing the transportation services with vehicles not owned by it.
Neither the Secretary of Transportation nor the Surface Transportation Board shall have regulatory or enforcement authority relating to provisions of this subsection.
Effective period.--Paragraphs (1) and (2) shall be in effect beginning the 60th day following the date of the enactment of this section and ending September 30, 2003.''.
Passed the House of Representatives October 10, 2000.