.--The Secretary may not implement any revenue raising measure recommended by the Commission in the report transmitted under section 5(c)(1) if, within the 45-day period beginning on March 1, 1998, a joint resolution is enacted, in accordance with the provisions of sections 8 and 10, disapproving the recommendations of the Commission.
The days on which either House of Congress is not in session because of an adjournment of more than 3 days to a day certain shall be excluded in the computation of such 45-day period.
Establishment.--There is established the Secretary of the Treasury's Creative Revenues Commission.
Membership.--The Commission shall consist of 11 members, appointed by the Secretary of Treasury, who have broad experience in Government and in tax and revenue issues.
The Secretary shall designate 2 Chairpersons from among the members of the Commission.
The Secretary shall appoint the members of the Commission not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Duties.-- (1) Report.--The Commission shall transmit to the Secretary, not later than December 31, 1997, a report containing a description of-- (A) all revenue raising measures which the Commission considered; (B) the revenue raising measures which the Commission recommends; (C) the rationale of the Commission for such recommendations; and (D) the manner in which such recommendations, in the aggregate, if implemented, would balance the Federal tax burden equally between corporations and individuals.
Transmission to committees.--The Commission shall, on the same date on which the Commission transmits the report to the Secretary under subparagraph (A), transmit to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate-- (A) a copy of such report; and (B) a statement certifying that the Commission has identified the revenue raising measures to be implemented by reviewing-- (i) various forms of taxation that exist in different countries; (ii) other possible ways for the Federal Government to raise revenue; and (iii) possible ways to balance the Federal tax burden equally between corporations and individuals.
Administration.-- (1) Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation for their work on the Commission, except that members who are not employees of the United States (determined without regard to service on the Commission) may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as authorized under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons serving intermittently in the Government service, to the full extent funds are available (subject to appropriations).
The Secretary shall provide the Commission with such administrative services, facilities, staff, and other support services as may be necessary.
Subject to appropriations, any expenses of the Commission shall be paid from such funds as may be available to the Secretary.
Not more than one-half of the professional staff of the Commission shall be individuals who have been employed by the Department of the Treasury during calendar year 1997 in any capacity other than as an employee of the Commission.
The Commission shall be in place and operating as soon as possible, shortly after which time the Commission shall brief the Secretary on the Commission's plan of action.
The report transmitted under subsection (c)(1) shall include a recommendation for a revenue raising measure only if such recommendation is approved by a vote of a majority of the members of the Commission.
As part of each annual budget request for the Department of the Treasury, the Secretary shall transmit to the appropriate committees of the Congress-- (1) a schedule of the revenue raising measures to be implemented under this Act in the fiscal year for which the request is made; (2) an estimate of the total expenditures required by each such revenue raising measure; (3) an estimate of the Federal Government cost savings to be achieved, or cost increases to be generated, by each such revenue raising measure and of the time period in which such savings or increases are to be achieved or generated; and (4) an estimate of the amounts of the increases or decreases, in the amounts of Federal tax paid by individual and corporate taxpayers of various incomes, to be generated or achieved by each such revenue raising measure and of the time period in which such increases or decreases are to be generated or achieved.
Account.--There is hereby established in the Treasury of the United States an account to be known as the ``Department of the Treasury Revenue Reform Account'', which shall be administered by the Secretary as a single account.
Amounts Deposited Into Account.--There shall be deposited into the Account-- (1) funds authorized for and appropriated to the Account with respect to fiscal year 1999 and fiscal years beginning thereafter; and (2) any funds that the Secretary may, subject to approval in an appropriation Act, transfer to the Account from funds appropriated to the Department of the Treasury for any purpose, except that such funds may be transferred only after the date on which the Secretary transmits written notice of, and justification for, such transfer to the appropriate committees of the Congress.
Use of Account Funds.--The Secretary may use the funds in the Account only for the purposes of implementing revenue raising measures under this Act.
Annual Reports.--Not later than 60 days after the end of each fiscal year in which the Secretary carries out activities under this Act, the Secretary shall transmit a report to the appropriate committees of Congress of the amount and nature of the deposits into, and the expenditures from, the Account during such fiscal year and of the amount and nature of other expenditures made by the Secretary pursuant to implementation of revenue raising measures under this Act during such fiscal year.
Transfer of Unobligated Funds.--Unobligated funds which remain in the Account after September 30, 2002, shall be held in the Account until transferred by law after the appropriate committees of the Congress receive the report transmitted under subsection (f).
Final Report.--Not later than November 30, 2002, the Secretary shall transmit to the appropriate committees of the Congress a report containing an accounting of-- (1) all of the funds deposited into and expended from the Account or otherwise expended by the Secretary under this Act; and (2) any amount remaining in the Account.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF REGULATORY REFORMS RECOMMENDED IN COMMISSION REPORT.
Terms of Resolution.--For purposes of section 4(b), the term ``joint resolution'' means only a joint resolution which is introduced before March 15, 1998, and-- (1) which does not have a preamble; (2) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``That Congress disapproves the recommendations of the Creative Revenues Commission established by the Secretary of the Treasury as submitted to the Secretary of the Treasury on ________'', the blank space being appropriately filled in; and (3) the title of which is as follows: ``Joint resolution disapproving the recommendations of the Creative Revenues Commission.''.
Referral.--A resolution described in subsection (a) and introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House.
A resolution described in subsection (a) and introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF NON-REGULATORY REFORMS RECOMMENDED IN COMMISSION REPORT.
Introduction.--Not later than March 14, 1998, the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the President pro tempore of the Senate shall introduce, in their respective houses, legislation to implement the measures which are recommended in the report transmitted under section 5(c)(1) and which may not be implemented by regulatory action.
Referral.--Legislation described in subsection (a) and introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House.
Legislation described in subsection (a) and introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Finance of the Senate.
Discharge.--If the committee to which reform legislation is referred has not reported such reform legislation (or identical legislation) before March 15, 1998, such committee shall be, as of March 15, 1998, discharged from further consideration of such reform legislation, and such reform legislation shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.-- (1) On or after the third day after the date on which the committee to which such reform legislation is referred has reported, or has been discharged (under subsection (a)) from further consideration of, such reform legislation, it is in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of such reform legislation (but only on the day after the calendar day on which such Member announces to the House concerned the Member's intention to do so).
All points of order against such reform legislation (and against consideration of such reform legislation) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of such reform legislation is agreed to, the respective House shall immediately proceed to consideration of such reform legislation without intervening motion, order, or other business, and such reform legislation shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate on such reform legislation, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing such reform legislation.
An amendment to such reform legislation is not in order.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit such reform legislation is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which such reform legislation is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on such reform legislation, and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of such reform legislation shall occur.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to such reform legislation shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by Other House.-- (1) If, before the passage by one House of reform legislation, that House receives from the other House such a reform legislation, then the following procedures shall apply: (A) Such reform legislation of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House receiving it except in the case of final passage as provided in subparagraph (B)(ii).
With respect to such reform legislation of the House receiving the reform legislation-- (i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if such reform legislation had not been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on such reform legislation of the other House.
Upon disposition of the reform legislation received from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider such reform legislation that originated in the receiving House.
Rules of the Senate and House.--This section, and sections 8 and 9, are enacted by the Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such are deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but are applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a reform legislation, and supersede other rules only to the extent inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time in the same manner, and to the same extent, as in the case of any other rule of that House.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Account.--The term ``Account'' means the Department of the Treasury Revenue Reform Account established by section 7(a).
Appropriate committees of congress.--The term ``appropriate committees of Congress'' means the Committee on Ways and Means of the House, the Committee on Finance of the Senate, and the Committees on Appropriations of the House and Senate.
Creative revenues commission; commission.--The terms ``Creative Revenues Commission'' and ``Commission'' mean the Secretary of the Treasury's Creative Revenues Commission established by section 5.
Reform legislation.--The term ``reform legislation'' means a resolution described in section 8(a) or legislation described in section 9(a).
Revenue raising measure.--The term ``revenue raising measure'' means a proposal to amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, a proposal to implement a regulatory change to enforcement or interpretation of such Code, or any other proposal to raise revenue for the Federal Government.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
HR 2526 IH----2 HR 2526 IH----3