This Act may be cited as the ``Investment for America Act''.
REINSTATEMENT OF 10-PERCENT DOMESTIC INVESTMENT TAX CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amount of investment credit) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) the domestic investment credit.''
Amount of Credit.--Section 48 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) Domestic Investment Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 46, the domestic investment credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to 10 percent of the qualified investment for such taxable year.
Qualified investment.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the qualified investment for any taxable year is the aggregate of-- ``(i) the applicable percentage of the basis of each new domestic section 38 property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year, plus ``(ii) the applicable percentage of the cost of each used domestic section 38 property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable percentage for any property shall be determined under paragraphs (2) and (7) of section 46(c) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
Certain rules made applicable.--The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 48 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this paragraph.
Domestic section 38 property.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `domestic section 38 property' means any section 38 property if-- ``(A) the property was completed in the United States, and ``(B) at least 60 percent of the basis of the property is attributable to value added within the United States.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `United States' includes the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the possessions of the United States.
Section 38 property.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `section 38 property' means-- ``(A) tangible personal property (other than an air conditioning or heating unit), or ``(B) other tangible property (not including a building and its structural components) but only if such property-- ``(i) is used as an integral part of manufacturing, production, or extraction or of furnishing transportation, communications, electrical energy, gas, water, or sewage disposal services, or ``(ii) constitutes a research facility used in connection with any of the activities referred to in clause (i), or ``(iii) constitutes a facility used in connection with any of the activities referred to in clause (i) for the bulk storage of fungible commodities (including commodities in a liquid or gaseous state), or ``(C) elevators and escalators, but only if-- ``(i) the construction, reconstruction, or erection of the elevator or escalator is completed by the taxpayer, or ``(ii) the original use of such elevator or escalator commences with the taxpayer, or ``(D) single purpose agricultural or horticultural structures; or ``(E) a storage facility (not including a building and its structural components) used in connection with the distribution of petroleum or any primary product of petroleum.
Such term includes only property to which section 168 applies without regard to any useful life and any other property with respect to which depreciation (or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable and having a useful life (determined as of the time such property is placed in service) of 3 years or more.
Coordination with other credits.--This subsection shall not apply to any property to which the energy credit or rehabilitation credit would apply unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such credits to such property.
Certain progress expenditure rules made applicable.-- Rules similar to rules of subsection (c)(4) and (d) of section 46 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (C) of section 49(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: ``(iv) the basis of any new domestic section 38 property and the cost of any used domestic section 38 property.''
Subparagraph (E) of section 50(a)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or 48(c)(6)'' before the period at the end thereof.
Paragraph (5) of section 50(a) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(D) Special rules for certain property.--In the case of any domestic section 38 property which is 3- year property (within the meaning of section 168(e))-- ``(i) the percentage set forth in clause (ii) of the table contained in paragraph (1)(B) shall be 66 percent, ``(ii) the percentage set forth in clause (iii) of such table shall be 33 percent, and ``(iii) clauses (iv) and (v) of such table shall not apply.''
(A) The section heading for section 48 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 48 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to periods after December 31, 1994, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
CREDIT FOR PURCHASES OF DOMESTIC DURABLE GOODS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
PURCHASES OF DOMESTIC DURABLE GOODS.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 7 percent of the aggregate amount paid during the taxable year for the purchase of domestic durable goods.
Domestic Durable Goods.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `domestic durable good' means any durable good if-- ``(A) the property was completed in the United States, and ``(B) at least 60 percent of the basis of the property is attributable to value added within the United States.
United states.--The term `United States' includes the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico and the possessions of the United States.
Limitation.--The amount of the credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed $1,000.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart A is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
Purchases of domestic durable goods.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.
CREDIT FOR CERTAIN COSTS INCURRED IN PURCHASING AN AMERICAN- MADE PASSENGER VEHICLE.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 23 (as added by section 3 of this Act) the following new section: ``SEC.
CERTAIN COSTS INCURRED IN PURCHASING AN AMERICAN-MADE PASSENGER VEHICLE.
In General.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified payments made by the taxpayer during such year.
Qualified Payments.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified payments' means any payment of-- ``(1) any State or local sales tax imposed on the purchase by the taxpayer of any qualified automobile, and ``(2) any interest on any loan which is secured by a qualified automobile and which was incurred by the taxpayer to purchase such automobile.
Qualified Automobile.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified automobile' means any automobile (as defined in section 4064(b))-- ``(1) which is purchased after December 31, 1994, ``(2) which is domestically produced, ``(3) the original use of which begins with the taxpayer, and ``(4) substantially all of the use of which is for personal, nonbusiness purposes.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, an automobile is domestically produced if more than 60 percent of the automobile is produced in the United States and its final assembly occurs in the United States.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction or credit shall be allowed under any other provision of this title for any payment for which a credit is allowable under this section.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart A is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 23 the following new item: ``Sec.
Certain costs incurred in purchasing an American-made passenger vehicle.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 1994.
PLACEMENT OF MADE IN AMERICA LABELS ON PRODUCTS.
Requirements for Use of Labels.--No product may bear a label which states or suggests that the product was made in America unless-- (1) the product has been registered with the Department of Commerce under subsection (b); and (2) the Secretary of Commerce has determined that-- (A) 60 percent of the product was manufactured in the United States; and (B) final assembly of the product took place in the United States.
Registry of American-Made Products.--Not later than 12 months after the Secretary has promulgated regulations regarding the registration of products with the Department of Commerce under this section, a person shall register with the Department of Commerce any product on which there is or will be affixed a label which states or suggests that the product was made in America.
Penalties for Fraudulent Use of Labels.-- (1) Civil fine.--Any person who, with an intent to defraud or mislead, places on a product a label which states or suggests that the product was ``made in America'' in violation of this section may be assessed a civil penalty by the Secretary of not more than $100,000.
The Secretary may issue an order assessing such civil penalty only after notice and an opportunity for an agency hearing on the record.
The validity of such order may not be reviewed in an action to collect such civil penalty.
Injunctive relief.--The Secretary may bring an action to enjoin the violation of, or to compel compliance with, this section, whenever the Secretary believes that such a violation has occurred or is about to occur.
Regulations.--Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations establishing procedures under which a person shall register a product under this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Label.--The term ``label'' means any written, printed, or graphic matter on, or attached to, a product or any of its containers or wrappers.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.