This Act may be cited as the ``Naturalization Improvements Act of 1995''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) According to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, by April 1995, 5,300,000 adults and about 700,000 children will be eligible for citizenship.
About 3,000,000 immigrants who were legalized under the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 will also be eligible for citizenship.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service estimates that about 338,445 naturalization cases were pending at the end of fiscal year 1994.
According to the Immigration and Naturalization Service, applications increased 78 percent from October 1994 to January 1995, compared with the same period the year before.
The percentage increase in citizenship applications ranged from 9 percent in San Antonio to 301 percent in Los Angeles.
According to the American Immigration Lawyers Association, estimates of the time it takes from filing the citizenship application to being interviewed range from 60 days to over 2 years.
In addition to the enormous backlog in applications, the following are also included as barriers to successfully completing the citizenship process: lack of outreach and information services available to the eligible population to inform potential applicants about the benefits and legal consequences of becoming a citizen; insufficient information and counseling on the application process itself; and lack of access to English language and citizenship preparation classes.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service cites lack of English language skills as the primary reason applicants are denied citizenship.
There is no Federal program that is specifically targeted to the educational needs of immigrants wishing to naturalize.
President Clinton's fiscal year 1996 budget proposal requests $7,000,000 for Immigration and Naturalization Service's citizenship and relating operating expenses as compared with $1,000,000,000 for border enforcement and assistance to States.
The following is the sense of the Congress: (1) The right of citizenship through naturalization underlies the greatness of our Nation in the same way that citizenship by birth does.
The rights accorded by the Constitution and the laws of the United States upon citizens and those lawfully in the United States, as well as upon those who are entitled to seek legal status under current law, must not be forsaken, weakened, nor compromised.
Reducing rights or services for everyone undermines our sense of responsibility as a democracy.
Naturalization should become a national priority to ensure that all residents are able to participate fully in the rights and responsibilities that go along with United States citizenship.
It is the responsibility of the Federal Government to provide the services necessary for naturalization.
In order to reduce the backlog of pending United States citizenship applications in Immigration and Naturalization Service offices across the country, the Immigration and Naturalization Service should increasingly privatize the administration of the oral English and written civics exam.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service should determine the appropriate agencies experienced in educational testing to assist with this part of the naturalization process.
In order to privatize the administration of the English oral and written civic exams, the Immigration and Naturalization Service should develop a national standard for each exam.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service should then determine what the standard will consist of and how to administer the standard after it has been established.
The Immigration and Naturalization Service should publicize the opportunity to take the oral English and written civics exams with a private agency authorized by the Immigration and Naturalization Service as an alternative to testing with the Immigration and Naturalization Service.
The inclusion of private agencies authorized by the Immigration and Naturalization Service to administer the English oral and written civics exams will give applicants the opportunity to complete the naturalization process with greater efficiency.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Immigration and Naturalization Service such sums as may be necessary for the following: (1) To restructure and streamline Immigration and Naturalization Service procedures to reduce delays in the naturalization process.
To promote local level, cooperative agreements between the Immigration and Naturalization Service and community organizations and institute administrative reforms to minimize delays and promote outreach to the immigrant community.
To expand current services to suburbs and target populations with special challenges such as the elderly.
To continue and expand collaborative arrangements among nonprofit, government, and private sector entities to deliver citizenship services (including outreach and adult education classes) as effectively and efficiently as possible.
To upgrade equipment and technology used to report on naturalization statistics and the naturalization application process.