This Act may be cited as the ``DebtPatriots.Gov Act of 2011''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the total public debt as of November 17, 2011, is over $15 trillion and that every American's share is $47,080; (2) www.pay.gov, launched in October 2000, is a secure Government-wide collection portal, which is Web-based and allows customers to access their accounts from any computer with Internet access; (3) www.pay.gov satisfies agencies and consumers demands for electronic alternatives by providing the ability to complete forms, make payments, and submit queries 24 hours a day electronically; (4) citizens who wish to make a general donation to the United States Government may send contributions to a specific account called ``Gifts to the United States'', an account established in 1843 to accept gifts, such as bequests, from individuals wishing to express their patriotism to the United States; (5) citizens who wish to make a general donation to a specific account called ``Gifts to Reduce the Public Debt of the United States'' may use TreasuryDirect, a section of www.pay.gov and Treasury Direct_x0004_; (6) gifts to reduce the public debt are accepted under the provisions of section 3113 of title 31, United States Code, which authorizes the Secretary of the Treasury to accept conditional gifts to the United States for the purpose of reducing the public debt; (7) gifts to reduce the public debt are voluntary donations, and no goods, services, or other considerations are provided to the donors, including, but not limited to, benefits on future tax liability; and (8) gifts to reduce the public debt do not supersede the constitutional powers nor the responsibility of Congress to ``pay the debts'', as described in article I, section 8 of the Constitution of the United States.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to publically recognize the patriotism of certain individuals and corporations which are willing to contribute additional funds, above and beyond their tax obligations, in order to reduce the public debt of the United States.
In General.--Using the existing infrastructure of www.pay.gov, the Secretary of the Treasury shall create a new Web site, www.DebtPatriots.gov, to specifically receive gifts to reduce the public debt.
The Web site shall be known as ``Gifts to Reduce the Public Debt'' and shall include the following: (1) Improved features and user interface from the existing infrastructure for ease of use.
An easily accessible domain name, www.DebtPatriots.gov.
an opt-in check-box to allow donor names to be publically recognized for their donation.
A linked Web site on which the publically recognized donors can be published according to the following levels of donation: (A) Corporation Award Levels: (i) Corporate Founder ($50B).
Corporate Son of Liberty ($10B).
Corporate Constitutional Delegate ($1B).
Individual Award Levels (Premium): (i) Premium Founding Father/Mother ($1B).
Premium Son/Daughter of Liberty ($500M).
Premium Constitutional Delegate ($100M).
Individual Award Levels: (i) Founding Father/Mother ($100K).
Son/Daughter of Liberty ($10K).
A clearly published list of the aforementioned award levels on DebtPatriots.Gov.
A printable form and address for those who prefer to make a gift through the mail by check.
Required Links to Web Site.--The Secretary of the Treasury and the President shall provide a link to this Web site on their main pages.
The President shall issue a signed certification of appreciation recognizing the award level of each donor who contributes to ``Gifts to Reduce the Public Debt''.