This Act may be cited as the ``Highway Innovation and Cost Savings Act''.
TAX-EXEMPT FINANCING OF QUALIFIED HIGHWAY INFRASTRUCTURE CONSTRUCTION.
Treatment as Exempt Facility Bond.--A bond described in subsection (b) shall be treated as described in section 141(e)(1)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, except that section 146 of such Code shall not apply to such bond.
Bond Described.-- (1) In general.--A bond is described in this subsection if such bond is issued after the date of enactment of this Act as part of an issue-- (A) 95 percent or more of the net proceeds of which are to be used to provide a qualified highway infrastructure project, and (B) to which there has been allocated a portion of the allocation to the project under paragraph (2)(C)(ii) which is equal to the aggregate face amount of bonds to be issued as part of such issue.
Qualified highway infrastructure projects.-- (A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term ``qualified highway infrastructure project'' means a project-- (i) for the construction or reconstruction of a highway, and (ii) designated under subparagraph (B) as an eligible pilot project.
Eligible pilot project.-- (i) In general.--The Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall select not more than 15 highway infrastructure projects to be pilot projects eligible for tax-exempt financing.
Eligibility criteria.--In determining the criteria necessary for the eligibility of pilot projects, the Secretary of Transportation shall include the following: (I) The project must serve the general public.
The project is necessary to evaluate the potential of the private sector's participation in the provision, maintenance, and operation of the highway infrastructure of the United States.
The project must be located on publicly-owned rights-of-way.
The project must be publicly owned or the ownership of the highway constructed or reconstructed under the project must revert to the public.
The project must be consistent with a transportation plan developed pursuant to section 134(g) or 135(e) of title 23, United States Code.
Aggregate face amount of tax-exempt financing.-- (i) In general.--The aggregate face amount of bonds issued pursuant to this section shall not exceed $15,000,000,000, determined without regard to any bond the proceeds of which are used exclusively to refund (other than to advance refund) a bond issued pursuant to this section (or a bond which is a part of a series of refundings of a bond so issued) if the amount of the refunding bond does not exceed the outstanding amount of the refunded bond.
Allocation.--The Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall allocate the amount described in clause (i) among the eligible pilot projects designated under subparagraph (B), based on the extent to which-- (I) the projects use new technologies, construction techniques, or innovative cost controls that result in savings in building or operating the projects, and (II) the projects address local, regional, or national transportation needs.
Reallocation.--If any portion of an allocation under clause (ii) is unused on the date which is 3 years after such allocation, the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, may reallocate such portion among the remaining eligible pilot projects.