This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Community Learning Centers Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) a local public school often serves as a center for the delivery of education and human resources for all members of a community; (2) public schools, primarily in rural and inner city communities, should collaborate with other public and nonprofit agencies and organizations, local businesses, educational entities (such as vocational and adult education programs, school to work programs, community colleges, and universities), recreational, cultural, and other community and human service entities for the purpose of meeting the needs and expanding the opportunities available to the residents of the communities served by such schools; (3) by using school facilities, equipment, and resources, communities can promote a more efficient use of public education facilities, especially in rural and inner city areas where limited financial resources have enhanced the necessity for local public schools to become social service centers; (4) the high technology, global economy of the 21st century will require lifelong learning to keep America's workforce competitive and successful, local public schools should provide centers for lifelong learning and educational opportunities for individuals of all ages; and (5) 21st Century Community Learning Centers enable the entire community to develop an education strategy that addresses the educational needs of all members of local communities.
PROGRAM AUTHORIZATION AND DISTRIBUTION.
Grants by the Secretary.--The Secretary is authorized in accordance with the provisions of this subsection to make grants to rural and inner city schools or consortia thereof to plan, implement, or to expand projects that benefit the educational, health, social service, cultural, and recreational needs of a rural or inner city community.
No school or consortia thereof shall receive a grant award of less than $50,000 in each fiscal year; and (2) such grant projects do not exceed a 3-year period.
Application.--To be eligible to receive funds under this Act, a school or consortia thereof shall submit an application to the Secretary of Education at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may reasonably prescribe, that shall include-- (1) a comprehensive local plan that enables such school to serve as a center for the delivery of education and human resources for members of a community; and (2) an initial evaluation of needs, available resources, and goals and objectives for the proposed community education program to determine programs that will be developed to address these needs: (A) A mechanism to disseminate information in a manner that is understandable and accessible to the community.
Identification of Federal, State, and local programs to be merged or coordinated so that public resources may be maximized.
A description of the collaborative efforts of community-based organizations, related public agencies, businesses, or other appropriate organizations.
A description of how the school will assist as a delivery center for existing and new services, especially inter-active telecommunication used for education and professional training.
The establishment of a facility utilization policy that specifically states rules and regulations for building and equipment use and supervision guidelines.
Priority.--The Secretary shall give priority to applications that offer a broad selection of services that address the needs of the community.
Authorized Programs.--Grants awarded under this Act may be used to plan, implement, or expand community learning centers which shall include not less than 4 of the following activities: (1) Literacy education programs.
Children's day care services.
Integrated education, health, social service, recreational, or cultural programs.
Summer and weekend school programs in conjunction with summer recreation programs.
Nutrition, health, and/or physical therapy.
Expanded library service hours to serve community needs.
Telecommunications and technology education programs for all ages.
Parenting skills education programs.
Support and training for child day care providers.
Employment counseling, training, and placement.
Services for students who withdraw from school before graduating high school, regardless of age.
Services for individuals who are either physically or mentally challenged.
In General.--In approving grants under this part, the Secretary shall assure an equitable distribution of assistance among the States, among urban and rural areas of the United States, and among urban and rural areas of a State.
Grant Period--Grants may be awarded for a period not to exceed 3 years.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Community Learning Center'' means the provision of educational, recreational, health, and social service programs for residents of all ages of a local community in public school buildings, primarily in rural and inner city areas, operated by the local educational agency in conjunction with local governmental agencies, businesses, vocational education programs, community colleges, universities, and cultural, recreational, and other community and human service entities; and (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
There are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1995 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 1999.