This Act may be cited as the ``Sudbury, Assabet and Concord Wild and Scenic Rivers Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Title VII of Public Law 101-628-- (A) designated a 29 mile segment of the Sudbury, Assabet, and Concord Rivers for study of potential addition to the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, and (B) directed the Secretary of the Interior to establish the Sudbury, Assabet, and Concord River Study Committee (in this Act referred to as the ``Study Committee'') to advise the Secretary of the Interior in conducting the study and concerning management alternatives should the river be included in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System.
The study determined that all three segments of these rivers are eligible for inclusion in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System based upon their free-flowing condition and outstanding scenic, recreation, wildlife, literary, and historic values.
The towns that directly abut the segments, including Framingham, Sudbury, Wayland, Lincoln, Concord, Bedford, Carlisle, and Billerica, Massachusetts, have each demonstrated their desire for National Wild and Scenic River Designation through town meeting votes endorsing designation.
During the study, the Study Committee and the National Park Service prepared a comprehensive management plan for the segment, entitled ``Sudbury, Assabet and Concord Wild and Scenic River Study, River Conservation Plan'', dated March 16, 1995, which establishes objectives, standards, and action programs that will ensure long-term protection of the rivers' outstanding values and compatible management of their land and water resources.
The Study Committee voted unanimously on February 23, 1995, to recommend that the Congress include these segments in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System for management in accordance with the River Conservation Plan.
WILD, SCENIC, AND RECREATIONAL RIVER DESIGNATION.
Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``( ) Sudbury, assabet and concord rivers, massachusetts.-- ``(A) In general.--The 29 miles of river segments in Massachusetts consisting of the Sudbury River from the Danforth Street Bridge in Framingham downstream to its confluence with the Assabet River at Egg Rock; the Assabet River from a point 1,000 feet downstream of the Damondale Dam in Concord to its confluence with the Sudbury River at Egg Rock; and the Concord River from its origin at Egg Rock in Concord downstream to the Route 3 bridge in Billerica (in this paragraph referred to as the `segments'), as scenic and recreational river segments.
The segments shall be administered by the SUASCO River Stewardship Council established under subparagraph (B) in cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, through cooperative agreements under section 10(e) between the Secretary and the Commonwealth of Massachusetts and its relevant political subdivisions (including the towns of Framingham, Wayland, Sudbury, Lincoln, Concord, Carlisle, Bedford, and Billerica), and shall be managed in accordance with the plan entitled ``Sudbury, Assabet and Concord Wild and Scenic River Study, River Conservation Plan'' dated March 16, 1995 (in this paragraph referred to as the `Plan').
The amount expended by the Federal Government for any activity implementing the Plan may not exceed 50 percent of the cost of the activity.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the cost of an activity includes the value of in-kind contributions used to carry out the activity.
The Plan is deemed to satisfy the requirement for a comprehensive management plan under section 3(d).
Management committee.--To assist in the long- term protection of the segments and the implementation of this paragraph and the Plan, the Secretary of the Interior shall establish the SUASCO River Stewardship Council (in this paragraph referred to as the `Council') within 90 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph.
The membership, functions, responsibilities, and administrative procedures of the Council shall be as set forth in the Plan.
The Council shall not be considered to be a Federal advisory committee, and shall not be subject to the provisions of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Federal role.--(i) The Director of the National Park Service (in this paragraph referred to as the `Director') or his or her designee shall represent the Secretary in the implementation of the Plan and the provisions of this Act with respect to the segments, including the review of proposed federally assisted water resources projects which could have a direct and adverse effect on the values for which the segment is established, as authorized under section 7(a).
Pursuant to section 10(e) and section 11(b)(1), the Director shall offer to enter into cooperative agreements with the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, its relevant political subdivisions, the Sudbury Valley Trustees, and the Organization for the Assabet River.
Such cooperative agreements shall be consistent with the Plan and may include provisions for financial or other assistance from the United States to facilitate the long-term protection, conservation and enhancement of the segment.
The Director may provide technical assistance, staff support, and funding to assist in the implementation of the Plan, except that the total cost to the Federal Government of activities to implement the Plan may not exceed $100,000 each fiscal year.
Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10(c), any portion of the segments not already within the National Park System shall not under this paragraph-- ``(I) become a part of the National Park System; ``(II) be managed by the National Park System; or ``(III) be subject to regulations which govern the National Park System.
Water resources projects.--(i) In determining whether a proposed water resources project would have a direct and adverse effect on the values for which the segments were included in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, the Secretary shall specifically consider the extent to which the project is consistent with the Plan.
The Plan, including the detailed Water Resources Study incorporated by reference therein and such additional analysis as may be incorporated in the future, shall serve as the primary source of information regarding the flows needed to maintain instream resources and potential compatibility between resource protection and possible additional water withdrawals.
Land management.--(i) The zoning bylaws of the towns of Framingham, Sudbury, Wayland, Lincoln, Concord, Carlisle, Bedford, and Billerica, Massachusetts, as in effect on the date of enactment of this paragraph, are deemed to satisfy the standards and requirements under section 6(c).
For the purpose of section 6(c), the towns are deemed to be `villages' and the provisions of that section which prohibit Federal acquisition of lands shall apply.
The United States Government shall not acquire by any means title to land, easements, or other interests in land along the segments or their tributaries for the purposes of designation of the segments under this paragraph.
Nothing in this Act shall prohibit Federal acquisition of interests in land along the segments under other laws for other purposes.
Distinct lateral boundaries.--Notwithstanding anything in section 3(b) of this Act to the contrary, no distinct lateral boundary shall be established for the segments, as set forth in the Plan.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this paragraph not to exceed $100,000 for each fiscal year.