This Act may be cited as the ``Recreational Boating Safety Improvement Act of 1993''.
PERSONAL FLOTATION DEVICES REQUIRED FOR CHILDREN.
Prohibition.--Section 4307(a) of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2) by striking ``or'' after the semicolon at the end; (2) in paragraph (3) by striking the period and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) operate a recreational vessel under 26 feet in length unless each individual 12 years of age or younger wears a personal flotation device when the individual is on an open deck of the vessel when the vessel is underway.''.
State Authority Preserved.--Section 4307 of title 46, United States Code, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Subsection (a)(4) shall not be construed to limit the authority of a State to establish requirements relating to the wearing of personal flotation devices on recreational vessels that are more stringent than that subsection.''.
LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE AMOUNT OF BOATING SAFETY PROGRAM ALLOCATION USED FOR PUBLIC ACCESS SITES.
In General.--Section 13106(b)(4) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, except that not more than 25 percent of the amount allocated to a State for a fiscal year may be used by the State for these purposes''.
Application.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not apply to an amount allocated to a State for a fiscal year before fiscal year 1994.
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS BASED ON STATE ADOPTION OF LAWS REGARDING BOATING WHILE INTOXICATED.
Section 13103 of title 46, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsections (a), (b), and (c) in order as subsections (b), (c), and (d); (2) by inserting before subsection (b) (as so redesignated) the following new subsection: ``(a) Beginning in fiscal year 1998, the Secretary shall allocate $10,000,000 of the amounts available for allocation and distribution under this chapter for State recreational boating safety programs as follows: ``(1)(A) One-half shall be allocated among eligible States that prohibit operation of a recreational vessel by an individual who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs and that-- ``(i) establish a blood alcohol concentration limit of .10 percent or less; or ``(ii) provide that acceptable evidence of intoxication may include personal observation by a law enforcement officer of the effect of intoxicants consumed by the individual on the individual's manner, disposition, speech, muscular movement, general appearance, or behavior.
The amount allocated to a State under this paragraph for a fiscal year shall be in the same ratio to the total amount allocated under this paragraph for the fiscal year as the number of vessels numbered in that State under a system approved under chapter 123 of this title bears to the total number of vessels numbered under approved systems of all States that receive an allocation under this paragraph for that fiscal year.
(A) One-half shall be allocated among eligible States that prohibit operation of a recreational vessel by an individual who is under the influence of alcohol or drugs and that establish an implied consent requirement that specifies that an individual is deemed to have given their consent to evidentiary testing for their blood alcohol concentration or presence of other intoxicating substances.
The amount allocated to a State under this paragraph for a fiscal year shall be in the same ratio to the total amount allocated under this paragraph for the fiscal year as the number of vessels numbered in that State under a system approved under chapter 123 of this title bears to the total number of vessels numbered under approved systems of all States that receive an allocation under this paragraph for the fiscal year.
''; (3) in subsection (b) (as so redesignated) in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by inserting ``the balance of remaining'' after ``allocate''; and (4) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) A State shall not be ineligible for an allocation under subsection (a) because of the adoption by the State of any requirement relating to the operation of a recreational vessel while under the influence of alcohol or drugs that is more stringent than the requirements for receiving the allocation.''.
REQUIRING VIOLATORS TO TAKE RECREATIONAL BOATING SAFETY COURSE.
Section 4311 of title 46, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h)(1) A person who willfully operates a recreational vessel in violation of this chapter or a regulation prescribed under this chapter may be ordered to complete a qualified recreational boating safety course-- ``(A) in addition to any other civil penalty that is assessed for the violation, in the case of-- ``(i) a subsequent violation by the same person; or ``(ii) a violation that results in a personal injury; or ``(B) in lieu of any other civil penalty that is assessed for the violation, in the case of any other violation.
In this subsection, the term `qualified recreational boating safety course' means a recreational boating safety course that is approved by the Secretary of Transportation for purposes of this subsection.''.
Section 13108(a)(1) of title 46, United States Code, is amended by-- (1) striking ``proceeding'' and inserting ``preceding''; and (2) striking ``Secertary'' and inserting ``Secretary''.