ON-CALL PAY FOR CERTAIN TECHNICAL MEDICAL EMPLOYEES.
Title I of the Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 United States Code 1611 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ON-CALL PAY FOR CERTAIN TECHNICAL MEDICAL EMPLOYEES.
In General.--The Secretary shall pay a technical medical employee of the Service for such time as the technical medical employee is officially scheduled to be on call outside such technical medical employee's regular hours or on a holiday designated by Federal statute or Executive order for such time as the technical medical employee may be called back to work at a rate that is equal to 10 percent of the amount that is equal to one and \1/2\ times such technical medical employee's hourly rate of basic pay.
Technical Medical Employee.--For the purposes of this section, the term `technical medical employee' includes the following: ``(1) Medical technician.--An employee whose position is in the GS-0645 occupational series.
Such a position may involve nonprofessional technical work in clinical (medical) laboratories such as performing tests and examinations in one or more areas of work (such as chemistry, blood banking, hematology, or microbiology) where the reports of findings of tests and examinations may be used by physicians in diagnosis, care and treatment of patients, or in support of medical research.
The work may require a practical knowledge of the techniques of medical laboratory practice in one or more areas of clinical laboratory work (e.g., blood banking, chemistry, hematology, microbiology, and cytology) and of the chemistry, biology, and anatomy involved.
Medical technologist.--An employee whose position is in the GS-0644 occupational series.
Such a position may involve one or more of the following: ``(A) Technical work subordinate to the work of pathologists or other physicians (or other professional employee) who make the final diagnostic examinations of specimens of human tissues or cell preparations).
Technician work in histopathology involving preparation of thin sections of tissue specimens including fixing, clear, infiltrating, embedding, sectioning, staining, and mounting.
Technician work in cytology involving preparation, staining, and examining microscopically specimens of body fluids, secretions, and exudiations from any part of the body to determine whether cellar structure is normal, atypical, or abnormal.
Work requiring a practical knowledge of the techniques of anatomical laboratory practice in one or both of the areas of laboratory work (i.e.
histopathology and cytology) and of the chemistry, biology, and anatomy involved.
Diagnostic radiologic technologist or technician.--An employee whose position is in the GS-0647 occupational series.
Such a position may involve one or more of the following: ``(A) Performing most routine diagnostic radiographic procedures under general supervision and gains experience in the performance of more difficult techniques and procedures by assisting higher grade technologists.
Operating radiographic equipment to produce x-ray films of chest, joints, feet, hands, long bones of arms and legs, and other routine views of other parts of the body.
Working with outpatients or ambulatory patients, positions patients, and sets technical factors in accordance with standardized procedures and techniques.
Performing a variety of difficult radiographic examinations.
Receiving patients, explaining method of procedure, positions patient, selecting and setting technical factors, setting up and adjusting accessory equipment required, and making exposures necessary for the requested procedure.
Modifications.--The Secretary shall carry out the intent of this section so that it applies to-- ``(1) subsequent or additional occupational series designations or redesignations; and ``(2) modified or additional employee descriptions as such modifications or additions are necessary to correspond with technological advancements.
Exception for Rate of On-Call Pay.--An employee who is eligible for on-call pay under subsection (a) and who was receiving standby premium pay pursuant to section 5545 of title 5 on May 20, 1988, shall, as long as such employee is employed in the same position and work unit and remains eligible for such standby pay, receive pay for any period of on-call duty at the rate equal to the greater of-- ``(1) the rate of pay which such employee would receive if being paid the rate of standby pay pursuant to such section that such individual would be entitled to receive if such individual were not scheduled to be on call instead, or ``(2) the rate of pay which such employee is entitled to receive including on-call premium pay described in subsection (a).