This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Nurse Shortage Relief Act of 1993''.
GRANTS FOR PROGRAMS TO INCREASE NUMBER OF ACTIVE NURSES.
Subpart I of part A of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296k et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``nurse recruitment programs ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities to carry out programs-- ``(1) to promote nursing as a career choice and to educate the public regarding the value of the nursing profession; ``(2) to identify students in public secondary schools who show an interest in health care and provide such students with internships in the area of health care; ``(3) to promote the nursing profession in public secondary schools; and ``(4) to recruit nursing students, by using creative methods, from groups not traditionally well represented in the nursing profession, including men, minorities, and individuals who are pursuing a second career.
Application.--To receive a grant under this section, a public or private nonprofit entity shall submit an application to the Secretary as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Any amounts appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.''.
GRANTS FOR PROGRAMS TO ATTRACT INACTIVE NURSES BACK INTO NURSING PROFESSION.
Subpart I of part A of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296k et sequentes), as amended by section 2 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``inactive nurse reactivation and training programs ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to public and private nonprofit entities and schools of nursing to establish or assist programs-- ``(1) to encourage and assist nurses that are not practicing in the nursing profession to reenter the profession; ``(2) to train or educate nurses that are reentering the nursing profession and practicing nurses as nurse practitioners or nurse midwives or in areas of needed specialized nursing skills; and ``(3) to provide tuition assistance to students enrolled in educational programs designed to facilitate the reentry into the nursing profession of nurses that are not practicing in the nursing profession.
Application.--To receive a grant under this section, a public or private nonprofit entity or a school of nursing shall submit an application to the Secretary as the Secretary may require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Any amounts appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.''.
GRANTS FOR PROGRAMS TO RETAIN PRACTICING NURSES.
Subpart I of part A of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296k et sequentes), as amended by sections 2 and 3 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``practicing nurse retention programs ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to health care facilities to carry out programs-- ``(1) to demonstrate the use of innovative methods to increase the attractiveness to individuals of the nursing profession as a career choice through changes in traditional wage structures, flexible delivery and scheduling of employment options and benefits, and restructuring the role of nurses in the health care facilities; and ``(2) to demonstrate innovative methods of providing for advancement in careers in the nursing profession to encourage nurses and nurse assistants to continue education in nursing.
Application.--To receive a grant under this section, a health care facility shall submit an application to the Secretary as the Secretary may require.
Definition of Health Care Facility.--For purposes of this section, the term `health care facility' means a hospital, public health center, outpatient medical facility, rehabilitation facility, facility for long-term care, or other facility for the provision of health care services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section.
Any amounts appropriated under this section shall remain available until expended.''.
PROGRAM FOR LOANS FOR CONTINUED NURSE TRAINING AND LOAN FORGIVENESS TO NURSING STUDENTS.
Part B of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 297 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart V--Assistance for Nurses After Completion of Nursing School ``loans for continued nurse training ``Sec.
Establishment of Program.--The Secretary may establish a program to insure educational loans to individuals who have attained a degree as a registered nurse for educational expenses related to programs designed to train or educate nurses as nurse practitioners or nurse midwives or in areas of needed specialized nursing skills (as designated by the Secretary under section 860(a)(2)).
Organization of Program.--With respect to the program of Insured Health Education Assistance Loans to Graduate Students established in subpart I of part A of title VII, the provisions of such subpart shall, except as inconsistent with this section, apply to the program established under subsection (a) in the same manner and to the same extent as such provisions apply to the program established in such subpart I.
Budget Compliance.--The authority of the Secretary to insure loans under this section shall be effective for any fiscal year only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.
``student loan forgiveness program ``Sec.
Establishment.--The Secretary may carry out a program to enter into agreements with eligible individuals to assist in repaying, in the amounts specified in subsection (c), the eligible educational loans of the eligible individuals.
Eligible Borrowers.--An individual shall be eligible to receive assistance under this section if the individual-- ``(1)(A) is enrolled as a full-time student in a collegiate school of nursing in a program leading to the achievement of a degree as a registered nurse; and ``(B) agrees, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, to work full time as a registered nurse in a nursing crisis area; or ``(2)(A) has attained a degree as a registered nurse; ``(B) is enrolled in a program designed to train or educate the individual as a nurse practitioner or nurse midwife or regarding an area of a needed specialized nursing skill; and ``(C) agrees, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, to work full time after completion of the program as a registered nurse in a nursing crisis area in a position that utilizes such training or education.
Amount of Payments.--The program established by the Secretary under this section may pay to a holder of loans on behalf of an eligible individual, for each completed 12-month period of work as agreed to under paragraph (1)(B) or (2)(C) of subsection (b), an amount equal to the amount equal to the percentage of the total of the principal, interest, and related expenses of such educational loans of the eligible individual determined in accordance with the following table: ``Years of work completed Percentage of total of principal, Cumulative percentage of total of as agreed to as a full- interest, and related expenses of principal, interest, and related time registered nurse in a eligible loans repaid under this expenses of eligible loans repaid under nursing crisis area section for previous 12-month period this section 1......................... 20................................... 20 2......................... 20................................... 40 3......................... 45................................... 85 4......................... 15................................... 100 ``(d) Definition of Eligible Educational Loans.--For purposes of this section the term `eligible educational loan' means-- ``(1) for an individual eligible under subsection (b)(1), any educational loans received before the attainment by the individual of the position of registered nurse; and ``(2) for an individual eligible under subsection (b)(2), any educational loans relating to the program in which the individual participates pursuant to subparagraph (B) of such subsection.
Budget Compliance.--The authority of the Secretary to enter into agreements under this section to repay loans shall be effective for any fiscal year only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in appropriation Acts.''.
INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR CORPORATIONS WHICH PROVIDE SCHOLARSHIPS FOR NURSE TRAINING.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign tax credit, etc.)
is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``SEC.
SCHOLARSHIPS PROVIDED BY CORPORATIONS FOR NURSE TRAINING.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a C corporation, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 20 percent of the amount paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year as qualified nursing scholarships.
Qualified Nursing Scholarship Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified nursing scholarship' means any scholarship-- ``(1) which is excludable from the gross income of the recipient, and ``(2) which is received by an individual who is a candidate for a degree as a registered nurse or for a higher nursing degree for purposes of pursuing such a degree.
Application With Other Credits.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) the regular tax for the taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and sections 27, 28, and 29, over ``(2) the tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such subpart B is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Scholarships provided by corporations for nurse training.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.
Except as provided in section 6(c), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect upon the expiration of the 90-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.