This Act may be cited as the ``Missing and Exploited Children Task Force Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the victimization of children in our Nation has reached epidemic proportions; recent Department of Justice figures show that-- (A) 4,600 children were abducted by non-family members; (B) two-thirds of the abductions of children by non-family members involve sexual assault; (C) more than 354,000 children were abducted by family members; and (D) 451,000 children ran away; (2) while some local law enforcement officials have been successful in the investigation and resolution of such crimes, most local agencies lack the personnel and resources necessary to give this problem the full attention it requires; (3) a majority of the Nation's 17,000 police departments have 10 or fewer officers; and (4) locating missing children requires a coordinated law enforcement effort; supplementing local law enforcement agencies with a team of assigned active Federal agents will allow Federal agents to pool their resources and expertise in order to assist local agents in the investigation of the Nation's most difficult cases involving missing children.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a task force comprised of law enforcement officers from pertinent Federal agencies to work with the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children (referred to as the ``Center'') and coordinate the provision of Federal law enforcement resources to assist State and local authorities in investigating the most difficult cases of missing and exploited children.
ESTABLISHMENT OF TASK FORCE.
Title IV of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5771 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 407 and 408 as sections 408 and 409, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 406 the following new section: ``task force ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established a Missing and Exploited Children's Task Force (referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Task Force shall include at least 2 members from each of-- ``(A) the Federal Bureau of Investigation; ``(B) the Secret Service; ``(C) the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms; ``(D) the United States Customs Service; ``(E) the Postal Inspection Service; ``(F) the United States Marshals Service; and ``(G) the Drug Enforcement Administration.
Chief.--A representative of the Federal Bureau of Investigation (in addition to the members of the Task Force selected under paragraph (1)(A)) shall act as chief of the Task Force.
Selection.--(A) The Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation shall select the chief of the Task Force.
The heads of the agencies described in paragraph (1) shall submit to the chief of the Task Force a list of at least 5 prospective Task Force members, and the chief shall select 2, or such greater number as may be agreeable to an agency head, as Task Force members.
Professional qualifications.--The members of the Task Force shall be law enforcement personnel selected for their expertise that would enable them to assist in the investigation of cases of missing and exploited children.
Status.--A member of the Task Force shall remain an employee of his or her respective agency for all purposes (including the purpose of performance review), and his or her service on the Task Force shall be without interruption or loss of civil service privilege or status and shall be on a nonreimbursable basis.
Period of service.--(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a member shall serve on the Task Force for a period of 1 year, and may be selected to a renewal of service for 1 additional year.
The chief of the Task Force may at any time request the head of an agency described in paragraph (1) to submit a list of 5 prospective Task Force members to replace a member of the Task Force, for the purpose of maintaining a Task Force membership that will be able to meet the demands of its caseload.
Support.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator of the General Services Administration, in coordination with the heads of the agencies described in subsection (b)(1), shall provide the Task Force office space and administrative and support services, such office space to be in close proximity to the office of the Center, so as to enable the Task Force to coordinate its activities with that of the Center on a day-to-day basis.
Legal guidance.--The Attorney General shall assign a United States Attorney to provide legal guidance, as needed, to members of the Task Force.
Purpose.-- ``(1) In general.--(A) The purpose of the Task Force shall be to make available the combined resources and expertise of the agencies described in paragraph (1) to assist State and local governments in the most difficult missing and exploited child cases nationwide, as identified by the chief of the Task Force from time to time, in consultation with the Center, and as many additional cases as resources permit, including the provision of assistance to State and local investigators on location in the field.
Technical assistance.--The role of the Task Force in any investigation shall be to provide advice and technical assistance and to make available the resources of the agencies described in subsection (b)(1); the Task Force shall not take a leadership role in any such investigation.
Training.--Members of the Task Force shall receive a course of training, provided by the Center, in matters relating to cases of missing and exploited children.
Cross-Designation of Task Force Members.--The Attorney General shall cross-designate the members of the Task Force with jurisdiction to enforce Federal law related to child abduction to the extent necessary to accomplish the purposes of this section.