This Act may be cited as the ``Arlington National Cemetery Integrity Act of 1998''.
PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR INTERMENT IN ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY.
In General.--Chapter 24 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Arlington National Cemetery: person eligible for interment; authorized headstones and markers ``(a) Eligibility.--The remains of the following individuals may be interred in Arlington National Cemetery: ``(1) Any member of the Armed Forces who dies while on active duty (other than active duty for training).
Any retired member of the Armed Forces who-- ``(A) served on active duty (other than for training); ``(B) is carried on a retired list; and ``(C) is entitled to receive retired pay.
Any former member of the Armed Forces separated for physical disability before October 1, 1949, who-- ``(A) served on active duty (other than for training); and ``(B) would have been eligible for retirement under the provisions of section 1201 of title 10 (relating to retirement for disability) had that section been in effect on the date of separation of the member.
Any former member of the Armed Forces whose last active duty military service (other than for training) terminated honorably and who has been awarded one of the following decorations: ``(A) Medal of Honor.
Distinguished Service Cross (Air Force Cross or Navy Cross).
Any former prisoner of war-- ``(A) who, while a prisoner of war, served honorably in the active military, naval, or air service; ``(B) whose last period of active military, naval, or air service terminated honorably; and ``(C) who died on or after November 30, 1993.
Any former member of the Armed Forces whose last active duty military service (other than for training) terminated honorably and who has held any of the following positions: ``(A) An elective office of the United States Government.
The office of the Chief Justice of the United States or of an Associate Justice of the Supreme Court of the United States.
An office listed in section 5312 or 5313 of title 5 (relating to Executive Schedule I and Executive Schedule II).
A qualifying chief of mission position in the Department of State.
The President or any former President.
Subject to subsection (b) and (c), the spouse, surviving spouse, minor child and, at the discretion of the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery, unmarried adult child of a person listed in paragraphs (1) through (6).
Subject to subsection (b), the spouse, surviving spouse, minor child, and, at the discretion of the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery, unmarried adult child of a member of the Armed Forces who is buried in Arlington National Cemetery as part of a group burial, but the spouse, surviving spouse, minor child, or unmarried adult child may not be buried in the group gravesite.
Subject to subsection (b), the spouse, surviving spouse, minor child, and, at the discretion of the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery, unmarried adult child of any person already buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
The parents of a minor child or unmarried adult child whose remains, based on the eligibility of a parent, are already buried in Arlington National Cemetery.
Spouses.--(1) For purposes of paragraph (9) of subsection (a), the term `spouse' includes the widow or widower of a member of the Armed Forces who was lost or buried at sea or who was officially determined to be permanently absent in a status of missing or missing in action.
For purposes of paragraph (8), (9), and (10) of subsection (a), a surviving spouse who has remarried and whose remarriage is void, terminated by death, or dissolved by annulment or divorce by a court with basic authority to render such decrees regains eligibility for burial in Arlington National Cemetery unless it is determined by the Secretary of the Army that the decree of annulment or divorce was secured through fraud or collusion.
Same Gravesite Limitation Inapplicable in Certain Cases.-- (1)(A) In the case of a gravesite of a spouse (whose remains have been buried in Arlington National Cemetery under paragraph (8) of subsection (a)) that cannot accommodate the subsequent burial of remains of a person listed in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a) due to encroachment of roots of trees, shrubs, plants, or to a similar event, the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery may provide for the burial of remains of the person in another gravesite in Arlington National Cemetery.
The burial of remains of the person in another gravesite in Arlington National Cemetery by reason of subparagraph (A) shall not give rise to eligibility for burial of remains of any other individual in that gravesite.
In the case of a gravesite of a person listed in paragraphs (1) through (6) of subsection (a) (whose remains have been buried in Arlington National Cemetery) that cannot accommodate the subsequent burial of remains of an otherwise eligible person described in paragraph (8) of subsection (a) due to such encroachment or similar event, the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery may not provide for the burial of remains of that otherwise eligible person in another gravesite in Arlington National Cemetery.
Disabled Adult Unmarried Children.--In the case of an unmarried adult child who is incapable of self-support up to the time of death because of a physical or mental condition, the child may be buried under paragraph (7) of subsection (a) without requirement for approval by the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery under that paragraph if the burial is in the same gravesite as the gravesite in which the parent has been or will be buried.
Definition.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `qualifying chief of mission position' means-- ``(A) with respect to service before January 5, 1986, a chief of mission position in the Department of State that was classified by the Secretary of State as a Class I Chief of Mission position under the laws and regulations in effect before January 5, 1986; and ``(B) with respect to service on or after January 5, 1986, a chief of mission position in the Department of State specified in the enclosure entitled `List of Chief of Mission Positions' in a letter dated March 21, 1988, from the Deputy Assistant Secretary of State for Personnel to the Superintendent of the Arlington National Cemetery (or the corresponding successor chief of mission position, in the case of Bonn and Moscow).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``2412.
Persons eligible for interment in Arlington National Cemetery.''.
PERSONS ELIGIBLE FOR INTERMENT IN THE COLUMBARIUM IN ARLINGTON NATIONAL CEMETERY.
In General.--Chapter 24 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 2 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Persons eligible for interment in the columbarium in Arlington National Cemetery ``The cremated remains of the following individuals may be placed in the columbarium in Arlington National Cemetery: ``(1) A veteran whose last period of active duty service (other than for training) ended honorably ``(2) The spouse, surviving spouse, minor child, and, at the discretion of the Superintendent of Arlington National Cemetery, unmarried adult child of a veteran described in paragraph (1).''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 24 of title 38, United States Code, as amended by section 2 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``2413.
Persons eligible for interment in the columbarium in Arlington National Cemetery.