This Act may be cited as the ``Procurement Efficiency Act of 1993''.
ON-LINE DATA BASE OF FEDERAL PROCUREMENT OPPORTUNITIES.
Establishment of Data Base.--Section 18 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e)(1) The Secretary of Commerce shall establish a computerized data base of information regarding-- ``(A) procurements to be conducted by executive agencies; and ``(B) subcontracts to be awarded pursuant to those procurements.
The data base established under this subsection shall-- ``(A) include information that is substantially the same as the information relating to procurements by executive agencies that is published in the Commerce Business Daily; ``(B) include the notices furnished to the Secretary of Commerce under subsection (a)(1)(A); and ``(C) make that information and those notices publicly available to on-line users of the data base.''.
Implementation.--The Secretary of Commerce shall establish and make publicly available the data base required by the amendment made by subsection (a) by not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 18(a)(2) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416(a)(2)) is amended by inserting after ``Daily'' the following: ``, and include promptly in the data base established under subsection (e),''.
IDENTIFICATION OF CONTRACTORS IN EXECUTIVE AGENCY PROCUREMENT RECORDS; SHARING OF PROCUREMENT RECORDS BY EXECUTIVE AGENCIES.
Section 19 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 417) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(B) by inserting before the semicolon the following: ``, including the taxpayer identification number of the source''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Each executive agency shall make all records established and maintained under this section readily available to all other executive agencies.''.
INCREASE IN SMALL PURCHASE THRESHOLD.
Increase in Small Purchase Threshold.--Section 4(11) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 403(11)) is amended by striking ``$25,000'' each place it appears and inserting ``$100,000''.
Requirement of Procurement Notices for All Competitive Procurements.--Section 18(a)(2) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``for a price expected to exceed the small purchase threshold''.
CLARIFICATION OF AUTHORITY FOR PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
Section 16 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 414) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in paragraph (4) by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(5) include in each regulation governing procurement that is issued by the agency a citation of the specific statutory authority for the regulation.''.
REPRESENTATION OF SMALL BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION ON COST ACCOUNTING STANDARDS BOARD.
Section 20(a)(1) of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 422(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A)-- (A) by striking ``5'' and inserting ``6''; and (B) by striking ``4'' and inserting ``5''; and (2) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) in the matter preceding clause (i) by striking ``two'' and inserting ``3''; (B) in clause (i) by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; and (C) by inserting after clause (ii) the following: ``(iii) one of whom shall be a representative of the Small Business Administration appointed by the Administrator of the Small Business Administration; and''.
RULES OPPOSED BY SBA CHIEF COUNSEL FOR ADVOCACY.
In General.--Section 612 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Statement of Opposition.-- ``(1) Transmittal of proposed rules and initial regulatory flexibility analysis to sba chief counsel for advocacy.--On or before the 30th day preceding the date of publication by an agency of general notice of proposed rulemaking for a rule, including a rule relating to procurement, the agency shall transmit to the Chief Counsel for Advocacy of the Small Business Administration-- ``(A) a copy of the proposed rule; and ``(B)(i) a copy of the initial regulatory flexibility analysis for the rule if required under section 603; or ``(ii) a determination by the agency that an initial regulatory flexibility analysis is not required for the proposed rule under section 603 and an explanation for the determination.
Statement of opposition.--On or before the 15th day following receipt of a proposed rule and initial regulatory flexibility analysis from an agency under paragraph (1), the Chief Counsel for Advocacy may transmit to the agency a written statement of opposition of the proposed rule.
Response.--If the Chief Counsel for Advocacy transmits to an agency a statement of opposition to a proposed rule in accordance with paragraph (2), the agency shall publish the statement, together with the response of the agency to the statement, in the Federal Register at the time of publication of general notice of proposed rulemaking for the rule.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 603(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``in accordance with section 612(d)'' before the period at the end of the last sentence.
REVIEW OF DEVIATIONS FROM PROCUREMENT NOTICE REQUIREMENT.
Review Requirement.--Section 18 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e)(1) In the case of any procurement for which a notice is not required under subsection (a)(1) by reason of subsection (c), the head of the executive agency intending to conduct the procurement shall, before issuing the solicitation for the procurement, submit to the Administrator of Federal Procurement Policy the justification for not furnishing the notice.
The Administrator of Federal Procurement Policy shall, before the issuance of the solicitation for the procurement, review the justification to ensure that it is appropriate and reasonable.
At least once every 5 years, the Administrator of Federal Procurement Policy shall review the justifications submitted under paragraph (1).
In conducting the review, the Administrator shall concentrate on those justifications that have been submitted by the same executive agency, for the same type of procurements, in each of the 5 years covered by the review, to ensure that such justifications continue to be appropriate and reasonable.''.
Effective Date.--Subsection (e) of section 18 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act shall apply with respect to solicitations for procurements issued after the 30-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.