This Act may be cited as the ``Humboldt Project Conveyance Act''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Nevada.
PCWCD.--The term ``PCWCD'' means the Pershing County Water Conservation District, a public entity organized under the laws of the State of Nevada.
Pershing county.--The term ``Pershing County'' means the Pershing County government, a political subunit of the State of Nevada.
Lander county.--The term ``Lander County'' means the Lander County government, a political subunit of the State of Nevada.
AUTHORITY TO CONVEY TITLE.
In General.--The Secretary shall, as soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, convey, all right, title, and interest in and to the lands and features of the Humboldt Project, including all water rights for storage and diversion, to PCWCD, the State, Pershing County, and Lander County, consistent with the terms and conditions set forth in the Memorandum of Agreement between PCWCD and Lander County dated January 24, 2000, the Conceptual Agreement between PCWCD and the State dated October 18, 2001, and the Letter of Agreement between Pershing County and the State dated April 16, 2002.
Compliance With Agreements.--All parties to the conveyance under subsection (a) shall comply with the terms and conditions of the agreements cited in subsection (a).
Report.--If the conveyance required by this section has not been completed within 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate that describes-- (1) the status of the conveyance; (2) any obstacles to completion of the conveyance; and (3) the anticipated date for completion of the conveyance.
In General.--As consideration for any conveyance required by section 3, PCWCD shall pay to the United States the net present value of miscellaneous revenues associated with the lands and facilities to be conveyed.
Withdrawn Lands.--As consideration for any conveyance of withdrawn lands required by section 3, the entity receiving title shall pay the United States (in addition to amounts paid under subsection (a)) the fair market value for any such lands conveyed that were withdrawn from the public domain pursuant to the Secretarial Orders dated March 16, 1934, and April 6, 1956.
Administrative Costs.--Administrative costs for conveyance of any land or facility under this Act shall be paid in equal shares by the Secretary and the entity receiving title to the land or facility, except costs identified in subsections (d) and (e).
Real Estate Transfer Costs.--As a condition of any conveyance of any land or facility required by section 3, costs of all boundary surveys, title searches, cadastral surveys, appraisals, and other real estate transactions required for the conveyance shall be paid by the entity receiving title to the land or facility.
NEPA Costs.--Costs associated with any review required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 for conveyance of any land or facility under section 3 shall be paid in equal shares by the Secretary and the entity receiving title to the land or facility.
State of Nevada.--The State shall not be responsible for any payments for land or facilities under this section.
Any proposal by the State to reconvey to another entity land conveyed by the Secretary under this Act shall be pursuant to an agreement with the Secretary providing for fair market value to the United States for the lands, and for continued management of the lands for recreation, wildlife habitat, wetlands, or resource conservation.
COMPLIANCE WITH OTHER LAWS.
Following the conveyance required by section 3, the district, the State, Pershing County, and Lander County shall, with respect to the interests conveyed, comply with all requirements of Federal, State, and local law applicable to non-Federal water distribution systems.
Effective on the date of the conveyance required by section 3, the Secretarial Orders dated March 16, 1934, and April 6, 1956, that withdrew public lands for the Rye Patch Reservoir and the Humboldt Sink, are hereby revoked.
Effective on the date of the conveyance required by section 3, the United States shall not be held liable by any court for damages of any kind arising out of any act, omission, or occurrence relating to the Humboldt Project, except for damages caused by acts of negligence committed by the United States or by its employees or agents prior to the date of conveyance.
Nothing in this section shall be considered to increase the liability of the United States beyond that currently provided in chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, popularly known as the Federal Tort Claims Act.
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY ACT.
Prior to conveyance the Secretary shall complete all actions as may be required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (United States Code 4321 et sequentes).
Upon conveyance of the lands and facilities by the Secretary under this Act, the Humboldt Project shall no longer be a Federal reclamation project and the district shall not be entitled to receive any future reclamation benefits with respect to that project, except those benefits that would be available to other nonreclamation districts.