This Act may be cited as the ``Sexual Harassment Prevention Act of 1994''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Sexual harassment in employment persists widely in the workplace, although it violates title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et sequentes) and adversely affects employees.
According to guidelines issued by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission in 1980, the most effective tool for eliminating sexual harassment is prevention.
The Merit Systems Protection Board found in 1981 and 1988 surveys of Federal Government employees that 42 percent of female employees and 14 percent of male employees questioned had experienced some kind of harassment in employment.
The American Psychological Association estimates that at least 50 percent of all working women have been sexually harassed at the workplace during their careers.
The vast majority of sexual harassment episodes go unreported to a supervisory employee or other individual designated by the employer.
Only 5 percent of the Government employees who indicated in the 1988 Merit Systems Protection Board survey that they had been harassed filed a formal complaint or requested an investigation of the harassment.
Sexual harassment has a significant cost for employees and employers.
A 1988 study by Working Woman Magazine shows that sexual harassment costs a typical ``Fortune 500'' employer $6,000,000, or $292.53 per employee, each year.
The same study estimates that it is 34 times more expensive for such an employer to ignore the problem than to establish effective programs and policies to address the problem.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to establish workplace requirements that will reduce the incidence of sexual harassment in employment; (2) to provide a low-cost system to assist employers to establish programs and policies to prevent sexual harassment in employment; (3) to raise the awareness of employees of the definition of sexual harassment and of available avenues of redress; and (4) to increase the authority and capacity of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, and other enforcement agencies, to assist in preventing sexual harassment in employment.
Posting of Notice in the Workplace.--Each employer shall post and keep posted in conspicuous places upon its premises where notices to employees and applicants for employment are customarily posted, a notice that shall be prepared or approved by the appropriate primary enforcement agency and shall set forth-- (1) the definition of sexual harassment found in section 1604.11(a) of title 29, Code of Federal Regulations (or any corresponding similar regulation); (2) the fact that sexual harassment in employment is a violation of Federal law; (3) information describing how to file with the primary enforcement agency a complaint alleging such harassment, including information on the time periods within which an alleged victim of discrimination (including sexual harassment) must file a charge with the primary enforcement agency, or a State or local fair employment agency, in order to satisfy the applicable statute of limitations; (4) an address, and the toll-free telephone number, to be used to contact the appropriate enforcement agency regarding such harassment or compliance with the requirements of this Act; and (5) such other information as the primary enforcement agency may require.
Separate Notice to Individual Employees.-- (1) Contents.--Each employer shall provide annually to each employee individually a written notice that includes-- (A) the information specified in paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (a); (B) a description of the procedures established by such employer to resolve allegations of sexual harassment in employment; and (C) such other information as the appropriate primary enforcement agency may require.
Manner of notice.--Such notice shall be provided in a manner that ensures that such employee actually receives such notice.
Management Information for Supervisory Employees.--Not later than 60 days after an employer places an individual in a supervisory employment position or 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs later, such employer shall provide to the supervisory employee information specifying the responsibilities of, and the methods to be used by, such employee to ensure that immediate and corrective action is taken to address allegations of sexual harassment in employment.
Civil Penalty.--A willful violation of this section shall be punishable by a civil penalty of not more than $1,000 for each separate violation.
DUTIES OF THE ENFORCEMENT AGENCIES.
Technical Assistance Materials.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, each primary enforcement agency shall prepare and make available to employers at no cost to the employers (by publication in the Federal Register or other means)-- (A) a model notice of the kind required by section 3(a) to be posted; (B) a model notice of the kind required by section 3(b) to be provided to employees; and (C) voluntary guidelines for the establishment of policies and procedures by employers to address allegations of discrimination (including sexual harassment) in employment.
Revisions.--The primary enforcement agency shall periodically review and, as appropriate, revise the notices and guidelines described in subparagraphs (A) through (C) of paragraph (1).
Toll-Free Telephone Number.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the primary enforcement agency shall provide a toll-free telephone number for use by employees and employers in the United States to obtain-- (1) information regarding compliance with this Act; and (2) the model notices and guidelines prepared under subsection (a).
Private Employees; Executive Employees; Employees of Instrumentalities; State Employees.--If an employee described in subparagraph (A), (B), (E), or (F) of section 6(2) alleges a violation of section 3, the Commission shall enforce the section in the same manner as the Commission enforces section 711 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e-10).
House of Representatives Employees.-- (1) Hearing.--If an employee described in section 6(2)(C) alleges a violation of section 3, the Office of Fair Employment Practices of the House of Representatives (or such entity as the House of Representatives may designate) shall consider the allegation in accordance with the hearing procedures provided in clause 6 of Rule LI of the Rules of the House of Representatives of the 103d Congress (or any other provision that continues in effect the provisions of such rule).
In carrying out such procedures, such Office or entity shall permit an employee, or a representative of the Office or entity, to file a complaint not later than 180 days after the alleged violation, and shall not require compliance with any counseling and mediation procedures provided in such rule or provision.
Review.--Any party to a proceeding conducted under paragraph (1) may seek review of a final decision resulting from such proceeding.
Such review shall be conducted by such Office or entity in accordance with the review procedures provided in clause 7 of such rule (or such other provision).
Procedures.--In conducting a proceeding under paragraph (1) or (2), such Office or entity shall conduct the proceeding in accordance with any requirement of such rule (or such other provision) that relates to such a proceeding, including a requirement relating to agreements, costs, closed hearings and confidentiality, and requests for witnesses and information.
Remedies.--Following a proceeding under paragraph (1) or (2), if the Office or entity finds that an employer is not in compliance with section 3, such Office or entity may order the civil penalty described in section 3(d).
Senate Employees.-- (1) Hearing.--If an employee described in section 6(2)(D) alleges a violation of section 3, the Office of Senate Fair Employment Practices (or such entity as the Senate may designate) shall consider the allegation in accordance with the hearing procedures provided in section 307 of the Government Employee Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 1207) (or any other provision that continues in effect the provisions of such Act).
In carrying out such procedures, such Office or entity shall permit an employee, or a representative of such Office or entity, to file a complaint not later than 180 days after the alleged violation, and shall not require compliance with any counseling and mediation procedures provided in such Act or provision.
Review.--Any party to a proceeding conducted under paragraph (1) may seek review of a final decision resulting from such proceeding.
Such review shall be conducted by the Select Committee on Ethics (or by such entity as the Senate may designate) in accordance with the review procedures provided in section 308 of such Act (or such other provision).
Judicial review.--Any party to a proceeding conducted under paragraph (2) may seek review of a final decision resulting from such proceeding.
Such review shall be conducted by the United States Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit in accordance with the procedures provided in section 309 of such Act.
Procedures.--In conducting a proceeding under paragraph (1) or (2), the appropriate Office, Committee, or entity shall conduct the proceeding in accordance with any requirement of such Act (or such other provision) that relates to such a proceeding, including a requirement relating to agreements, costs, closed hearings and confidentiality, and requests for witnesses and information.
Remedies.--Following a proceeding under paragraph (1), (2), or (3), if the appropriate Office, Committee, entity, or court finds that an employer is not in compliance with section 3, the Office, Committee, entity, or court may order the civil penalty described in section 3(d).
As used in this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Employee.--The term ``employee'' means-- (A) an employee as defined in section 701(f) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e(f)); (B) an employee referred to in section 717(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 2000e-16(a)); (C) an employee in an employment position of the House of Representatives; (D) a Senate employee as defined in section 301(c)(1) of the Government Employee Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 1201(c)(1)); (E) an employee (other than an employee described in subparagraph (B) or (D)) in an employment position of an instrumentality of the Congress; and (F) an individual referred to in section 321(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 1220(a)).
Employer.--The term ``employer'' means-- (A) an employer as defined in section 701(b) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e(b)); (B) a Federal entity, or entity of the Government of the District of Columbia, to which section 717(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e-16(a)) applies; (C) an employing authority of the House of Representatives, of the Senate, or of an instrumentality of the Congress; and (D) an elected official described in section 321(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1991.
Instrumentality of the congress.--The term ``instrumentality of the Congress'' means the Architect of the Capitol, the Congressional Budget Office, the General Accounting Office, the Government Printing Office, the Library of Congress, the Office of Technology Assessment, the United States Botanic Garden, and any other office of the legislative branch of the Federal Government.
Primary enforcement agency.--The term ``primary enforcement agency'' means-- (A) with respect to any matter relating to an allegation of sexual harassment of an employee described in subparagraph (A), (B), (E), or (F) of paragraph (2), the Commission; (B) with respect to any matter relating to an allegation of sexual harassment of an employee described in paragraph (2)(C), the Office of Fair Employment Practices of the House of Representatives (or such entity as the House of Representatives may designate); and (C) with respect to any matter relating to an allegation of sexual harassment of an employee described in paragraph (2)(D), the Office of Senate Fair Employment Practices (or such entity as the Senate may designate).
Sexual harassment.--The term ``sexual harassment'' has the same meaning as such term has for purposes of title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et sequentes).
General Effective Date.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Employer Requirements.--Section 3 shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.