This Act may be cited as the ``Helium Privatization Act of 1997''.
AMENDMENT OF HELIUM ACT.
Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Helium Act (50 United States Code 167-167n), as amended by the Helium Privatization Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-273).
Section 4 is amended by-- (1) striking subsection (c); and (2) redesignating subsection (d) as subsection (c).
SALE OF CRUDE HELIUM.
Subsection 6(c) is amended by striking ``--'' and all that follows through ``(2)''.
Section 8 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
Secretary of Defense.-- ``(1) In general.--Half of the helium reserves owned by the United States on the date of the enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1997 shall be placed under the authority of the Secretary of Defense, who shall determine and execute the storage, transportation, and use of helium from the reserves.
The Federal Government shall forgive any share of debt owed on these reserves.
Location of reserves.--The Secretary of Defense may maintain the reserves under the authority of the Secretary of Defense at the site on which they are located on the date of enactment of this Act, or transfer the reserves to another site.
In a case in which the Secretary of Defense elects to transfer the reserves, the Secretary shall notify the Secretary of the Interior of the transfer not later than the predetermined date agreed to by the Secretary of Defense and Secretary of the Interior.
Department of the Interior.-- ``(1) In general.--The remaining half of the helium reserves owned by the United States on the date of the enactment of the Helium Privatization Act of 1997 shall remain under the authority of the Secretary of the Interior.
Disposal of reserves.-- ``(A) Investment administrator.--In order to dispose of the helium reserves under the authority of the Secretary of the Interior, the Secretary of the Interior shall appoint an Investment Administrator to sell-- ``(i) the helium from the helium reserves; and ``(ii) any production, refining, and marketing assets of the reserves, unless the Secretary of Defense determines that such assets are essential to the transportation or storage needs of the Secretary of Defense.
The proceeds from any sales shall be paid to the Treasury of the United States.
A percentage of the proceeds, as agreed to by the Secretary of the Interior and the Investment Administrator, shall be used to pay the salary of the Investment Administrator.
Selection criteria for investment administrator.--Any individual interested in the position of Investment Administrator shall, within a time period to be determined by the Secretary of the Interior-- ``(i) submit in writing to the Secretary of the Interior a plan for disposing of the helium reserves under the authority of the Secretary of the Interior (including any unobligated natural gas reserves and real estate at the helium reserves used in helium refinement and production); and ``(ii) make an oral presentation to the Secretary of the Interior on such plan.
Interim disposal.--The Secretary of the Interior may determine a price in consultation with the helium industry, and sell helium described in paragraph (1) during the period in which an Investment Administrator has not been selected.
Discovery of Additional Reserves.--The discovery of additional helium reserves shall not affect the duties of the Secretaries to make sales of helium under this section.''.
National Academy of Sciences Report.--Subsection 15(a) is amended by inserting after ``disposal of helium reserves'' the following: ``under the authority of the Secretary of Defense''.
Report to Congress.--Subsection 15(b) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1) by inserting ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in paragraph (2) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a period; and (3) by striking paragraph (3).