This Act may be cited as the ``Religious Liberty Protection Act of 1998''.
PROTECTION OF RELIGIOUS EXERCISE.
General Rule.--Except as provided in subsection (b), a government shall not substantially burden a person's religious exercise-- (1) in a program or activity, operated by a government, that receives Federal financial assistance; or (2) in or affecting commerce with foreign nations, among the several States, or with the Indian tribes; even if the burden results from a rule of general applicability.
Exception.--A government may substantially burden a person's religious exercise if the government demonstrates that application of the burden to the person-- (1) is in furtherance of a compelling governmental interest; and (2) is the least restrictive means of furthering that compelling governmental interest.
Funding Not Affected.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize the United States to deny or withhold Federal financial assistance as a remedy for a violation of this Act.
State Policy Not Commandeered.--A government may eliminate the substantial burden on religious exercise by changing the policy that results in the burden, by retaining the policy and exempting the religious exercise from that policy, or by any other means that eliminates the burden.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- (1) the term ``government'' means a branch, department, agency, instrumentality, subdivision, or official of a State (or other person acting under color of State law); (2) the term ``program or activity'' means a program or activity as defined in paragraph (1) or (2) of section 606 of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000d-4a); and (3) the term ``demonstrates'' means meets the burdens of going forward with the evidence and of persuasion.
ENFORCEMENT OF THE FREE EXERCISE CLAUSE.
Procedure.--If a claimant produces prima facie evidence to support a claim of a violation of the Free Exercise Clause, the government shall bear the burden of persuasion on all issues relating to the claim, except any issue as to the existence of the burden on religious exercise.
Land Use Regulation.-- (1) Limitation on land use regulation.--No government shall impose a land use regulation that-- (A) substantially burdens religious exercise, unless the burden is the least restrictive means to prevent substantial and tangible harm to neighboring properties or to the public health or safety; (B) denies religious assemblies a reasonable location in the jurisdiction; or (C) excludes religious assemblies from areas in which nonreligious assemblies are permitted.
Full faith and credit.--Adjudication of a claim of a violation of this subsection in a non-Federal forum shall be entitled to full faith and credit in a Federal court only if the claimant had a full and fair adjudication of that claim in the non-Federal forum.
Nonpreemption.--Nothing in this subsection shall preempt State law that is equally or more protective of religious exercise.
Nonapplication of other portions of this act.--Section 2 does not apply to land use regulation.
Cause of Action.--A person may assert a violation of this Act as a claim or defense in a judicial proceeding and obtain appropriate relief against a government.
Standing to assert a claim or defense under this section shall be governed by the general rules of standing under article III of the Constitution.
Attorneys' Fees.--Section 722(b) of the Revised Statutes (42 United States Code 1988(b)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``the Religious Liberty Protection Act of 1998,'' after ``Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993,''; and (2) by striking the comma that follows a comma.
Prisoners.--Any litigation under this Act in which the claimant is a prisoner shall be subject to the Prison Litigation Reform Act of 1995 (including provisions of law amended by that Act).
Liability of Governments.-- (1) Liability of states.--A State shall not be immune under the 11th amendment to the Constitution from a civil action, for a violation of the Free Exercise Clause under section 3, including a civil action for money damages.
Liability of the united states.--The United States shall not be immune from any civil action, for a violation of the Free Exercise Clause under section 3, including a civil action for money damages.
Religious Belief Unaffected.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize any government to burden any religious belief.
Religious Exercise Not Regulated.--Nothing in this Act shall create any basis for regulation of religious exercise or for claims against a religious organization, including any religiously affiliated school or university, not acting under color of law.
Claims to Funding Unaffected.--Nothing in this Act shall create or preclude a right of any religious organization to receive funding or other assistance from a government, or of any person to receive government funding for a religious activity, but this Act may require government to incur expenses in its own operations to avoid imposing a burden or a substantial burden on religious exercise.
Other Authority To Impose Conditions on Funding Unaffected.-- Nothing in this Act shall-- (1) authorize a government to regulate or affect, directly or indirectly, the activities or policies of a person other than a government as a condition of receiving funding or other assistance; or (2) restrict any authority that may exist under other law to so regulate or affect, except as provided in this Act.
Effect On Other Law.--Proof that a religious exercise affects commerce for the purposes of this Act does not give rise to any inference or presumption that the religious exercise is subject to any other law regulating commerce.
Severability.--If any provision of this Act or of an amendment made by this Act, or any application of such provision to any person or circumstance, is held to be unconstitutional, the remainder of this Act, the amendments made by this Act, and the application of the provision to any other person or circumstance shall not be affected.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect, interpret, or in any way address that portion of the first amendment to the Constitution prohibiting laws respecting an establishment of religion (referred to in this section as the ``Establishment Clause'').
Granting government funding, benefits, or exemptions, to the extent permissible under the Establishment Clause, shall not constitute a violation of this Act.
As used in this section, the term ``granting'', used with respect to government funding, benefits, or exemptions, does not include the denial of government funding, benefits, or exemptions.
AMENDMENTS TO RELIGIOUS FREEDOM RESTORATION ACT.
Definitions.--Section 5 of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 2000bb-2) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``a State, or subdivision of a State'' and inserting ``a covered entity or a subdivision of such an entity''; (2) in paragraph (2), by striking ``term'' and all that follows through ``includes'' and inserting ``term `covered entity' means''; and (3) in paragraph (4), by striking all after ``means,'' and inserting ``an act or refusal to act that is substantially motivated by a religious belief, whether or not the act or refusal is compulsory or central to a larger system of religious belief.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 6(a) of the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993 (42 United States Code 2000bb-3(a)) is amended by striking ``and State''.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``religious exercise'' means an act or refusal to act that is substantially motivated by a religious belief, whether or not the act or refusal is compulsory or central to a larger system of religious belief; (2) the term ``Free Exercise Clause'' means that portion of the first amendment to the Constitution that proscribes laws prohibiting the free exercise of religion and includes the application of that proscription under the 14th amendment to the Constitution; and (3) except as otherwise provided in this Act, the term ``government'' means a branch, department, agency, instrumentality, subdivision, or official of a State, or other person acting under color of State law, or a branch, department, agency, instrumentality, subdivision, or official of the United States, or other person acting under color of Federal law.