This Act may be cited as the ``Gambling ATM and Credit/Debit Card Reform Act''.
IMPLEMENTATION OF THE NATIONAL GAMBLING IMPACT STUDY COMMISSION'S RECOMMENDATIONS RELATING TO BANKING AND CREDIT.
Initiation of Electronic Fund Transfers in Gambling Establishments.--The Electronic Fund Transfer Act (15 United States Code 1693 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 918, 919, 920, and 921 as sections 919, 920, 921, and 922, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 917 the following new section: ``SEC.
PLACEMENT OF ELECTRONIC TERMINALS IN GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS.
In General.--No person may place, or cause to be placed, an electronic terminal in the immediate area of a gambling establishment where any form of wager or bet is made or accepted, any game of chance is played, any gambling device is used, or any other form of gambling is carried on.
Regulations.-- ``(1) In general.--The Board shall prescribe such regulations as the Board may consider to be appropriate to ensure that the initation of electronic fund transfers by consumers is kept, to the extent practicable, physically segregated from any activity described in subsection (a).
Separate setting.--Such regulations shall include a clear delineation of the setting in which, and the circumstances under which, any use of an electronic terminal or credit card referred to in paragraph (1) should be conducted in a location physically segregated from an area where any activity described in subsection (a) is routinely carried on.
Liability.--For purposes of section 915, a failure to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) with regard to any electronic terminal shall be considered a failure to comply with a provision of this title with respect to any consumer who initiates an electronic fund transfer at such terminal while such violation continues.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: ``(1) Gambling device.--The term `gambling device' has the meaning given to such term in section 41311(b) of title 49, United States Code.
Gambling establishment.--The term `gambling establishment' has the meaning given to such term in section 1081 of title 18, United States Code.''.
Use of Credit Cards To Initiate Extensions of Credit in Gambling Establishments.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act (15 United States Code 1631 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
PROHIBITION ON INITIATION OF EXTENSIONS OF CREDIT IN CERTAIN GAMBLING AREAS WITHIN GAMBLING ESTABLISHMENTS.
In General.--No person may-- ``(1) place, or cause to be placed, an electronic terminal; or ``(2) otherwise accept the use of a credit card by a consumer to initiate a consumer credit transaction to pay for money, property, or services obtained by the consumer, in the immediate area of a gambling establishment where any form of wager or bet is made or accepted, any game of chance is played, any gambling device is used, or any other form of gambling is carried on.
Regulations.-- ``(1) In general.--The Board shall prescribe such regulations as the Board may consider to be appropriate to ensure that the use of an electronic terminal or the use of a credit card to initiate a consumer credit transaction to pay for money, property, or services obtained by a consumer is kept, to the extent practicable, physically segregated from any activity described in subsection (a).
Separate setting.--Such regulations shall include a clear delineation of the setting in which, and the circumstances under which, any use of an electronic terminal or credit card referred to in paragraph (1) should be conducted in a location physically segregated from an area where any activity described in subsection (a) is routinely carried on.
Civil Liability.-- ``(1) In general.--Any person who fails to comply with any provision of this title with respect to any electronic terminal or the acceptance of a credit card to initiate a consumer credit transaction at a place in a gambling establishment that constitutes a violation shall be liable to any consumer who uses the electronic terminal or provides a credit card at such place in an amount equal to the sum of the amounts determined under each of the following subparagraphs: ``(A) Actual damages.--The greater of-- ``(i) the amount of any actual damage sustained by the consumer as a result of such failure; or ``(ii) any amount paid, directly or with the proceeds of the credit transaction, by the consumer to such person.
Punitive damages.-- ``(i) Individual actions.--In the case of any action by an individual, such additional amount as the court may allow.
Class actions.--In the case of a class action, the sum of-- ``(I) the aggregate of the amount which the court may allow for each named plaintiff; and ``(II) the aggregate of the amount which the court may allow for each other class member, without regard to any minimum individual recovery.
Attorneys' fees.--In the case of any successful action to enforce any liability under subparagraph (A) or (B), the costs of the action, together with reasonable attorneys' fees.
Factors to be considered in awarding punitive damages.--In determining the amount of any liability of any person under paragraph (1)(B), the court shall consider, among other relevant factors-- ``(A) the frequency and persistence of noncompliance by such person; ``(B) the nature of the noncompliance; ``(C) the extent to which such noncompliance was intentional; and ``(D) in the case of any class action, the number of consumers adversely affected.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the following definitions shall apply: ``(1) Electronic terminal.--The term `electronic terminal'-- ``(A) means an electronic device, other than a telephone operated by a consumer, through which a consumer may initiate a consumer credit transaction in payment for any money, property, or services obtained by the consumer; and ``(B) includes point-of-sale terminals, automated teller machines, and cash dispensing machines ``(2) Gambling device.--The term `gambling device' has the meaning given to such term in section 41311(b) of title 49, United States Code.
Gambling establishment.--The term `gambling establishment' has the meaning given to such term in section 1081 of title 18, United States Code.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 2 of the Truth in Lending Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 139 the following new item: ``140.
Prohibition on initiation of extensions of credit in certain gambling areas within gambling establishments.