This Act may be cited as the ``Law Enforcement Scholarship and Recruitment Act''.
In this Act-- ``Director'' means the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
``educational expenses''-- (A) means expenses that are directly attributable to-- (i) a course of education leading to the award of an associate degree; (ii) a course of education leading to the award of a baccalaureate degree; or (iii) a course of graduate study following award of a baccalaureate degree; and (B) includes the cost of tuition, fees, books, supplies, and related expenses.
``institution of higher education'' has the meaning stated in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1141(a)).
``law enforcement position'' means employment as an officer in a State or local police force, or correctional institution.
``State'' means a State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands of the United States, American Samoa, Guam, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Of amounts appropriated pursuant to section 11, the Director shall allot-- (1) 80 percent to States on the basis of the number of law enforcement officers in each State compared to the number of law enforcement officers in all of the States; and (2) 20 percent to States on the basis of the shortage of law enforcement personnel and the need for assistance under this Act in the State compared to the shortage of law enforcement personnel and the need for assistance under this Act in all States.
SCHOLARSHIP AND EMPLOYMENT PROGRAMS.
Use of Allotment.-- (1) In general.--A State that receives an allotment under section 3 shall use the allotment to pay the Federal share of the costs of-- (A) awarding scholarship to in-service law enforcement personnel to enable such personnel to seek further education; and (B) providing-- (i) full-time employment in summer; or (ii) part-time (not to exceed 20 hours per week) employment during a period not to exceed 1 year.
Employment.--The employment described in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1) shall be provided by State and local law enforcement agencies for students who are juniors or seniors in high school or are enrolled in an accredited institution of higher education and who demonstrate an interest in undertaking a career in law enforcement.
Such employment shall not be in a law enforcement position.
Such employment shall consist of performing meaningful tasks that inform such students of the nature of the tasks performed by law enforcement agencies.
Payments; Federal Share; Non-Federal Share.-- (1) Payments.--The Secretary shall pay to each State that receives an allotment under section 3 the Federal share of the cost of the activities described in the application submitted pursuant to section 7.
Federal share.--The Federal share shall not exceed 60 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost of scholarships and student employment provided under this Act shall be supplied from sources other than the Federal Government.
Lead Agency.--A State that receives an allotment under section 3 shall designate an appropriate State agency to serve as the lead agency to conduct a scholarship program, a student employment program, or both in the State in accordance with this Act.
Responsibilities of Director.--The Director shall be responsible for the administration of the programs conducted pursuant to this Act and shall, in consultation with the Assistant Secretary for Postsecondary Education, issue regulations implementing this Act.
Administrative Expenses.--A State that receives an allotment under section 3 may use not more than 8 percent of the amount of the allotment for administrative expenses.
Special Rule.--A State that receives an allotment under section 3 shall ensure that each scholarship recipient under this Act is compensated at the same rate of pay and benefits and enjoys the same rights under applicable agreements with labor organizations and under State and local law as other law enforcement personnel of the same rank and tenure in the office of which the scholarship recipient is a member.
Supplementation of Funding.--Funds received under this Act shall be used only to supplement, and not to supplant, Federal, State, and local efforts for recruitment and education of law enforcement personnel.
Period of Award.--A scholarship awarded under this Act shall be for a period of 1 academic year.
Use of Scholarships.--A scholarship recipient under this Act may use the scholarship for educational expenses at any accredited institution of higher education.
Scholarships.--A person shall be eligible to receive a scholarship under this Act if the person has been employed in law enforcement for the 2-year period immediately preceding the date on which assistance is sought.
Ineligibility for Student Employment.--A person who has been employed as a law enforcement officer is ineligible to participate in a student employment program carried out under this Act.
STATE APPLICATIONS FOR ALLOTMENT.
In General.--A State that desires an allotment under section 3 shall submit an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Contents.--An application under subsection (a) shall-- (1) describe the scholarship program and the student employment program for which assistance under this Act is sought; (2) contain assurances that the lead agency will work in cooperation with local law enforcement liaisons, representatives of police labor organizations and police management organizations, and other appropriate State and local agencies to develop and implement interagency agreements designed to carry out this Act; (3) contain assurances that the State will advertise the scholarship assistance and student employment it will provide under this Act and that the State will use such programs to enhance recruitment efforts; (4) contain assurances that the State will screen and select law enforcement personnel for participation in the scholarship program under this Act; (5) contain assurances that under the student employment program the State will screen and select, for participation in the program, students who have an interest in undertaking a career in law enforcement; (6) contain assurances that under the scholarship program the State will make scholarship payments to institutions of higher education on behalf of scholarship recipients under this Act; (7) with respect to the student employment program, identify-- (A) the employment tasks students will be assigned to perform; (B) the compensation students will be paid to perform such tasks; and (C) the training students will receive as part of their participation in the program; (8) identify model curriculum and existing programs designed to meet the educational and professional needs of law enforcement personnel; and (9) contain assurances that the State will promote cooperative agreements with educational and law enforcement agencies to enhance law enforcement personnel recruitment efforts in institutions of higher education.
INDIVIDUAL APPLICATIONS FOR SCHOLARSHIP OR EMPLOYMENT.
In General.--A person who desires a scholarship or employment under this Act shall submit an application to the State at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the State may reasonably require.
Contents.--An application under subsection (a) shall describe the academic courses for which a scholarship is sought or the location and duration of employment that is sought.
Priority.--In awarding scholarships and providing student employment under this Act, a State shall give priority to applications from persons who-- (1) are members of racial, ethnic, or gender groups whose representation in the law enforcement agencies within the State in substantially less than in the population eligible for employment in law enforcement in the State; (2) are pursuing an undergraduate degree; and (3) are not receiving financial assistance under the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001 et sequentes).
In General.--A scholarship recipient under this Act shall enter into an agreement with the Director.
Contents.--An agreement under subsection (a) shall-- (1) provide assurances that the scholarship recipient will work in a law enforcement position in the State that awards the scholarship in accordance with the service obligation described in subsection (c) after completion of the recipient's academic courses leading to an associate, bachelor, or graduate degree; (2) provide assurances that the scholarship recipient will repay the entire scholarship awarded under this Act in accordance with such terms and conditions as the Director shall prescribe if the requirements of the agreement are not complied with, unless the recipient-- (A) dies; (B) becomes physically or emotionally disabled, as established by the sworn affidavit of a qualified physician; or (C) has been discharged in bankruptcy; and (3) set forth the terms and conditions under which a scholarship recipient may seek employment in the field of law enforcement in a State other than the State that awards the scholarship.
Service Obligation.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), a scholarship recipient under this Act shall work in a law enforcement position in the State that awards the scholarship for a period of 1 month for each credit hour for which funds are received under the scholarship.
Minimum and maximum required periods of service.--For the purposes of satisfying the requirement of paragraph (1), a scholarship recipient shall work in a law enforcement position in the State that awards the scholarship for a period of not less than 6 months but shall not be required to work in such a position for more than 2 years.
In General.--Not later than April 1 of each year, the Director shall submit a report to the Attorney General, the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate.
Contents.--A report under subsection (a) shall-- (1) state the number of present and past scholarship recipients under this Act, categorized according to the levels of educational study in which the recipients are engaged and the number of years that the recipients have served in law enforcement; (2) state, with respect to student employees under this Act-- (A) the number of present and past student employees; (B) the number of such employees who complete a course of study at an accredited institution of higher education; and (C) the number of such employees who subsequently accept a law enforcement position; (3) describe the geographic, racial, and gender dispersion of scholarship recipients and employees; and (4) describe the progress of the scholarship program and the student employment program and make recommendations for changes in the programs.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $30,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998.
Uses of Funds.--Of the funds appropriated under subsection (a) for any fiscal year-- (1) 75 percent shall be available to provide scholarships described in section 4(a)(1)(A); and (2) 25 percent shall be available to provide employment described in sections 4(a)(1)(B) and 4(a)(2).