This Act may be cited as the ``Teacher Education for Autistic Children Act of 2002'' or the ``TEACH Act of 2002''.
TRAINING OF SPECIAL EDUCATION TEACHERS WITH EXPERTISE IN AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS.
Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to such sums as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated for ``Special Education- Personnel Preparation to Improve Services and Results for Children with Disabilities'', there are authorized to be appropriated for ``Special Education-Personnel Preparation to Improve Services and Results for Children with Disabilities'', for each of the fiscal year 2003 through 2007, $15,000,000-- (1) to provide technical assistance grants to develop standards for training teachers with respect to the provision of education for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and to integrate such standards into the existing training infrastructure; (2) to train special education teachers with an expertise in autism spectrum disorders; and (3) to provide preservice or professional development training of personnel to be special education teachers, aides of such teachers or other paraprofessionals providing teaching assistance, special education administrators, or staff specialists (such as speech-language pathologists and school psychologists) with an expertise in autism spectrum disorders.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.
IMPROVING RESULTS FOR CHILDREN WITH AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS.
Authorization of Appropriations.--In addition to such sums as are otherwise authorized to be appropriated to carry out subpart 1 of part D of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act, there are authorized to be appropriated for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007 $5,000,000 for competitive grants under subpart 1 of part D of such Act to assist State educational agencies, in cooperation with other appropriate entities, to improve results for children with autism spectrum disorders (ASD).
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.
REFUNDABLE TAX CREDIT FOR EDUCATION AND TRAINING RELATING TO AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS.
In General.--Subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to refundable credits) is amended by redesignating section 35 as section 36 and by inserting after section 34 following new section: ``SEC.
EDUCATION AND TRAINING RELATING TO AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an eligible individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified expenses which are paid or incurred by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Limitation.--The amount allowed as a credit under subsection (a) for a taxable year shall not exceed $10,000.
Qualified Expenses.--The term `qualified expenses' means-- ``(1) tuition, fees, books, supplies, and equipment required for the enrollment or attendance of such individual in a course or program of study to prepare such individual to teach children or adults with an autism spectrum disorder, and ``(2) interest on a qualified education loan (as defined by section 221(d)(1) the proceeds of which are used to for expenses described in paragraph (1).
Autism Spectrum Disorders.--For purposes of this section, the term `autism spectrum disorders' has the meaning given such term in section 9 of the Teacher Education for Autistic Children Act of 2002.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Approval of courses and programs of study.--A course or program of study shall not be taken into account for purposes of subsection (c) unless such course or program is approved by the State in which such course or program is offered.
Denial of double benefit.--No credit or deduction shall be allowed under this chapter for any expense for which credit is allowed under this section.
Coordination with other education provisions.--The total amount of qualified expenses shall be reduced by the amount of such expenses taken into account in determining any amount allowed as a credit under section 25A, excluded under section 135, 529(c)(1), or 530(d)(2), or deducted under section 222.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the amount taken into account in determining the amount excluded under section 529(c)(1) shall not include that portion of the distribution which represents a return of any contributions to the plan.
Termination.--This section shall not apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2007.''.
Technical Amendment.--Paragraph (2) of section 1324(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or from section 35 of such Code'' before the period at the end.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart C of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Education and training relating to autism spectrum disorders.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.
REPORT ON AUTISM EARLY INTERVENTION ACTIVITIES.
Report.--Section 613 of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1413) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(k) Report on Autism Early Intervention Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--A local educational agency that receives assistance under this part for a fiscal year shall prepare and submit to the Secretary a report that contains a description of the activities referred to in paragraph (2) carried out in the preceding fiscal year.
Information.--The activities referred to in this paragraph are the following: ``(A) Activities carried out by the agency to ensure that students who exhibit symptoms of autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are referred to appropriate experts for diagnosis.
Appropriate training provided by the agency, or on behalf of the agency, of personnel of the agency and schools of the agency to carry out the activities described in subparagraph (A).
Definition.--In this subsection, the term `autism spectrum disorders' has the meaning given the term in section 9 of the Teacher Education for Autistic Children Act of 2002.''.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary of Education shall provide technical assistance to local educational agencies that receive assistance under part B of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act to assist such agencies comply with the reporting requirement under section 613(k) of such Act (as added by subsection (a)).
TASK FORCE ON AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Education, acting through the Assistant Secretary for Special Education and Rehabilitative Services, shall establish and provide administrative support for a Task Force on Autism Spectrum Disorders (ASD) (in this section referred to as the ``Task Force'').
Duties.--The Task Force shall-- (1) conduct a review of minimum standards relating to the provision of special education for children with autism spectrum disorders and provide recommendations to improve or otherwise strengthen such standards; (2) conduct a review of the effectiveness of existing educational models used with respect to the provision of special education for children with autism spectrum disorders; and (3) conduct an evaluation of programs carried out by State and local educational agencies to train teachers with respect to the provision of special education for children with autism spectrum disorders and provide recommendations to improve and expand such programs.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Education, acting through the Assistant Secretary for Special Education and Rehabilitative Services and in consultation with the Director of the National Research Council (or the Director's designee), shall appoint members of the Task Force as follows: (A) Not less than two members shall be representatives from national autism organizations.
Not less than one member shall be an individual with an autism spectrum disorder or a parent (or legal guardian) of such an individual.
Not less than two members shall be representatives from academia or professionals with experience in working with children with autism.
Not less than two members shall be appropriate officers or employees of the Department of Education.
Not less than two members shall be appropriate officers or employees of the Department of Health and Human Services (to be appointed in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services).
Compensation.-- (A) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), members of the Task Force shall be paid at the maximum rate of basic pay for GS-14 of the General Schedule for each day during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties of the Task Force.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.--Members of the Task Force who are full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Task Force.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Task Force shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter for each of the subsequent four calendar years, the Task Force shall prepare and submit to the Secretary of Education a report that contains the results of the reviews and evaluations conducted pursuant to subsection (b) and a description of the recommendations proposed pursuant to such subsection.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $500,000 for fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until expended.
STUDY AND REPORT ON FEDERAL VOCATIONAL TRAINING PROGRAMS.
Study.--The Secretary of Education, in conjunction with the Secretary of Labor (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Secretaries''), shall conduct a study on the effectiveness of Federal vocational training programs in providing appropriate assistance to individuals with autism spectrum disorders (ASD) (b) Report.--Not later than 18 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretaries shall submit to Congress a report that contains the following: (1) The results of the study conducted under subsection (a).
Administrative and legislative recommendations to improve the effectiveness of Federal vocational training programs in providing appropriate assistance to individuals with autism spectrum disorders.
Recommendations on appropriate data that should be collected, maintained, and disseminated in order to better monitor the effectiveness of each vocational training program that serves individuals with autism spectrum disorders.
STATE AUTISM OMBUDSMAN OFFICES.
Grants to States.--Of the amount appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subsection (d) for a fiscal year, the Secretary of Education shall provide grants to each State that meets the requirements of subsection (b) for the purpose of carrying out this section.
State Requirements.--A State meets the requirements of this subsection if it establishes and operates (including through the use of funds provided under a grant under subsection (a)) at least one State autism ombudsman office in accordance with this section.
The office shall be headed by an individual who shall be selected from among individuals who are members of, or approved by, national, non-profit organizations, including their State and local affiliate organizations, dedicated to addressing, by whatever means, the needs of individuals with autism spectrum disorders or their families or legal guardians.
Duties of Office.-- (1) In general.--A State autism ombudsman office established in accordance with subsection (b) shall serve individuals with autism spectrum disorders and their families or guardians as a resource to assist with legal, educational, and family support systems issues, including by advising families or guardians on the process of the individualized education program, interpreting school communications regarding a child who exhibits autistic behavior, proposing alternatives to those proposed by the IEP team, and otherwise mediating between families or guardians of a child with an autism spectrum disorder and officials of local or State public school systems, agencies, or boards.
Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``individualized education program'' or ``IEP'' means a written statement for a child with a disability that is developed, reviewed, and revised in accordance with section 614(d) of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act.
Requirements.--A State autism ombudsman office established in accordance with subsection (b) shall-- (1) coordinate with the State developmental disabilities council, university-affiliated programs, regional resource centers, and other appropriate State entities; and (2) operate independently of the State educational agency and local educational agencies within the State.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $8,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
In this Act, the term ``autism spectrum disorders''-- (1) means any of a group of life-long neurological disabilities, characterized by problems with social interactions and communication skills, and by the need for sameness or repetition in behavior; and (2) includes autistic disorder, Asperger's disorder, and pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified.