This Act may be cited as the ``Welfare Dependency Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds: (1) In the period since 1960 the average annual caseload of the aid to families with dependent children program (hereafter referred to in this section as ``AFDC'') under title IV of the Social Security Act has quintupled.
In 1990 there were on average almost twice as many households receiving AFDC payments as the number of households and individuals receiving unemployment compensation benefits.
Nearly one-quarter of children born in the period 1967 through 1969 were on welfare (AFDC) before reaching age 18.
For minority children this ratio approached three-quarters.
At any given time one-quarter of school children are from single parent families, or households with neither parent.
The National Assessment of Educational Progress has documented the educational losses associated with single parent or no parent households.
Only one-quarter of father-absent families receive full child support and over one-half receive none.
The average AFDC benefit has declined by more than one- third since 1960.
The burden of welfare dependency is an issue of necessary concern to women, who in overwhelming proportion are the heads of single parent families.
The rate of welfare dependency may be rising.
However, the statistical basis on which to assess this national issue is wholly inadequate, much as the statistical basis for addressing issues of unemployment was inadequate prior to the Employment Act of 1946, which required the creation of the annual economic report of the President and the development of unemployment rates.
Congressional Policy.--The Congress hereby declares that-- (1) it is the policy and responsibility of the Federal Government to reduce welfare dependency to the lowest possible level, and to assist families toward self-sufficiency, consistent with other essential national goals; (2) it is the policy of the United States to strengthen families, to ensure that children grow up in families that are economically self-sufficient and to underscore the responsibility of parents to support their children; (3) the Federal Government should help welfare recipients as well as individuals at risk of welfare dependency to improve their education and job skills, to obtain access to necessary support services, and to take such other steps as may assist them to meet their responsibilities to become financially independent; and (4) it is the purpose of this Act to aid in lowering welfare dependency by providing the public with generally accepted measures of welfare dependency so that the public can track dependency over time and determine whether progress is being made in reducing welfare dependency and enabling families to be self-sufficient.
MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING OF WELFARE DEPENDENCY.
In General.--Title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 413 the following new section: ``measurement and reporting of welfare dependency ``Sec.
Development of Welfare Dependency Indicators, Rates, and Predictors.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture, shall develop indicators, rates, and predictors of welfare dependency.
Development.--The Secretary shall-- ``(A) develop-- ``(i) indicators and rates related to the level of welfare dependency in the United States; and ``(ii) predictors that are correlated with welfare dependency; ``(B) assess the data needed to report annually on the indicators, rates, and predictors, including the ability of existing data collection efforts to provide such data and any additional data collection needs; and ``(C) not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this section, provide an interim report containing conclusions resulting from the development and assessment described in subparagraphs (A) and (B), to-- ``(i) the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives; ``(ii) the Committee on Education and Labor of the House of Representatives; ``(iii) the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives; ``(iv) the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives; ``(v) the Committee on Finance of the Senate; ``(vi) the Committee on Labor and Human Resources of the Senate; and ``(vii) the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.
Considerations.--In developing the indicators, rates, and predictors, the Secretary shall consider the complexity of patterns of welfare dependency and self-sufficiency attainment, and the external factors, including the economy, that affect welfare dependency.
Advisory Board on Welfare Dependency.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established an Advisory Board on Welfare Dependency (hereafter referred to in this section as the ``Board'').
Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 12 members with equal numbers to be appointed by the House of Representatives, the Senate, and the President.
The Board shall be composed of experts in the fields of welfare research and statistical methodology, representatives of State and local welfare agencies, and organizations concerned with welfare issues.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy occurring in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment for the position being vacated.
The vacancy shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Board.
Duties.--Duties of the Board shall include-- ``(A) providing advice and recommendations to the Secretary on the development of indicators, rates, and predictors of welfare dependency, and the identification of data collection needs and existing data collection efforts, described in subsection (a)(2)(B); and ``(B) providing advice on the development and presentation of the annual report on welfare dependency indicators, rates, and predictors required under subsection (c).
Travel expenses.--Members of the Board shall not be compensated, but shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, for each day the member is engaged in the performance of duties away from the home or regular place of business of the member.
Detail of federal employees.--The Secretary shall detail, without reimbursement, any of the personnel of the Department of Health and Human Services to the Board to assist the Board in carrying out its duties.
Any detail shall not interrupt or otherwise affect the civil service status or privileges of the Federal employee.
Voluntary service.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Board may accept the voluntary services provided by a member of the Board.
Termination of board.--The Board shall be terminated at such time as the Secretary determines the duties described in paragraph (4) have been completed, but in any case prior to the submission of the first report required under subsection (c).
Annual Welfare Dependency Report.-- ``(1) Preparation.--The Secretary shall prepare an annual report on welfare dependency in the United States.
The report shall attempt to identify indicators, rates, and predictors of welfare dependency and trends in dependency, and provide information and analysis on the causes of dependency.
Coverage.--The report shall include analysis of families and individuals receiving assistance under means- tested benefit programs, including the program of aid to families with dependent children under this part, the food stamp program under the Food Stamp Act of 1977, and the Supplemental Security Income program under title XVI, or as general assistance under programs administered by State and local governments.
Contents.--Each report shall set forth-- ``(A) for each of the means-tested benefit programs described in paragraph (2)-- ``(i) current trends in the number and rates of recipients and the characteristics, including age, sex, marital status, presence of children, labor force participation, and disability, of the recipients; and ``(ii) total expenditures; ``(B) the proportion of the total population receiving each of the programs and patterns of multiple program participation and recipiency duration; ``(C)(i) characteristics of each such program, including total expenditures broken down by Federal and State shares, gross income limit, need standards, and maximum potential benefit by State; and ``(ii) a description of the interactions among the programs; ``(D) in the case of the second, or a subsequent, report, changes in the information described in subparagraphs (A) through (C) from the previous year, and trends in program participation; ``(E) annual numerical goals for recipients, and expenditures, within each program and within significant subgroups within the population, for the calendar year in which the report is transmitted and for each of the following 4 calendar years, which goals shall, consistent with other essential national goals, reflect the objectives of-- ``(i) reducing welfare dependency to the lowest possible level; and ``(ii) increasing family self-sufficiency at or above the Federal poverty level to the greatest extent possible; ``(F)(i) the programs and policies as the Secretary, in consultation with the Board, determines are necessary to meet the goals for each of the 5 years; and ``(ii) such recommendations for legislation, which shall not include proposals to reduce eligibility levels or impose barriers to program access, as the Secretary may determine to be necessary or desirable to reduce welfare dependency; and ``(G) interim goals for reducing the proportion of children, and families with children, who are recipients of aid to families with dependent children to 10 percent of families with children, adjusted for economic conditions.
Submission.--The Secretary shall submit such a report not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this section, and annually thereafter, to the committees specified in subsection (a)(2)(C).
The report shall be transmitted during the first 60 days of each regular session of Congress.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall be effective on the date of the enactment of this Act.