This Act may be cited as the ``Department of Environmental Protection Act''.
TITLE I--REDESIGNATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY AS DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION SEC.
REDESIGNATION OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY AS DEPARTMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION.
Redesignation.--The Environmental Protection Agency is redesignated as the Department of Environmental Protection (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Department''), and shall be an executive department in the executive branch of the Government.
The Department shall be headquartered at the seat of Government.
The official acronym of the Department shall be ``D.E.P.''.
Secretary of the Environment.--(1) There shall be at the head of the Department a Secretary of Environmental Protection (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Office of the Secretary.--The Office of the Secretary shall consist of the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary appointed under subsection (d), and may include an Executive Secretary.
Transfer.--The functions, powers, and duties of the Administrator, other officers and employees of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the various offices and agencies of the Environmental Protection Agency are transferred to and vested in the Secretary.
Deputy Secretary.--There shall be in the Department a Deputy Secretary of Environmental Protection, who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Deputy Secretary shall perform such functions as the Secretary shall prescribe, and shall act as the Secretary during the absence or disability of the Secretary or in the event of a vacancy in the Office of the Secretary.
Delegation of Authority.--Except as provided in this Act and other existing laws, the Secretary may delegate any functions, including the making of regulations, to such officers and employees of the Department as the Secretary may designate, and may authorize such successive redelegations of such functions within the Department as the Secretary considers to be necessary or appropriate.
Establishment of Positions.--There shall be in the Department such number of Assistant Secretaries, not to exceed 10, as the Secretary shall determine, each of whom-- (1) shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate; and (2) shall perform such functions as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Functions.--The Secretary shall assign to each Assistant Secretary of the Department such functions as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Designation of Functions Prior to Confirmation.--Whenever the President submits the name of an individual to the Senate for confirmation as an Assistant Secretary under this section, the President shall state the particular functions of the Department (as assigned by the Secretary under subsection (b)) such individual will exercise upon taking office.
Establishment of Positions.--There shall be in the Department 20 Deputy Assistant Secretaries, or such number as the Secretary determines is appropriate.
Appointments.--Each Deputy Assistant Secretary-- (1) shall be appointed by the Secretary; and (2) shall perform such functions as the Secretary shall prescribe.
Career Senior Executive Service.--At least one-half of positions established under subsection (a) and filled by subsection (b) shall be in the career Senior Executive Service.
Functions.--Functions assigned to an Assistant Secretary under section 102(b) may be performed by one or more Deputy Assistant Secretaries appointed to assist such Assistant Secretary.
OFFICE OF THE GENERAL COUNSEL.
General Counsel.--There shall be in the Department the Office of the General Counsel.
There shall be at the head of such office a General Counsel who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The General Counsel shall be the chief legal officer of the Department and shall provide legal assistance to the Secretary concerning the programs and policies of the Department.
Deputy General Counsel.--There shall be in the Office of the General Counsel at least one Deputy General Counsel, who-- (1) shall be appointed by the General Counsel; and (2) shall perform such functions as the Secretary shall prescribe.
OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL.
The Office of Inspector General of the Environmental Protection Agency, established in accordance with the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.
), is redesignated as the Office of Inspector General of the Department of Environmental Protection.
There shall be in the Department not more than 11 regional administrators, each of whom shall be appointed by the Secretary.
Political affiliation or political qualification may not be the primary factor taken into account in connection with the appointment of any person to a position as a regional administrator of the Department.
Each regional administrator shall-- (1) perform in accordance with applicable law such of the functions transferred or delegated to or vested in the Secretary as the Secretary shall prescribe in accordance with the provisions of this Act and other applicable law; and (2) implement program policies and priorities as established by the Secretary, Assistant Secretaries, and Deputy Secretaries.
CONTINUING PERFORMANCE OF FUNCTIONS.
Redesignation of Positions.--(1) The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency is redesignated as the Secretary of the Department of Environmental Protection.
The Deputy Administrator of such agency is redesignated as the Deputy Secretary of the Department of Environmental Protection.
Each Assistant Administrator of such agency is redesignated as an Assistant Secretary of the Department.
The General Counsel of such agency is redesignated as the General Counsel of the Department.
The Inspector General of such agency is redesignated as the Inspector General of the Department.
Not Subject to Renomination or Reconfirmation.--An individual serving at the pleasure of the President in a position that is redesignated by subsection (a) may continue to serve in and perform functions of that position after the date of the enactment of this Act without renomination by the President or reconfirmation by the Senate.
Reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, reorganization plan, or delegation of authority, or in any document-- (1) to the Environmental Protection Agency is deemed to refer to the Department of Environmental Protection; (2) to the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency is deemed to refer to the Secretary of Environmental Protection; (3) to the Deputy Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency is deemed to refer to the Deputy Secretary of Environmental Protection; and (4) to an Assistant Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency is deemed to refer to the corresponding Assistant Secretary of the Department of Environmental Protection who is assigned the functions of that Assistant Administrator.
Continuing Effect of Legal Documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, privileges, and other administrative actions-- (1) which have been issued, made, granted or allowed to become effective by the President, the Administrator or other authorized official of the Environmental Protection Agency, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, which relate to functions of the Administrator or any other officer or agent of the Environmental Protection Agency actions; and (2) which are in effect at the time this Act takes effect; shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Secretary, or other authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Proceedings Not Affected.--This Act shall not affect any proceeding, proposed rule, or application for any license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending before the Environmental Protection Agency at the time this Act takes effect, and such proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this Act had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection prohibits the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits Not Affected.--This Act shall not affect suits commenced before the effective date of this Act, and in all such suits proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against the Environmental Protection Agency, or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall be abated by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Property and Resources.--The contracts, liabilities, records, property, and other assets and interests of the Environmental Protection Agency shall, after the effective date of this Act, be considered to be contracts, liabilities, records, property, and other assets and interests of the Department.
Presidential Succession.--Section 19(d)(1) of title 3, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the period at the end thereof the following: ``, Secretary of Environmental Protection''.
Definition of Department in Civil Service Laws.--Section 101 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The Department of Environmental Protection.''.
Compensation, Level I.--Section 5312 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Secretary of Environmental Protection.''.
Compensation, Level II.--Section 5313 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Administrator of Environmental Protection Agency'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Deputy Secretary of Environmental Protection''.
Compensation, Level IV.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``Inspector General, Environmental Protection Agency'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``Inspector General, Department of Environmental Protection''; (2) by striking each reference to an Assistant Administrator, or Assistant Administrators, of the Environmental Protection Agency; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``Assistant Secretaries, Department of Environmental Protection.
``General Counsel, Department of Environmental Protection.''.
Inspector General Act.--The Inspector General Act of 1978 is amended-- (1) in section 11(1)-- (A) by inserting ``Environmental Protection,'' after ``Energy,''; and (B) by striking ``Environmental Protection,''; and (2) in section 11(2)-- (A) by inserting ``Environmental Protection,'' after ``Energy,''; and (B) by striking ``the Environmental Protection Agency,''.
After consultation with the Committee on Government Operations of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate, and other appropriate committees of the Congress, the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Congress proposed legislation containing technical and conforming amendments to the laws of the United States, to reflect the changes made by this Act.
Such proposed legislation shall be submitted not later than 1 year after the effective date of this Act.
TITLE II--ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS SEC.
ACQUISITION OF COPYRIGHTS AND PATENTS.
The Secretary may acquire any of the following rights if the property acquired thereby is for use by or for, or useful to, the Department: (1) Copyrights, patents, and applications for patents, designs, processes, and manufacturing data.
Licenses under copyrights, patents, and applications for patents.
Releases, before suit is brought, for past infringement of patents or copyrights.
The Secretary may accept, hold, administer, and utilize gifts, bequests, and devises of real or personal property for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Department.
Gifts, bequests, and devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon the order of the Secretary.
OFFICIAL SEAL OF DEPARTMENT.
On and after the effective date of this Act, the seal of the Environmental Protection Agency, with appropriate changes, shall be the official seal of the Department, until such time as the Secretary may cause an official seal to be made for the Department of such design as the Secretary shall approve.
USE OF LIKENESS OF OFFICIAL SEAL OF DEPARTMENT.
Display of Seal.--Whoever knowingly displays any printed or other likeness of the official seal of the Department, or any facsimile thereof, in or in connection with, any advertisement, poster, circular, book, pamphlet, or other publication, public meeting, play, motion picture, telecast, or other production, or on any building, monument, or stationery, for the purpose of conveying, or in a manner reasonably calculated to convey, a false impression of sponsorship or approval by the Government of the United States or by any department, agency, or instrumentality thereof, shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 6 months, or both.
Manufacture, Reproduction, Sale, or Purchases for Resale.-- Except as authorized under regulations promulgated by the Secretary and published in the Federal Register, whoever knowingly manufactures, reproduces, sells, or purchases for resale, either separately or appended to any article manufactured or sold, any likeness of the official seal of the Department or any substantial part thereof (except for manufacture or sale of the article for the official use of the Government of the United States), shall be fined not more than $250 or imprisoned not more than 6 months, or both.
Injunctions.--A violation of subsection (a) or (b) may be enjoined by an action brought by the Attorney General in the appropriate district court of the United States.
The Attorney General shall file such an action upon request of the Secretary or any authorized representative of the Secretary.
USE OF STATIONERY, PRINTED FORMS, AND SUPPLIES OF ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY.
The Secretary shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, existing stationery, printed forms, and other supplies of the Environmental Protection Agency are used to carry out functions of the Department before procuring new stationery, printed forms, and other supplies for the Department.