This Act may be cited as the ``National Training Center for Minority Museum, Archives, and Historic Preservation Professionals Act''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) By a law enacted in 1980, the National Afro-American History and Culture Commission was established to develop plans for the construction and operation of the National Center for the Study of Afro-American History and Culture (now known as the National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center).
The Museum was constructed at Wilberforce, Ohio, and opened to the public in April 1988.
It was the intent of Congress, and the understanding of the State of Ohio, that the Federal Government would assist the State by providing funds for construction and development of the Museum as a joint Federal-State project, yet this partnership was not clarified in the original legislation.
The State of Ohio has assumed almost exclusive financial responsibility for the Museum thus far.
There is a gross underrepresentation of minority museum, archives, and historic preservation professionals in our Nation's museums, archives, and historic preservation offices, which results in the failure to preserve important artifacts, manuscripts, and sites related to minority history and culture.
The State of Ohio has gone as far as it can without tangible Federal assistance and needs Federal funds for construction of a center at the Museum to be used to train minority museum, archives, and historic preservation professionals for our Nation's museums, archives, and historic preservation offices.
Public Law 101-628 instructs the National Park Service to develop a range of concepts to preserve, interpret and commemorate the Underground Railroad story.
During the 19th Century, the State of Ohio and its citizens played major roles in helping escaped slaves to freedom via the Underground Railroad.
Wilberforce, Ohio was an important station among a network of stations in Ohio.
Purposes.--In order to meet the charge of the original legislation, the purposes of this Act are-- (1) to authorize the appropriation of funds for construction and maintenance of the National Training Center at the National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center at Wilberforce, Ohio; (2) to authorize the establishment of a Board of Governors of the National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center jointly with the State of Ohio; and (3) to authorize an interpretative and research center to preserve, interpret and commemorate the Underground Railroad story.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Board of governors.--The term ``Board of Governors'' means the Board of Governors of the National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center established pursuant to section 6.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the National Park Service.
Museum.--The term ``Museum'' means the National Afro- American Museum and Cultural Center.
NATIONAL TRAINING CENTER CONSTRUCTION AND OPERATIONS AND MAINTENANCE.
The Director shall-- (1) construct, jointly with the State of Ohio, a National Training Center at the Museum which will prepare professionals for our Nation's museums, archives, and historic preservation offices; and (2) through the Board of Governors established pursuant to section 6, provide for the operation and maintenance of the Museum and provide for technical assistance to the Museum.
MINORITY MUSEUM PROFESSIONAL STUDIES.
The Secretary of Education, acting through the Board of Governors, shall-- (1) contract with a consortium of institutions of higher education to implement a graduate degree program to train minorities in museum, archives, and historic preservation studies at the Museum; (2) offer annual seminars in museum, archival, and historic preservation practices and periodic workshops, in conjunction with the African American Museums Association and other professional organizations, to serve the needs of minority museum professionals; and (3) provide scholarships and loans for students and professionals in the studies established under paragraphs (1) and (2).
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF MUSEUM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Education and the Director are authorized to establish jointly with the State of Ohio a Board of Governors of the National Afro-American Museum and Cultural Center which meets the requirements of subsection (b) and which has the authority to carry out the duties, responsibilities, and authorities required by this Act.
Requirements for Board of Governors.--The requirements for the Board of Governors referred to in subsection (a) are as follows: (1) Number and appointment.-- (A) Four members of the Board of Governors are appointed by the Governor of Ohio, who are-- (i) the presidents of Central State University, Wright State University, and Wilberforce University, or their designees; and (ii) the Director of the Ohio Historical Society, or the Director's designee.
Five members of the Board of Governors who shall be from diverse disciplines and geographical residence and shall be committed to the advancement of knowledge and African American and minority history and culture, of whom-- (i) three shall be appointed by the Governor of Ohio; (ii) one shall be appointed by the Secretary; and (iii) one shall be appointed by the Director.
Terms.-- (A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term for members of the Board of Governors is three years and members may be reappointed.
Staggered terms.--As designated by the appointing authority at the time of initial appointments pursuant to paragraph (1)(B), the term of one member expires at the end of one year, the terms of two members expire at the end of two years, and the terms of three members expire at the end of three years.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Board of Governors shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the predecessor of the member was appointed for the remainder of the term.
No compensation.--Except as provided in paragraph (5), members of the Board of Governors appointed pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) shall serve without pay.
Expenses.--Members of the Board of Governors appointed pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) shall receive per diem, travel, and transportation expenses for each day, including travel time, during which they are engaged in the performance of the duties of the Board of Governors in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, with respect to employees serving intermittently in the Government service.
Chairperson.--The Board of Governors shall elect a chairperson by a majority vote of the members of the Board of Governors.
Meetings.--The Board of Governors shall meet at the call of the chairperson or upon the written request of a majority of its members, but shall meet not less than twice each year.
Quorum.--A majority of the Board of Governors shall constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting business, but a lesser number may receive information on behalf of the Board of Governors.
Voluntary services.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the chairperson of the Board of Governors may accept for the Board of Governors voluntary services provided by a member of the Board of Governors.
Commission Termination.--Effective 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the National Center for the Study of Afro- American History and Culture Act (20 United States Code 3701 et sequentes) is repealed.
DUTIES, AUTHORITIES, AND RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE MUSEUM.
In General.--The duties of the Board of Governors established pursuant to section 6(a) are as follows: (1) To recommend annual budgets for the Museum and the National Training Center established pursuant to section 4.
To have the sole authority to-- (A) loan, exchange, sell, or otherwise dispose of any part of the collections of the Museum, but only if the funds generated by such disposition are used for additions to the collections of the Museum or for additions to the endowment of the Museum; (B) subject to the availability of funds and the provisions of annual budgets of the Museum, purchase, accept, borrow, or otherwise acquire artifacts and other property for addition to the collections of the Museum; (C) establish policy with respect to the utilization of the collections of the Museum; and (D) establish policy regarding programming, education, exhibitions, and research, with respect to the life and culture of African Americans, the role of African Americans in the history of the United States, especially the significance of the Underground Railroad, and the contributions of African Americans to society.
To have authority to-- (A) provide for restoration, preservation, and maintenance of the collections of the Museum; (B) solicit funds for the Museum and determine the purposes to which those funds shall be used; (C) approve expenditures from the endowment of the Museum, or of income generated from the endowment, for any purpose of the Museum; and (D) consult with, advise, and support the Director in the operation of the Museum.
To establish programs in cooperation with other minority museums, historical societies, educational institutions, cultural and other organizations for the education and promotion of understanding regarding minority life, art, history, and culture.
To support the efforts of other minority museums and cultural and other organizations to educate and promote understanding regarding minority life, art, history, and culture, including-- (A) development of cooperative programs and exhibitions; (B) identification, management, and care of collections; (C) participation in the training of museum archives and historic preservation professionals; and (D) creating opportunities for-- (i) research fellowships; and (ii) professional and student internships.
To adopt bylaws to carry out the functions of the Board of Governors.
To report annually to Congress and the Ohio legislature on the acquisition, disposition, and display of minority American objects and artifacts and on other appropriate matters.
Capital.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Director for construction, equipment, and exhibit installation pursuant to section 4(1) (1) $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1996 for planning and design; and (2) $10,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1997 and 1998 for construction, equipment and exhibit installation.
Operations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Director (1) $1,000,000 for operation and maintenance pursuant to section 4(2); and (2) $25,000 annually for the Board of Governors pursuant to section 6(b)(5).
Minority Museum Professional Studies.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary such sums as may be necessary to carry out section 5.