This Act may be cited as the ``Charitable Volunteers Tax Credit Incentive Act of 1995''.
CREDIT FOR CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS TO CERTAIN PRIVATE CHARITIES PROVIDING ASSISTANCE TO THE POOR.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
23. CREDIT FOR CERTAIN CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS.
In General.--In the case of an eligible taxpayer, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to so much of the qualified charitable contributions which are paid by the taxpayer to 1 qualified charity as do not exceed $500.
Eligible Taxpayer.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible taxpayer' means any individual who has worked at least 50 hours at the qualified charity identified under subsection (c) during the taxable year.
Qualified Charitable Contribution.--For the purposes of this section, the term `qualified charitable contribution' means any charitable contribution (as defined in section 170(c)) made in cash, but only if the amount of such contribution, the qualified charity, and the number of hours worked by the taxpayer at the qualified charity are identified on the return for the taxable year during which such contribution is made.
Qualified Charity.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified charity' means, with respect to the taxpayer, any organization described in section 501(c)(3) and exempt from tax under section 501(a)-- ``(A) which is certified by the Secretary as meeting the requirements of paragraphs (2) and (3); and ``(B) which is organized under the laws of a State at the time the contribution is made and is exempt from income taxation (if any) by such State.
Charity must primarily assist the poor.--An organization meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the predominant activity of such organization is the provision of services to individuals whose annual incomes do not exceed 150 percent of the official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget).
Minimum expenditure requirement.-- ``(A) In general.--An organization meets the requirements of this paragraph only if the Secretary reasonably expects that the annual exempt purpose expenditures of such organization will not be less than 70 percent of the annual aggregate expenditures of such organization.
Exempt purpose expenditure.--For purposes of subparagraph A-- ``(i) In general.--The term `exempt purpose expenditure' means any expenditure to carry out the activity referred to in paragraph (2).
Exceptions.--Such term shall not include-- ``(I) any administrative expense; ``(II) any expenses for the purpose of influencing legislation (as defined in section 4911(d)); ``(III) any expense primarily for the purpose of fundraising; and ``(IV) any expense for a legal service provided on behalf of any individual referred to in paragraph (2).
Donor May Not Have Financial Interest in Charity.-- ``(1) In general.--No credit shall be allowed under this section for any contribution made to an organization if the donor or any member of the donor's family is an officer or employee of such organization.
Self-dealing.--To the extent provided by the Secretary by regulation, no credit shall be allowed under this section for any contribution made to an organization if-- ``(A) the donor, ``(B) any member of the family of the donor, or ``(C) any thirty-five percent controlled entity of persons described in subparagraph (A) or (B), engages in significant activities with respect to such organization which are a type described in section 4941(d) (relating to self-dealing).
35-percent controlled entity.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (2), the term `35-percent controlled entity' means-- ``(i) a corporation in which persons described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of paragraph (2) own more than 35 percent of the combined voting power, ``(ii) a partnership in which such persons own more than 35 percent of the profits interest, and ``(iii) a trust or estate in which such persons own more than 35 percent of the beneficial interest.
Constructive ownership rules.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (3) and (4) of section 4946(a) shall apply for purposes of this paragraph.
Member of the family.--For the purposes of this subsection, the members of an individual's family shall be determined under section 4946(d).
Coordination With Deduction for Charitable Contributions.-- ``(1) Credit in lieu of deductions.--The credit provided by subsection (a) for any qualified charitable deduction shall be in lieu of any deduction otherwise allowable under this chapter for such contribution.
Election to have this section not apply.--A taxpayer may elect for any taxable year to have this section not apply.''.
Qualified Charities Required To Provide Copies of Annual Return.--Subsection (e) of section 6104 of such code (relating to public inspection of certain annual returns and applications for exemption) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Charities receiving creditable contributions required to provide copies of annual return.-- ``(A) In general.--Every qualified charity (as defined in section 23(d)) shall, upon request of an individual made at an office where such organization's annual return filed under section 6033 is required under paragraph (1) to be available for inspection, shall provide a copy of such return to such individual without charge other than a reasonable fee for any reproduction and mailing costs.
If the request is made in person, such copies shall be provided immediately and, if made other than in person, shall be provided within 30 days.
Period of availability.--Subparagraph (A) shall only apply during the 3-year period beginning on the filing date (as defined in paragraph (1)(D) of the return requested).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
23. Credit for certain charitable contributions.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to contributions made and work performed after the 90th day after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.