This Act may be cited as the ``Commission on the Dual-Use Application of Facilities and Resources at White Sands Missile Range Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The end of the Cold War, the fall of communist governments, and the spread of democratic principles and governments across the world will permit the Federal Government to continue the thoughtful reduction in the amount spent by the United States for national defense.
The reallocation of amounts that would otherwise be spent for that purpose offers an opportunity for the Federal Government to expand the utilization of defense-related equipment, processes, and technologies by the private sector, thereby promoting growth and job creation in the United States economy.
The Department of Defense has spent billions of dollars on the research, development, test, and evaluation of a variety of such equipment, processes, and technologies, including the facilities, equipment, processes, and technologies utilized at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico.
The Department of Defense has not adequately studied or provided guidance for the manner in which defense-related facilities, equipment, processes, and technologies may be utilized effectively by the private sector.
A study of the facilities and resources of White Sands Missile Range provides an excellent opportunity to examine the defense-related facilities, equipment, processes, and technologies of the Department of Defense and their utilization by scientific personnel engaged in a variety of research, development, test, and evaluation programs.
The establishment of a commission for the study of such facilities, equipment, processes, and technologies will provide timely, relevant information on potential dual-use applications of such facilities, equipment, processes, and technologies by the private sector.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on the Dual-Use Application of Facilities and Resources at White Sands Missile Range (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of 10 members appointed by the Secretary of Defense, of whom-- (1) not less than one shall be a senior official or employee of the Department of Energy national laboratories who is familiar with the experiences of the Department of Energy with cooperative research and development agreements and dual- use technologies; (2) not less than one shall be a chief executive officer of a corporation that has worked with the Department of Defense or the Department of Energy on cooperative research and development agreements or have significant experience in the research, development, test, and evaluation of high technology; (3) not less than one shall be a senior official or employee of a department or agency of the Federal Government who is an expert in the commercial utilization or application of high technology by the private sector; and (4) the remainder, if any, shall be such persons as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Period of Appointment; Vacancies.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Quorum.--Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairman.--The Commission shall select a Chairman from among its members.
Meetings.--(1) Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall hold its first meeting.
The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairman.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate 1 year after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study of the manner in which the defense-related equipment, facilities, processes, and technologies at White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, may be utilized by the private sector.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date on which all members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall submit to the Committees on Armed Services and the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the results of the study conducted under subsection (a) which shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as the Commission considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Hearings.--For the purpose of carrying out this Act, the Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence, as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths of affirmations to witnesses appearing before the Commission.
Information from Federal Agencies.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Upon the request of a member of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Delegation of Powers.-- Any member of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this Act.
Postal Service.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Compensation.--(1) Each member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the United States shall be compensated at a rate established by the Commission not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the actual performance of duties as a member of the Commission.
Each member of the Commission who is an officer or employee of the United States shall receive no additional compensation for service on the Commission.
While away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of their duties for the Commission, the members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at a rate established by the Commission not to exceed rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Administrative Provisions.--(1) The Commission shall appoint an executive director who shall be compensated at a rate established by the Commission not to exceed the rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
With the approval of the Commission, the executive director may appoint and fix the compensation of such additional personnel as the executive director considers necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission.
Service of an individual as a member of the Commission, or employment of the individual by the Commission as an expert in any business or professional field, on a part-time or full-time basis, with or without compensation, shall not be considered as service or employment bringing such individual within the provisions of any Federal law relating to conflicts of interest or otherwise imposing restrictions, requirements, or penalties in relation to the employment of persons, the performance of services, or the payment or receipt of compensation in connection with claims, proceedings, or matters involving the United States.
Service as a member of the Commission, or as an employee of the Commission, shall not be considered service in an appointive or elective position in the Government for purposes of section 8344 of title 5, United States Code, or comparable provisions of Federal law.
There are authorized to be appropriated such amounts as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.