This Act may be cited as the ``Airline Competition Act of 1999''.
In this Act: (1) Air carrier.--The term ``air carrier'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(2) of title 49, United States Code.
Aircraft.--The term ``aircraft'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(6) of title 49, United States Code.
Airport.--The term ``airport'' has the meaning given that term in section 40102(9) of title 49, United States Code.
Attorney general.--The term ``Attorney General'' means the Attorney General of the United States.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
PREFERENCE FOR LOW-COMPETITION AIRPORTS.
Definitions.--Section 41714(h) of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (3) and (4) as paragraphs (5) and (6), respectively; and (2) by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Large hub airport.--The term `large hub airport' means an airport described in section 47134(d)(2).
Low-competition airport.--The term `low-competition airport' means an airport that-- ``(A) is not a large hub airport; and ``(B) the Secretary determines has substantially-- ``(i) less service than the average service at airports in the United States; or ``(ii) higher airfares than average airfares for airports in the United States.''.
Preference.--Section 41714(c)(1) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In granting exemptions under this paragraph, the Secretary shall give preference to air transportation provided to low-competition airports that are located within a 500-mile radius of a high density airport.''.
Guidelines.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General, shall issue regulations that define predatory practices and unfair methods of competition of air carriers for the purposes of applying this Act to complaints of predatory practices or unfair methods of competition filed under section 41712 of title 49, United States Code, or any other applicable provision of law.
Determinations Regarding Actions Filed.-- (1) Actions filed before the date of enactment of this act.--Not later than 9 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete action on any complaint alleging a predatory practice or unfair method of competition by an air carrier that was filed with the Secretary under section 41712 of title 49, United States Code, or any other applicable provision of law before the date of enactment of this Act.
Actions filed on or after the date of enactment of this act.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after a complaint alleging a predatory practice or unfair method of competition by an air carrier is filed with the Secretary under section 41712 of title 49, United States Code, or any other applicable provision of law, the Secretary shall make an initial finding concerning whether the practice that is the subject of the complaint constitutes a predatory practice or unfair method of competition.
Applicability.--Subparagraph (A) shall apply to a complaint filed with the Secretary on or after the date of enactment of this Act.
Restraining Orders.-- (1) In general.--In a manner consistent with section 41712 or any other applicable provision of law, the Secretary shall enjoin, pending final determination, any action of an air carrier that the Secretary finds to be a predatory practice or unfair method of competition under subsection (b).
Period for taking action.--The Secretary shall carry out the requirements of paragraph (1) not later than 15 days after an initial finding is made with respect to a complaint under subsection (b) (or if the initial finding is made before the date of enactment of this Act, not later than 15 days after the date of enactment of this Act).
LIMITS ON COMPETITION IN AVIATION INDUSTRY.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, and annually thereafter, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report concerning barriers to entry, predatory practices (including pricing), and other limits on competition in the aviation industry.
PROVISIONS TO PREVENT INCREASED AIRCRAFT NOISE.
Secretarial Authority Under This Act.--Nothing in this Act or the amendments made by this Act shall authorize the Secretary to take any action that would increase aircraft noise in any community in the vicinity of an airport.
Stage 4 Noise Levels.-- (1) Proposed regulations.--Section 47523 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Stage 4 Noise Levels.-- ``(1) Proposed regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Airline Competition Act of 1999, the Secretary shall issue proposed regulations that-- ``(A) establish, in a manner consistent with this chapter, stage 4 noise levels applicable to aircraft designated by the Secretary as stage 4 aircraft; and ``(B) provide for the implementation of the stage 4 noise level requirements by the date that is 36 months after the date of issuance of the proposed regulations.
Criteria for noise levels.--The stage 4 noise levels established under this subsection shall-- ``(A) provide for a significant reduction in the level of noise generated by aircraft; and ``(B) be consistent with the noise levels attainable through the use of the most effective noise control technology available for stage 3 aircraft (as that term is used under section 47524(c)), as of January 1, 1999.''.
Legislative proposals.--At the same time as the Secretary issues proposed regulations under section 47523(c) of title 49, United States Code, as added by paragraph (1) of this subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress such proposed legislation (including amendments to chapter 475 of title 49, United States Code) as is necessary to ensure the implementation of stage 4 noise levels (as that term is used in such section 47523(c)).
CLARIFICATION OF LEGAL STANDING.
Section 41713(b) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) This subsection shall not bar any cause of action brought against an air carrier by 1 or more private parties seeking to enforce any right under the common law of any State or under any State statute, other than a statute purporting to directly prescribe fares, routes, or levels of air transportation service.