This Act may be cited as the ``Independent Nuclear Safety Board Act of 1994''.
Findings.--Congress finds that there is a great need for-- (1) vigorous investigation of events at facilities, or involving materials, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that could adversely affect public health or safety; and (2) continual review and assessment of licensing and other regulatory practices of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which may result in conclusions critical of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission or officials of the Commission.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish an Independent Nuclear Safety Board which shall promote nuclear safety by-- (1) conducting independent investigations of events at facilities, or involving materials, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission that could adversely affect public health or safety; (2) reviewing and assessing the licensing and other regulatory practices of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; (3) recommending to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission improvements in licensing and related regulatory practices; and (4) informing Congress of findings and recommendations of the Board that result from the investigations referred to in paragraph (1).
ESTABLISHMENT OF NUCLEAR SAFETY BOARD.
Title II of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5841 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
INDEPENDENT NUCLEAR SAFETY BOARD.
Establishment.--There is established a board to be known as the `Independent Nuclear Safety Board' (referred to in this section as the `Board').
Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--The Board shall be composed of 3 members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among respected experts in the field of commercial nuclear energy with a demonstrated competence and knowledge relevant to the independent investigative and prescriptive functions of the Board.
Not more than 2 members of the Board shall be members of the same political party.
Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this section, the President shall submit the nominations for appointment to the Board.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the membership of the Board shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Financial interests.--No member of the Board shall-- ``(A) have any significant financial relationship in any firm, company, corporation, or other business entity that is engaged in an activity regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (referred to in this section as the `Commission') as a licensee or contractor; or ``(B) have had such a relationship within the 2- year period preceding the appointment of the member.
Chairperson.-- ``(1) In general.--The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson of the Board shall be designated by the President.
The Chairperson and Vice Chairperson may be reappointed.
Functions.-- ``(A) In general.--The Chairperson shall be the chief executive officer of the Board and shall, subject to such policies as the Board may establish, exercise the functions of the Board with respect to-- ``(i) the appointment and supervision of personnel employed by the Board; ``(ii) the organization of any administrative units established by the Board; and ``(iii) the use and expenditure of funds.
Delegation.--The Chairperson may delegate any of the functions under this paragraph to any other member of the Board or to any appropriate employee or officer of the Board.
Vice chairperson.--The Vice Chairperson shall act as Chairperson in the case of the absence or incapacity of the Chairperson or in the case of a vacancy in the office of Chairperson.
Terms of Members.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Board shall serve for a term of 6 years.
A member of the Board may be reappointed.
Initial members.--Of the members first appointed to the Board-- ``(A) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 2 years; ``(B) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 4 years; and ``(C) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 6 years; as designated by the President at the time of appointment.
Special terms.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term of office for which the predecessor of the member was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of the term.
A member may serve after the expiration of the term of the member until a successor has taken office.
Removal.--Any member of the Board may be removed by the President for inefficiency, neglect of duty, or malfeasance in office.
Quorum.--Two members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Functions and Authorities.-- ``(1) Investigations.-- ``(A) In general.-- ``(i) Investigations by board.--The Board shall investigate any event at any facility, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission, that the Board determines to be significant because the event could-- ``(I) adversely affect public health or safety; or ``(II) be the precursor of an event that could adversely affect public health or safety.
Investigations by commission.--The Board may request the Commission to carry out an investigation of an event described in clause (i) and to report the findings of the Commission to the Board in a timely fashion.
Whenever the Commission concludes such an investigation, the Board may analyze the findings of the Commission for the purpose of making its own conclusions and recommendations.
Purpose of investigations.--The purpose of a Board investigation of an event under this paragraph shall be-- ``(i) to ascertain information concerning the circumstances of the event, and the implications of the event for public health and safety; ``(ii) to determine whether the event is part of a pattern of similar events at 1 or more facilities, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission that could-- ``(I) adversely affect public health or safety; or ``(II) be the precursor of an event that could adversely affect public health or safety; and ``(iii) to provide such recommendations to the Commission for changes in licensing, safety regulations and requirements, and other regulatory policy as may be prudent or necessary.
Analysis of operational data.--For purposes of carrying out this section, the Board shall have access to and may systematically analyze-- ``(A) operational data from any facility, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission to determine whether there exist certain patterns of events that indicate safety problems; and ``(B) operational data of the Commission including personnel and files.
Special studies.--The Board may conduct special studies pertaining to nuclear safety at any facility, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission.
Evaluation of suggestions.--The Board may evaluate suggestions received from the scientific and industrial communities, and from the interested public, on specific measures to improve safety at any facility, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission.
Recommendations to commission.-- ``(A) In general.--The Board shall recommend to the Commission specific measures that should be adopted to minimize the likelihood that events will occur at any facility, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission, that could adversely affect public health or safety.
The Commission shall respond in writing to the recommendations of the Board not later than 120 days after receipt of the recommendations.
The written response shall detail specific measures adopted by the Commission in response to the recommendations, and explanations for the inaction of the Commission on recommendations the Commission chose to reject.
Submission to congress.--The recommendations of the Board made pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall be submitted to Congress.
Reporting requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of investigations, the Board shall establish reporting requirements that shall be binding on-- ``(i) any person who operates, designs, supplies, maintains, or is otherwise involved with the operation or construction of, a facility licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission; and ``(ii) any person who processes, stores, transports, uses, or possesses a material licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission.
Protected material.-- ``(i) Reporting.--The information that the Board may require to be reported under this paragraph may include any material designated as classified material pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2011 et sequentes), or any information designated as safeguards information and protected from disclosure under section 147 of such Act (42 United States Code 2167).
Public access.--Information received by the Board shall be made available to the public in accordance with the applicable provisions of subsections (a) and (b) of section 306 of the Independent Safety Board Act of 1974 (49 United States Code App.
Hearings.-- ``(A) In general.--The Board or, on the authorization of the Board, any member of the Board, may, for the purpose of carrying out this section, hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, and require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such evidence as the Board or the authorized member determines advisable.
Subpoenas.-- ``(i) In general.--A subpoena may be issued only under the signature of the Chairperson, or any member of the Board designated by the Chairperson, and shall be served by any person designated by the Chairperson or the member.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place in the United States at any designated place of hearing in the United States.
Oaths.--Any member of the Board may administer an oath or affirmation to a witness appearing before the Board.
Enforcement.--Any person who willfully neglects or refuses to qualify as a witness, or to testify, or to produce any evidence in obedience to any subpoena duly issued under the authority of this paragraph, shall be fined not more than $5,000, or imprisoned for not more than 180 days, or both.
Upon certification by the Chairperson of the Board of the facts concerning any willful disobedience by any person to the United States attorney for any judicial district in which the person resides or is found, the attorney may proceed by information for the prosecution of the person for the offense.
Reports.-- ``(A) In general.--The Board shall issue periodic reports that shall be made available to Congress, and to Federal, State, and local government agencies concerned with safety at a facility, or involving any material, licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission.
The reports shall be made available to other interested persons on request.
Contents.--Each report shall contain-- ``(i) the major findings of the Board investigations; and ``(ii) recommendations of-- ``(I) specific measures to reduce the likelihood of a recurrence of nuclear events similar to events investigated by the Board; and ``(II) corrective steps implemented or required by the Commission to enhance or improve safety conditions at facilities investigated by the Board and other facilities as considered appropriate by the Board.
Staff and consultants.--In accordance with the civil service laws and regulations, the Chairperson of the Board may hire staff and employ consultants for the purpose of carrying out the functions and duties of the Board under this subsection.
Events.--As used in this subsection, the term `event' includes an action or failure to act by any person, including the Commission as an organization and the staff of the Commission, or a continuing series of actions or failures to act by any such person, including operational failures, that the Board determines have a potentially adverse effect on public health or safety as described in paragraph (1).
Transfer of Functions.--There are transferred to the Board-- ``(1) all functions of the Office for Analysis and Evaluation of Operational Data of the Commission relating to the functions of the Board described in subsection (f); and ``(2) such personnel from the Office for Analysis and Evaluation of Operational Data as the Director of the Office of Management and Budget determines are necessary to carry out the functions described in subsection (f).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995 through 2000.
Termination.--The Board shall terminate on September 30, 2000.''.