This Act may be cited as the ``California Ocean Protection Act of 1995''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the coast of California possesses unique historical, ecological, educational, recreational, economic, and research values that are appropriate for protection under Federal law; (2) the threat to the coast of California, a national treasure, continues to intensify as a result of fossil fuel exploration and development, mineral extraction, and the burning and dumping of toxic and hazardous wastes; (3) the activities described in paragraph (2) could result in irreparable damage to the coast of California; and (4) the establishment of an ocean protection zone off the coast of California would enhance recreational and commercial fisheries, and the use of renewable resources within the zone.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Development.--The term ``development'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Exclusive economic zone.--The term ``Exclusive Economic Zone'' means the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States, as defined by Presidential Proclamation 5030 of March 10, 1983.
Exploration.--The term ``exploration'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Harmful ocean dumping.--The term ``harmful ocean dumping''-- (A) shall have the meaning provided by the Administrator, in consultation with the heads of other Federal agencies whom the Administrator determines to be appropriate; but (B) shall not include-- (i) a de minimus disposal of vessel waste; (ii) the disposal of dredged material that-- (I) would meet the requirements for disposal under the criteria established under section 103 of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1413), including regulations promulgated under that section; or (II) is disposed of pursuant to a permit issued pursuant to that section; (iii) a discharge that is authorized under a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued under section 402 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1342); or (iv) a disposal that is carried out by an appropriate Federal agency under title I of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1411 et sequentes).
Minerals.--The term ``minerals'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Outer continental shelf.--The term ``outer Continental Shelf'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Person.--The term ``person'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Production.--The term ``production'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of such Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Territorial sea .--The term ``territorial sea'' means the belt of sea measured from the baseline of the United States, determined in accordance with international law, as set forth in Presidential Proclamation 5928, dated December 27, 1988.
Zone.--The term ``Zone'' means the California Ocean Protection Zone established under section 4.
DESIGNATION OF CALIFORNIA OCEAN PROTECTION ZONE.
There is established a California Ocean Protection Zone, consisting of-- (1) waters of the Exclusive Economic Zone that are contiguous to the waters of the territorial sea that are contiguous to the State of California; (2) waters of the territorial sea that are contiguous to the State of California; and (3) the portion of the outer Continental Shelf underlying those waters.
Mineral Exploration, Development, and Production.-- (1) Definition.--In this subsection, the term ``lease'' has the meaning stated in section 2 of the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act (43 United States Code 1331).
Issuance of leases, permits, and licenses.-- Notwithstanding any other law, the head of a Federal agency may not issue a lease, permit, or license for the exploration for or development or production of oil, gas, or other minerals in or from the Zone.
Exploration, development, and production.-- Notwithstanding any other law, a person may not engage in the exploration for, or the development or production of, oil, gas, or other minerals in or from the Zone after the date of the cancellation, expiration, relinquishment, or termination of a lease, permit, or license in effect on June ____, 1995, that permits exploration, development, or production.
Ocean Incineration and Dumping.--Notwithstanding any other law, the head of a Federal agency may not issue a lease, permit, or license for-- (1) ocean incineration or harmful ocean dumping within the Zone; or (2) any onshore facility that facilitates ocean incineration or harmful ocean dumping within the Zone.
This Act is not intended to regulate, restrict, or prohibit commercial or recreational fishing, or other harvesting of ocean life in the Zone.