This Act may be cited as the ``Capitol Police Retention, Recruitment, and Authorization Act of 2002''.
INCREASE IN ANNUAL RATE OF BASIC COMPENSATION.
For fiscal year 2003, the Capitol Police Board shall increase the annual rate of basic compensation applicable for officers and members of the Capitol Police for pay periods occurring during the year by 5 percent, except that in the case of officers above the rank of captain the increase shall be made at a rate determined by the Board at its discretion (but not to exceed 5 percent).
INCREASE IN RATES APPLICABLE TO NEWLY-APPOINTED MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES.
The Capitol Police Board may compensate newly-appointed officers, members, and civilian employees of the Capitol Police at an annual rate of basic compensation in excess of the lowest rate of compensation otherwise applicable to the position to which the employee is appointed, except that in no case may such a rate be greater than the maximum annual rate of basic compensation otherwise applicable to the position.
ADDITIONAL COMPENSATION FOR SPECIALTY ASSIGNMENTS.
Section 909(e) of the Emergency Supplemental Act, 2002 (40 United States Code 207b-2(e)), is amended-- (1) in the heading, by inserting ``and Officers Holding Other Specialty Assignments'' after ``Officers''; (2) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``or who is assigned to another specialty assignment designated by the chief of the Capitol Police'' after ``field training officer''; and (3) in paragraph (2), by striking ``officer,'' and inserting ``officer or to be assigned to a designated specialty assignment,''.
APPLICATION OF PREMIUM PAY LIMITS ON ANNUALIZED BASIS.
In General.--Any limits on the amount of premium pay which may be earned by officers and members of the Capitol Police during emergencies (as determined by the Capitol Police Board) shall be applied by the Capitol Police Board on an annual basis and not on a pay period basis.
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to hours of duty occurring on or after September 11, 2001.
THRESHOLD FOR ELIGIBILITY FOR ADDITIONAL ANNUAL LEAVE.
The Capitol Police Board shall provide that an officer or member of the Capitol Police who completes 3 years of employment with the Capitol Police (taking into account any period occurring before, on, or after the date of the enactment of this Act) shall receive 8 hours of annual leave per pay period.
FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR HIGHER EDUCATION COSTS.
Tuition Reimbursement.-- (1) In general.--The Capitol Police Board shall establish a tuition reimbursement program for officers and members of the Capitol Police who are enrolled in or accepted for enrollment in a degree, certificate, or other program leading to a recognized educational credential at an institution of higher education in a course of study relating to law enforcement.
Annual cap on amount reimbursed.--The amount paid as a reimbursement under the program established under this subsection with respect to any individual may not exceed $3,000 during any year.
Approval of regulations.--The program established under this subsection shall take effect upon the approval of the regulations promulgated by the Capitol Police Board to carry out the program by the Committee on House Administration of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate.
Bonus Payments for Completion of Degree.--The Capitol Police Board may make a one-time bonus payment in an amount not to exceed $500 to any officer or member who participates in the program established under subsection (a) upon the officer's or member's completion of the course of study involved.
BONUS PAYMENTS FOR OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES WHO RECRUIT NEW OFFICERS.
In General.--The Capitol Police Board may make a one-time bonus payment in an amount not to exceed $500 to any officer, member, or civilian employee of the Capitol Police who recruits another individual to serve as an officer or member of the Capitol Police.
Exemption of Recruitment Officers.--No payment may be made under subsection (a) to any officer, member, or civilian employee who carries out recruiting activities for the Capitol Police as part of the individual's official responsibilities.
Timing.--No payment may be made under subsection (a) with respect to an individual recruited to serve as an officer or member of the Capitol Police until the individual completes the training required for new officers or members and is sworn in as an officer or member.
DEPOSIT OF CERTAIN FUNDS RELATING TO THE CAPITOL POLICE.
In General.-- (1) Disposal of property.--Any funds from the proceeds of the disposal of property of the Capitol Police shall be deposited in the United States Treasury for credit to the appropriation for ``general expenses'' under the heading ``Capitol Police Board'', or ``security enhancements'' under the heading ``Capitol Police Board''.
Compensation.--Any funds for compensation for damage to, or loss of, property of the Capitol Police, including any insurance payment or payment made by an officer or civilian employee of the Capitol Police for such compensation, shall be deposited in the United States Treasury for credit to the appropriation for ``general expenses'' under the heading ``Capitol Police Board''.
Reimbursement for services provided to governments.-- Any funds from reimbursement made by another entity of the Federal government or by any State or local government for assistance provided by the Capitol Police shall be deposited in the United States Treasury for credit to the appropriation for ``general expenses'' under the heading ``Capitol Police Board''.
Expenditures.--Funds deposited under subsection (a) may be expended by the Capitol Police Board for any authorized purpose (subject to the approval of the Committee on House Administration of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate) and shall remain available until expended.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply with respect to fiscal year 2003 and each succeeding fiscal year.
INCREASE IN NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED POSITIONS.
Effective with respect to fiscal year 2002 and each fiscal year thereafter, the total number of full-time equivalent positions of the United States Capitol Police (including positions for members of the Capitol Police and civilian employees) may not exceed 1,981 positions.
The disposal of firearms by officers and members of the United States Capitol Police shall be carried out in accordance with regulations promulgated by the Capitol Police Board and approved by the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate and the Committee on House Administration of the House of Representatives.
USE OF VEHICLES TO TRANSPORT POLICE DOGS.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an officer of the United States Capitol Police who works with a police dog and who is responsible for the care of the dog during non-working hours may use an official Capitol Police vehicle when the officer is accompanied by the dog to travel between the officer's residence and duty station and to otherwise carry out official duties.
SENSE OF CONGRESS ON MANAGEMENT OF CAPITOL POLICE.
It is the sense of Congress that, to the greatest extent possible consistent with the mission of the Capitol Police, the chief of the Capitol Police should seek to deploy the human and other resources of the Police in a manner maximizing opportunities for individual officers to be trained for, and to acquire and maintain proficiency in, all aspects of the Police's responsibilities, and to rotate regularly among different posts and duties, in order to utilize fully the skills and talents of officers, enhance the appeal of their work, and ensure the highest state of readiness.
There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal year 2003 and each succeeding fiscal year such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act and the amendments made by this Act.
Except as otherwise provided, this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to pay periods occurring during fiscal year 2003 and each succeeding fiscal year.
Passed the House of Representatives June 26, 2002.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.