COMPENSATION FOR FARMERS FOR DAMAGES FROM TRADE EMBARGOES.
Compensation Required.--In connection with any trade embargo imposed by the President after the date of the enactment of this Act, or any retaliatory embargo imposed by a foreign country in response to such an embargo, the Secretary of Agriculture shall compensate producers of each agricultural commodity produced in the United States and included among the prohibited trade items for damages incurred by the producers as a result of lost sales or reduced market price of the commodity due to the initial or retaliatory embargo.
This section shall not apply in the case of a trade embargo imposed by the President that prohibits all trade with the country subject to the embargo, if the Congress passes a law approving of the embargo.
Filing of Claim.--To obtain compensation under subsection (a), a producer shall file a claim with the Secretary of Agriculture specifying the amount of the damages incurred by the producer as a result of an embargo described in subsection (a).
Calculation of Damages.--For each agricultural commodity produced in the United States and subject to an embargo described in subsection (a), the Secretary of Agriculture shall determine the difference, if any, between the average price of the agricultural commodity for the 12-month period ending on the date the agricultural commodity became subject to the embargo and the average price of the agricultural commodity for the 12-month period immediately after that date.
The Secretary shall adjust the amount determined under the preceding sentence to reflect only the amount of the price reduction resulting from the embargo.
Producers shall use the adjusted amount to calculate their damages.
If the embargo extends beyond the first year, the Secretary shall redetermine the difference between the average prices during each subsequent 12-month period.
Payment.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall forward the producer's claim to the Commodity Credit Corporation, which shall pay the producer, from funds available to the Corporation, an amount equal to-- (1) three times the amount of the damages determined under subsection (c), in the case of an agricultural commodity subject to a trade embargo imposed by the President; or (2) the amount of the damages determined under subsection (c), in the case of an agricultural commodity subject to a retaliatory embargo imposed by a foreign country in response to the President's embargo.
Reimbursement.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall reimburse the Commodity Credit Corporation, from funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, for all payments made by the Corporation under subsection (d).
Adjudication of Disputes.--In the case of a dispute arising in connection with a claim under this section, the United States Court of Federal Claims shall have jurisdiction to adjudicate the claim and enter judgment accordingly.
If the Court enters judgment on behalf of the producer, the United States shall be responsible for the costs incurred by the producer to pursue the claim.
Notification of Congress.--As soon as possible after the President imposes an embargo described in subsection (a) or is informed of a retaliatory embargo, the President shall notify the Congress regarding-- (1) the agricultural commodities subject to the embargo; (2) the amount of damages to agricultural producers estimated as likely to result from the embargo; and (3) the source of funds to be used to provide compensation to such producers under subsection (a).
Assistance Following Embargo.--During the one-year period following the lifting of any trade embargo described in subsection (a) with respect to an agricultural commodity, the Secretary of Agriculture shall provide assistance to producers of the agricultural commodity in order to assist such producers to regain market share lost as a result of the embargo.
The Secretary shall provide such assistance in such manner and under such terms as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Agricultural Commodity Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``agricultural commodity'' means-- (1) any agricultural commodity planted and produced in the United States by annual tilling of the soil (including tilling by one-trip planters), such as wheat, corn, grain sorghum, barley, oats, rye, cotton, soybeans, peanuts, tobacco, sugar beets, potatoes, and vegetables; (2) sugar cane and rice planted and produced in the United States; (3) milk, fruits, and honey produced in the United States; (4) beef and other livestock, poultry, and aquacultural species raised in the United States; and (5) timber and fiber crops produced in the United States.
Such term also includes any integral input into the production of an agricultural commodity, such as seed crops, crop nutrients, or crop protection products.