This Act may be cited as the ``Superior National Forest Fund Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The anticipated number of persons using the facilities of the Superior National Forest requires additional funding to provide minimum sanitary and safety related service at the Superior National Forest as well as management of the environment and riparian areas.
The quality of services provided at the Superior National Forest and the integrity of the environment could best be served by maintaining public, rather than private, management of the Superior National Forest.
The users of units of the National Forest System have demonstrated a willingness to pay a user fee for maintenance and operation if the locally collected funds are returned to the unit.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to use funds generated from fees charged in connection with the recreational use of the Superior National Forest-- (1) to assure adequate funding of maintenance and operation of the Superior National Forest; and (2) to provide additional funding to the counties in which the Superior National Forest is located, enabling the counties to increase investment in facilities and services related to public safety, sanitation, and the recreational environment.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Recreation site.--The term ``recreation site'' means a campground, picnic ground, swimming site, boat launch site, lake access site, or other man-made or natural recreational facility in the Superior National Forest.
Recreation use fee; fee.--The terms ``recreation use fee'' or ``fee'' mean a fee that is charged for the use of a recreation site in the Superior National Forest.
Recreation use pass.--The term ``recreation use pass'' means a document that entitles the holder access and use of recreation sites in the Superior National Forest for a specified period of time.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
TEMPORARY AUTHORITY TO COLLECT RECREATION USE FEES.
Recreation Use Fee Authorized.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary may establish and collect recreation use fees at designated recreation sites within the Superior National Forest.
Exceptions.--The Secretary may not impose or collect a recreation use fee for the use or provision in the Superior National Forest, either singly or in any combination, of drinking water, wayside exhibits, toilet facilities, general purpose roads, overlook sites, or general information.
The Secretary may not impose or collect a fee from any officer or employee of the Federal Government or State or local government authorized by the Secretary to perform administrative duties at recreation sites in the Superior National Forest.
Establishment and Collection.--Establishment and collection of recreation use fees shall be made in accordance with subsections (d) and (e) of section 4 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a).
The Secretary may authorize the collection of fees by volunteers in accordance with subsection (k) of such section.
Golden Age Passport and Golden Access Passport.--Any person holding a valid Golden Age Passport or Golden Access Passport issued under paragraph (4) or (5) of section 4(a) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a(a)) shall be entitled upon presentation of such passport to use a recreation site within the Superior National Forest at a rate equal to 50 percent of the recreation use fee otherwise applicable to such recreation site.
Effect on Other Laws.--Recreation use fees established under this section for use of recreation sites in the Superior National Forest shall be in lieu of any recreation use fees for such recreation sites under section 4(b) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a(b)) or section 1401 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1993 (16 United States Code 460l-6c).
TEMPORARY AUTHORITY TO SELL RECREATION USE PASSES.
Recreation Use Pass Authorized.--The Secretary shall make available for purchase recreation use passes for the use on a daily or annual basis of recreation sites in the Superior National Forest otherwise subject to a recreation use fee.
Use of an annual recreation use pass shall be subject to any single stay time limits imposed on the recreation site.
Availability.--The Secretary may have recreation use passes available for sale at any recreation site for which a recreation use fee is charged or at other convenient locations.
Use of Pass.--The recreation use pass shall apply to-- (1) the pass holder and any person accompanying the pass holder in a single, private, noncommercial vehicle; or (2) the pass holder and the spouse, children, and parents of the pass holder accompanying the pass holder where entry to a recreation site is by any means other than a private, noncommercial vehicle.
Golden Age Passport and Golden Access Passport.--Any person holding a valid Golden Age Passport or Golden Access Passport issued under paragraph (4) or (5) of section 4(a) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a(a)) shall be entitled upon presentation of such passport to purchase of a recreation use pass for the Superior National Forest at a rate equal to 50 percent of the purchase price otherwise applicable to the recreation use pass.
Rules and Regulations, Enforcement Powers.--Recreation use passes sold under this section shall be nontransferable.
The unlawful use of a recreation use pass shall be punishable in accordance with regulations established under section 4(e) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1964 (16 United States Code 460l-6a(e)).
Termination.--The authority of the Secretary to establish or collect fees under section 4 or sell recreation use passes under section 5 shall expire at the end of the seven-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Termination of such authority shall not affect the validity of any annual recreation use pass sold under section 5 before that date.
Report.--Not later than six years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources and the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives a report evaluating the authority provided by sections 4 and 5 regarding recreation use fees and recreation use passes.
The report shall include any recommendations of the Secretary for modifying the authority, for extending the authority beyond the date specified in subsection (a), or for extending the authority to other units of the National Forest System.
DISPOSITION OF RECREATION USE FEES AND FUNDS FROM SALES OF RECREATION USE PASSES.
Deposit of Funds.--Notwithstanding paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 4(i) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a(i)), recreation use fees collected under section 4 and amounts received from sales of recreation use passes under section 5 shall be deposited in a special account in the Treasury.
Use of Funds.-- (1) Operation, maintenance, and other uses.--In such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Secretary may use amounts in the special account to provide supplemental funds for operation, maintenance, and management of recreation sites within the Superior National Forest, for interpretation and management of resources in the Superior National Forest, and for administrative costs associated with such activities.
Payments to states and counties.--Recreation use fees collected under section 4 and amounts received for recreation use passes sold under section 5 shall be considered as money received for purpose of computing and distributing payments to States and counties pursuant to section 13 of the Act of March 1, 1911 (16 United States Code 500).
Roads and Trails.--Recreation use fees collected under section 4 and amounts received for recreation use passes sold under section 5 shall not be considered as money received for purpose of the fourteenth paragraph under the heading ``forest service'' of the Act of March 4, 1913 (16 United States Code 501).