This Act may be cited as the ``Ship, Seafarer, and Container Security Act''.
In General.--When operating in navigable waters of the United States (as defined in section 2101(17a) of title 46, United States Code), the following vessels shall be equipped with an automatic identification system: (1) Any vessel subject to the Vessel Bridge-to-Bridge Radiotelephone Act (33 United States Code 1201 et sequentes).
Any small passenger vessel carrying more than a number of passengers determined by the Secretary of Transportation.
Any commercial towing vessel while towing astern or pushing ahead or alongside, except commercial assistance towing vessels rendering assistance to disabled small vessels.
Any other vessel for which the Secretary of Transportation determines that an automatic identification system is necessary for the safe navigation of the vessel.
Regulations; Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall initiate a rulemaking to implement subsection (a).
Content.--Regulations promulgated pursuant to that rulemaking-- (A) may, subject to subparagraph (B), include effective dates for the application of subsection (a) to different vessels at different times; (B) shall require all vessels to which subsection (a) applies to comply with the requirements of subsection (a) no later than December 31, 2004; and (C) shall be issued in final form before December 31, 2004.
Effective date not dependent upon final rule.--If regulations have not been promulgated in final form under this subsection before December 31, 2004, then subsection (a) shall apply to-- (A) any vessel described in paragraph (1) or (3) of that subsection on and after that date; and (B) other vessels described in subsection (a) as may be provided in regulations promulgated thereafter.
Treaty Initiative.--The Secretary of Transportation should undertake the negotiation of an international agreement, or amendments to an international agreement that provides for a uniform, comprehensive, international system of identification for seafarers that will enable the United States and other countries to establish authoritatively the identity of any seafarer aboard a vessel within the jurisdiction, including the territorial waters, of the United States or such other country.
Legislative Alternative.--If the Secretary fails to complete the international agreement negotiation or amendment process undertaken under subsection (a) within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a draft of legislation that, if enacted, would establish a uniform, comprehensive system of identification for seafarers.
GREATER TRANSPARENCY OF SHIP REGISTRATION.
Treaty Initiative.--The Secretary of Transportation should undertake the negotiation of an international agreement, or the amendment of an international agreement, to provide greater transparency with respect to the registration and ownership of vessels entering or operating in the territorial waters of the United States.
Legislative Alternative.--If the Secretary fails to complete the international agreement or amendment process undertaken under subsection (a) within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a draft of legislation that, if enacted, would provide for greater transparency with respect to the registration and ownership of vessels operating in international waters.
INTERNATIONAL AGREEMENT ON CONTAINER INTEGRITY.
Treaty Initiative.--The Secretary of Transportation should undertake the negotiation of an international agreement, or amendments to an international agreement, to establish marine container integrity and anti-tampering standards for marine containers.
Legislative Alternative.--If the Secretary fails to complete the international agreement negotiation or amendment process undertaken under subsection (a) within 24 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a draft of legislation that, if enacted, would establish marine container integrity and anti- tampering standards.
COAST GUARD TO DEVELOP RISK-BASED ANALYSIS AND SECURITY ZONE SYSTEM FOR VESSELS.
In General.--The Commandant of the Coast Guard shall establish-- (1) a risk-based system for use in evaluating the potential threat to the national security of the United States of vessels entering the territorial waters of the United States; and (2) a system of security zones for ports, territorial waters, and waterways of the United States.
Mechanisms and Systems Considerations.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Commandant shall consider-- (1) the use of public/private partnerships to implement and enforce security within the security zones, shoreside protection alternatives, and the environmental, public safety, and relative effectiveness of such alternatives within the security zones; and (2) technological means of enhancing the security within the security zones of ports, territorial waters, and waterways of the United States.
Grants.--The Commandant of the Coast Guard may make grants to applicants for research and development of alternative means of providing the protection and security required by this section.
Reports.-- (1) Initial report.--Within 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commandant of the Coast Guard shall transmit, in a form that does not compromise security, to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representative Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a report that includes-- (A) a description of the methodology employed in evaluating risks to security; (B) a list of security zones; and (C) recommendations as to how protection of such vessels and security zones might be further improved.
Report on alternatives.--Within 12 months after the Commandant has awarded grants under subsection (c), the Commandant shall transmit to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representative Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a report on the results of testing and research carried out with those grants.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Department in which the Coast Guard is operating for the use of the Coast Guard, $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2003 to make grants under subsection (c).