This Act may be cited as the ``Guaranteeing a United and Resolute Defense Act of 2003''.
ASSISTANCE FOR NATIONAL GUARD HOMELAND SECURITY ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Title 32, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 112 the following new section: ``Sec.
Homeland security activities ``(a) Funding Assistance.--The Secretary of Defense may provide funds to the Governor of a State that has a homeland security activities plan in effect that satisfies the requirements of subsection (c).
Such funds shall be used for the following: ``(1) The pay, allowances, clothing, subsistence, gratuities, travel, and related expenses, as authorized by State law, of personnel of the National Guard of that State for service performed for the purpose of homeland security while not in Federal service.
The operation and maintenance of the equipment and facilities of the National Guard of the State that are used for the purpose of homeland security.
The procurement of services and the purchase or leasing of equipment for the National Guard of that State for use for the purpose of homeland security.
Use of Personnel Performing Full-Time National Guard Duty.-- (1) Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of Defense, personnel of the National Guard of a State may, in accordance with the State homeland security activities plan, be ordered to perform full-time National Guard duty under section 502(f) of this title for the purpose of carrying out homeland security activities.
(A) A member of the National Guard serving on full-time National Guard duty under orders authorized under paragraph (1) shall participate in the training required under section 502(a) of this title in addition to the duty performed for the purpose authorized under that paragraph, and may participate in additional training for the purpose of promoting military readiness, to include attendance at schools.
The pay, allowances, and other benefits of the member while participating in such training shall be the same as those to which the member is entitled while performing duty for the purpose of carrying out homeland security activities.
The member is not entitled to additional pay, allowances, or other benefits for participating in such training while serving on full-time National Guard duty under orders authorized under paragraph (1).
Appropriations available for the Department of Defense for homeland security activities may be used for paying costs associated with a member's participation in training described in subparagraph (A).
The appropriation shall be reimbursed in full, out of appropriations available for paying those costs, for the amounts paid.
Appropriations available for paying those costs shall be available for making the reimbursements.
Homeland Security Activities Plan Requirements.--The homeland security activities plan of a State-- ``(1) shall specify how personnel and equipment of the National Guard of the State are to be used in homeland security activities and include a detailed explanation of the reasons why the National Guard should be used for the specified activities; ``(2) shall describe in detail how any available National Guard training facilities, including any distance learning programs and projects, are to be used; ``(3) shall include the Governor's certification that the activities under the plan are to be conducted at a time when the personnel involved are not in Federal service; ``(4) shall include the Governor's certification that participation by National Guard personnel in the activities under the plan is service in addition to training required under section 502 of this title; ``(5) shall include a certification by the Attorney General of the State (or, in the case of a State with no position of Attorney General, a civilian official of the State equivalent to a State attorney general) that the use of the National Guard of the State for the activities proposed under the plan is authorized by, and is consistent with, State law; ``(6) shall include the Governor's certification that the Governor or a civilian official of the State designated by the Governor has determined that any activities to be carried out in conjunction with Federal agencies under the plan are in furtherance of the homeland security activities specified under paragraph (1); and ``(7) may provide for the use of personnel and equipment of the National Guard of that State to assist the Directorate of Immigration Affairs of the Department of Homeland Security in the transportation of aliens who have violated a Federal or State law.
Relationship to State Drug Interdiction and Counter-Drug Activities Plan.--A State drug interdiction and counter-drug activities plan referred to in section 112 of this title may be included as an annex to the State's homeland security activities plan.
If included as an annex and approved under section 112(d) of this title, the Governor of the State may-- ``(1) authorize the use of services, supplies, and equipment procured under subsection (a)(3), and personnel performing full-time National Guard duty under subsection (b), to support drug interdiction and counter-drug activities carried out under section 112 of this title, if the Governor determines that such use is necessary to accomplish the purposes of the State drug interdiction and counter-drug activities plan and will not adversely affect the performance of homeland security activities; and ``(2) authorize the use of services, supplies, and equipment procured under section 112(a) of this title, and personnel performing full-time National Guard duty under section 112(b) of this title, to support homeland security activities carried out under this section, if the Governor determines that such use is necessary to accomplish the purposes of the State homeland security activities plan and will not adversely affect the performance drug interdiction and counter-drug activities.
Examination and Approval of Plan.--The Secretary of Defense shall examine the adequacy of each homeland security activities plan of a State and, if the plan is determined adequate, approve the plan.
Annual Report.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress an annual report on the assistance provided under this section during the preceding fiscal year, including the activities carried out with such assistance.
The report shall include the following: ``(1) A description of the homeland security activities conducted under homeland security activities plans with funds provided under this section.
An accounting of the funds provided to each State under this section.
An analysis of the effects on military training and readiness of using units and personnel of the National Guard to perform activities under the homeland security activities plans.
Statutory Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed as limiting the authority of any unit of the National Guard of a State, when such unit is not in Federal service, to perform law enforcement functions authorized to be performed by the National Guard by the laws of the State concerned.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `Governor', in the case of the District of Columbia, means the commanding general of the National Guard of the District of Columbia.
The term `homeland security activities', with respect to the National Guard of a State, means the use of National Guard personnel, when authorized by the law of the State and requested by the Governor of the State, to prevent, deter, defend against, and respond to an attack or threat of attack on the people and territory of the United States.
The term `State' includes the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, and the Virgin Islands.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 1 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 112 the following new item: ``112a.
AUTHORITY FOR MEMBERS OF NATIONAL GUARD TO PARTICIPATE IN ADDITIONAL MILITARY TRAINING WHILE ON ORDERS TO SUPPORT COUNTER-DRUG ACTIVITIES.
Section 112(b)(2)(A) of title 32, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``The member may participate in additional training for the purpose of promoting military readiness, to include attendance at schools.
''; and (2) in the last sentence, by striking ``in training required under section 502(a)(1) of this title'' and inserting ``in such training while serving on full-time National Guard duty under orders authorized under paragraph (1)''.