This Act may be cited as the ``United States Commemorative Coin Act of 1995''.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Fund'' means the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Maintenance Fund established under section 201; (2) the term ``recipient organization'' means an organization described in section 101 to which surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act are paid; and (3) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
TITLE I--COMMEMORATIVE COIN PROGRAMS SEC.
In accordance with the recommendations of the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee, the Secretary shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) Bicentennial of united states.--On or before December 31, 1995, the Secretary shall mint not more than 25,000 $10 gold coins with specifications to be determined by the Secretary.
United nations and president truman.-- (A) In general.--To commemorate the 50th anniversary of the founding of the United Nations and the role of President Harry S. Truman in the founding of the United Nations, during a 1-year period beginning in 1996, the Secretary shall issue-- (i) not more than 75,000 $5 coins, each of which shall-- (I) weigh 8.359 grams; (II) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (III) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy; and (ii) not more than 350,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (I) weigh 26.73 grams; (II) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (III) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent alloy.
Surcharges.--All sales of the coins issued under this subsection shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin for each $5 coin, and a surcharge of $10 per coin for each $1 coin.
Distribution of surcharges.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this subsection shall be promptly paid by the Secretary in accordance with the following: (i) Fifty percent of the surcharges received shall be paid to the Harry S. Truman Library Foundation.
Fifty percent of the surcharges received shall be paid to the United Nations Association.
Smithsonian institution.-- (A) In general.--To commemorate the 150th anniversary of the founding of the Smithsonian Institution, during a 1-year period beginning in August 1996, the Secretary shall issue-- (i) not more than 100,000 $5 coins, each of which shall-- (I) weigh 8.359 grams; (II) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (III) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy; and (ii) not more than 800,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (I) weigh 26.73 grams; (II) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (III) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent alloy.
Surcharges.--All sales of the coins issued under this subsection shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin for each $5 coin, and a surcharge of $10 per coin for each $1 coin.
Distribution of surcharges.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this subsection shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Smithsonian Institution to be used to support the National Numismatic Collection at the National Museum of American History.
Design.--The design of the coins issued under this subsection shall be emblematic of the scientific, educational, and cultural significance and importance of the Smithsonian Institution.
Each coin issued under this subsection shall include an inscription of the following words from the original bequest of James Smithson: ``for the increase and diffusion of knowledge''.
Franklin delano roosevelt.-- (A) In general.--To commemorate the public opening of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington, D.C., which will honor President Roosevelt's leadership and legacy, during a 1-year period beginning in 1997, the Secretary shall issue not more than 100,000 $5 coins, each of which shall-- (i) weigh 8.359 grams; (ii) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (iii) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
Surcharges.--All sales of the coins issued under this subsection shall include a surcharge of $35 per coin.
Distribution of surcharges.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this subsection shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial Commission.
Yellowstone national park.-- (A) In general.--To commemorate the 125th anniversary of the establishment of Yellowstone National Park as the first national park in the United States, and the birth of the national park idea, during a 1-year period beginning in 1997, the Secretary shall issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (i) weigh 26.73 grams; (ii) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (iii) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent alloy.
Surcharges.--All sales of the coins issued under this subsection shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution of surcharges.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this subsection shall be promptly paid by the Secretary in accordance with the following: (i) Fifty percent of the surcharges received shall be paid to the National Park Foundation to be used for the support of national parks.
Fifty percent of the surcharges received shall be paid to Yellowstone National Park.
National law enforcement officers memorial.-- (A) In general.--To recognize the sacrifice of law enforcement officers and their families in preserving public safety, during a 1-year period beginning in 1997, the Secretary shall issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (i) weigh 26.73 grams; (ii) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (iii) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent alloy.
Surcharges.--All sales of the coins issued under this subsection shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution of surcharges.--After receiving surcharges from the sale of the coins issued under this subsection, the Secretary shall transfer to the Secretary of the Interior an amount equal to the surcharges received from the sale of the coins issued under this subsection, which amount shall be deposited in the Fund established under section 201.
Availability.--The coins issued under this subsection shall be available for issuance not later than May 1997.
Selection.--The design for each coin issued under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the appropriate recipient organization or organizations and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Designation and Inscriptions.--On each coin issued under this Act there shall be-- (1) a designation of the value of the coin; (2) an inscription of the year; and (3) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
The coins issued under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain gold for minting coins under this Act pursuant to the authority of the Secretary under other provisions of law.
Silver.--The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from sources the Secretary determines to be appropriate, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Each coin issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coin; (2) the surcharge provided in section 101 with respect to the coin; (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coin (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping); and (4) the estimated profit determined under section 106(b) with respect to the coin.
DETERMINATION OF COSTS AND PROFIT.
Determination of Costs.--With respect to the coins issued under this Act, the Secretary shall, on an ongoing basis, determine-- (1) the costs incurred in carrying out each coin program authorized under this Act; and (2) the allocation of overhead costs among all coin programs authorized under this Act.
Determination of Profit.--Prior to the sale of each coin issued under this Act, the Secretary shall calculate the estimated profit to be included in the sale price of the coin under section 105(4).
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
Section 5112(j) of title 31, United States Code, shall apply to the procurement of goods or services necessary to carrying out the programs and operations of the United States Mint under this Act.
PROHIBITION ON JUDICIAL REVIEW.
Each determination made by the Secretary in implementing a commemorative coin program under this Act shall be made in the sole discretion of the Secretary and shall not be subject to judicial review.
The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of each recipient organization as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under section 101.
It is the sense of the Congress that each coin program authorized under this Act should be self-sustaining and should be administered so as not to result in any net cost to the Numismatic Public Enterprise Fund.
TITLE II--NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS MEMORIAL MAINTENANCE FUND SEC.
NATIONAL LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS MEMORIAL MAINTENANCE FUND.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial Maintenance Fund, which shall be a revolving fund administered by the Secretary of the Interior (or the designee of the Secretary of the Interior).
Funding.--Amounts in the Fund shall include-- (A) amounts deposited in the Fund under section 101(6); and (B) any donations received under paragraph (3).
Donations.--The Secretary of the Interior may accept donations to the Fund.
Interest-bearing account.--The Fund shall be maintained in an interest-bearing account within the Treasury of the United States.
Purposes.--The Fund shall be used-- (1) for the maintenance and repair of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial in Washington, D.C.; (2) to periodically add the names of law enforcement officers who have died in the line of duty to the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial; (3) for the security of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial site, including the posting of National Park Service rangers and United States Park Police, as appropriate; (4) at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior and in consultation with the Secretary and the Attorney General of the United States, who shall establish an equitable procedure between the Fund and such other organizations as may be appropriate, to provide educational scholarships to the immediate family members of law enforcement officers killed in the line of duty whose names appear on the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial, the total annual amount of such scholarships not to exceed 10 percent of the annual income of the Fund; (5) for the dissemination of information regarding the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial to the general public; (6) to administer the Fund, including contracting for necessary services, in an amount not to exceed the lesser of-- (A) 10 percent of the annual income of the Fund; or (B) $200,000 during any 1-year period; and (7) at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Fund, for appropriate purposes in the event of an emergency affecting the operation of the National Law Enforcement Officers Memorial, except that, during any 1- year period, not more than $200,000 of the principal of the Fund may be used to carry out this paragraph.
Budget and Audit Treatment.--The Fund shall be subject to the budget and audit provisions of chapter 91 of title 31, United States Code.