This Act may be cited as the ``Hydroelectric Licensing and Incentives Act of 2001''.
IMPROVEMENTS TO HYDROPOWER RELICENSING PROCESS.
In General.--Part I of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 791a and following) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PROCESS FOR CONSIDERATION BY FEDERAL AGENCIES OF CONDITIONS TO LICENSES.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Condition.--The term `condition' means-- ``(A) a condition to a license for a project on a Federal reservation determined by a consulting agency for the purpose of the first proviso of section 4(e); or ``(B) a prescription relating to the construction, maintenance, or operation of a fishway determined by a consulting agency for the purpose of the first sentence of section 18.
Consulting agency.--The term `consulting agency' means-- ``(A) in relation to a condition described in paragraph (1)(A), the Federal agency with responsibility for supervising the reservation; and ``(B) in relation to a condition described in paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce, as appropriate.
Factors To Be Considered.--In determining a condition, a consulting agency shall-- ``(1) consider the economic effects (including power cost impacts) of the condition; ``(2) consider the effect on other beneficial public uses (including irrigation, flood control, water supply, and recreation) of the condition; ``(3) consider compatibility with other conditions to be included in the license, including mandatory conditions of other agencies, when available; ``(4) consider compatibility with conditions existing at the project site, including, where applicable, joint operation of a facility by two or more sovereign nations, operation of a facility on a waterway that is an international boundary, and conditions mandated by international treaty; ``(5) prescribe a condition only when necessary to address direct project-related effects; and ``(6) in selecting among conditions that are equally effective for purposes of the first proviso of section 4(e) and the first sentence of section 18, prescribe the least costly alternative.
Documentation.-- ``(1) In general.--A consulting agency shall assemble a record detailing, among other pertinent matters, all proposals made, comments received from public notice of draft conditions, facts considered, and analyses made sufficient to demonstrate compliance with subsection (b).
Submission to the commission.--A consulting agency shall include the documentation under paragraph (1) in it, submission of a condition to the Commission.
Public Comment.--Before submitting to the Commission a condition, and at least 90 days before a license applicant is required to file a license application with the Commission, a consulting agency shall provide notice of draft conditions and an opportunity for a hearing on the record.
The consulting agency shall take into consideration all comments received and include in the documentation submitted to the Commission evidence thereof.
Submission of Final Condition.-- ``(1) In general.--After an applicant files with the Commission an application for a license, the Commission shall set a date by which a consulting agency shall submit to the Commission a final condition.
Limitation.--Except as provided in paragraph (4), the date for submission of a final condition shall be not later than one year after the date on which the Commission gives the consulting agency notice that a license application is ready for environmental review.
Default.--If a consulting agency does not submit a final condition to a license by the date set under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) the consulting agency shall not thereafter have authority to recommend or establish a condition to the license; and ``(B) the Commission may, but shall not be required to, recommend or establish an appropriate condition to the license that-- ``(i) furthers the interest sought to be protected by the provision of law that authorizes the consulting agency to propose or establish a condition to the license; and ``(ii) conforms to the requirements of this Act.
Extension.--The Commission may extend for good cause a deadline set under paragraph (2).''.
Conforming and Technical Amendments.--(1) Section 3(17)(E)(ii) of the Federal Power Act (16 United States Code 796(17)(E)(ii)) is amended by striking the period at the end thereof and inserting a semicolon.
The first proviso of the first sentence of section 4(e) of such Act (16 United States Code 797(e)) is amended by inserting after ``conditions'' the following: ``, determined in accordance with section 32,'' and by striking the period at the end of the proviso and inserting a colon.
Section 14(b) of such Act (16 United States Code 807(b)) is amended by striking ``its'' and inserting ``it'' in the second sentence.
Section 18 of such Act (16 United States Code 811) is amended in the first sentence by striking ``prescribed by the Secretary of Commerce'' and inserting ``prescribed, in accordance with section 32, by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce, as appropriate''.
Section 21 of such Act (16 United States Code 814) is amended by inserting a colon after ``$3,000''.
Section 30(c)(1) of such Act (16 United States Code 823a(c)(1)) is amended by inserting a comma after ``Service'' each place it appears.
Incentive Payments.--For electric energy generated and sold by a qualified hydroelectric facility during the incentive period, the Secretary of Energy (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') shall make, subject to the availability of appropriations, incentive payments to the owner or operator of such facility.
The amount of such payment made to any such owner or operator shall be as determined under subsection (e) of this section.
Payments under this section may only be made upon receipt by the Secretary of an incentive payment application which establishes that the applicant is eligible to receive such payment and which satisfies such other requirements as the Secretary deems necessary.
Such application shall be in such form, and shall be submitted at such time, as the Secretary shall establish.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) Qualified hydroelectric facility.--The term ``qualified hydroelectric facility'' means a turbine or other generating device owned or solely operated by a non-Federal entity which generates hydroelectric energy for sale and which is added to an existing dam or conduit.
Existing dam or conduit.--The term ``existing dam or conduit'' means any dam or conduit the construction of which was completed before the date of the enactment of this section and which does not require any construction or enlargement of impoundment or diversion structures (other than repair or reconstruction) in connection with the installation of a turbine or other generating device.
Conduit.--The term ``conduit'' has the same meaning as when used in section 30(a)(2) of the Federal Power Act.
The terms defined in this subsection shall apply without regard to the hydroelectric kilowatt capacity of the facility concerned, without regard to whether the facility uses a dam owned by a governmental or nongovernmental entity, and without regard to whether the facility begins operation on or after the date of the enactment of this section.
Eligibility Window.--Payments may be made under this section only for electric energy generated from a qualified hydroelectric facility which begins operation during the period of 10 fiscal years beginning with the first full fiscal year occurring after the date of enactment of this Act.
Incentive Period.--A qualified hydroelectric facility may receive payments under this section for a period of 10 fiscal years (referred to in this section as the ``incentive period'').
Such period shall begin with the fiscal year in which electric energy generated from the facility is first eligible for such payments.
Amount of Payment.-- (1) In general.--Payments made by the Secretary under this section to the owner or operator of a qualified hydroelectric facility shall be based on the number of kilowatt hours of hydroelectric energy generated by the facility during the incentive period.
For any such facility, the amount of such payment shall be 1.5 cents per kilowatt hour (adjusted as provided in paragraph (2)), subject to the availability of appropriations under subsection (g), except that no facility may receive more than $1,000,000 in one calendar year.
Adjustments.--The amount of the payment made to any person under this section as provided in paragraph (1) shall be adjusted for inflation for each fiscal year beginning after calendar year 2001 in the same manner as provided in the provisions of section 29(d)(2)(B) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, except that in applying such provisions the calendar year 2001 shall be substituted for calendar year 1979.
Sunset.--No payment may be made under this section to any qualified hydroelectric facility after the expiration of the period of 20 fiscal years beginning with the first full fiscal year occurring after the date of enactment of this Act, and no payment may be made under this section to any such facility after a payment has been made with respect to such facility for a period of 10 fiscal years.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out the purposes of this section $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2002 through 2011.
Incentive Payments.--The Secretary of Energy shall make incentive payments to the owners or operators of hydroelectric facilities at existing dams to be used to make capital improvements in the facilities that are directly related to improving the efficiency of such facilities by at least 3 percent.
Limitations.--Incentive payments under this section shall not exceed 10 percent of the costs of the capital improvement concerned and not more than one payment may be made with respect to improvements at a single facility.
No payment in excess of $1,000,000 may be made with respect to improvements at a single facility.
Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section not more than $50,000,000 in each fiscal year after the fiscal year 2001.
SMALL HYDROELECTRIC POWER PROJECTS.
Section 408(a)(6) of the Public Utility Regulatory Policies Act of 1978 is amended by striking ``April 20, 1977'' and inserting ``May 16, 2001''.
INCREASED HYDROELECTRIC GENERATION AT EXISTING FEDERAL FACILITIES.
In General.--The Secretary of Energy, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior and Secretary of the Army, shall conduct studies of the cost-effective opportunities to increase hydropower generation at existing federally-owned or operated water regulation, storage, and conveyance facilities.
Such studies shall be completed within two years after the date of enactment of this Act and transmitted to the Committee on Commerce of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
An individual study shall be prepared for each of the Nation's principal river basins.
Each such study shall identify and describe with specificity the following matters: (1) Opportunities to improve the efficiency of hydropower generation at such facilities through, but not limited to, mechanical, structural, or operational changes.
Opportunities to improve the efficiency of the use of water supplied or regulated by Federal projects where such improvement could, in the absence of legal or administrative constraints, make additional water supplies available for hydropower generation or reduce project energy use.
Opportunities to create additional hydropower generating capacity at existing facilities through, but not limited to, the construction of additional generating facilities, the uprating of generators and turbines, and the construction of pumped storage facilities.
Preliminary assessment of the costs and the economic and environmental consequences of such measures.
Previous Studies.--If studies of the type required by subsection (a) have been prepared by any agency of the United States and published within the five years prior to the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Energy may choose not to perform new studies and incorporate the information in such studies into the studies required by subsection (a).
Authorization.--There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.