This Act may be cited as the ``Church Insurance Protection Act''.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the recent incidents of arson attacks against churches should be condemned; and (2) houses of worship and their congregations should be held harmless for the recent acts of arson and insurance companies should be prohibited from taking punitive measures against the churches and congregations because of the occurrence of such acts.
PROHIBITION OF CANCELING OR DECLINING TO RENEW FIRE INSURANCE FOR RELIGIOUS PROPERTIES.
An insurer may not cancel or decline to renew any coverage for fire insurance for a religious property based on-- (1) the race, color, religion, or national origin of the members of the congregation for, members of, or participants in, the religious organization or gathering that uses the property (or the predominant number of such members or participants); (2) the status of the property as a religious property; (3) any previous occurrence of arson against the property; or (4) any threat or perceived threat of arson against the property.
PROHIBITION OF DISCRIMINATION IN PREMIUM CHARGES.
An insurer may not require, as a condition of coverage for fire insurance for a religious property, that the insured pay a premium or contribution which is greater than the premium or contribution for similar coverage for a similarly situated property, solely on the basis of-- (1) the race, color, religion, or national origin of the members of the congregation for, members of, or participants in, the religious organization or gathering that uses the property (or the predominant number of such members or participants); (2) the status of the property as a religious property; (3) any previous occurrence of arson against the property; or (4) any threat or perceived threat of arson against the property.
ENFORCEMENT THROUGH DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE.
In General.--The authority and responsibility for investigating violations of this Act and for enforcing this Act shall be in the Attorney General.
Complaints.--The Attorney General shall provide for persons aggrieved under this Act to file complaints with the Attorney General alleging violations of this Act and shall investigate such complaints to determine whether the violations have occurred.
Monitoring Compliance.--The Attorney General may, on the Attorney General's own initiative, take such actions as the Attorney General considers appropriate to investigate and determine compliance with this Act.
Cause of Action.--Whenever the Attorney General has reasonable cause to believe that a violation of this Act has occurred and judicial action is necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act, the Attorney General may commence a civil action in any appropriate United States district court.
Relief.--In addition to other appropriate relief which may be granted in a civil action, the court in a civil action under subsection (a)-- (1) may award such preventive relief, including a permanent or temporary injunction, restraining order, or other order against the person responsible for a violation of this Act as is necessary to ensure the full enjoyment of rights granted by this Act (including an order of specific performance of any contract for insurance coverage); and (2) shall assess a civil penalty against the person determined to violate this Act in an amount of-- (A) $50,000, for a first violation; (B) $250,000, for a second violation; and (C) $500,000, for a third or subsequent violation.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Coverage for fire insurance.--The term ``coverage for fire insurance'' means any property and casualty insurance coverage that includes insurance against losses, damages, expenses, and liabilities caused by fires.
The term includes coverage under a policy for only the line of insurance for losses from fires and coverage for such fire losses under a policy that includes the fire line of insurance together with other lines.
Insurer.--The term ``insurer'' means any corporation, association, society, order, firm, company, mutual, partnership, individual, aggregation of individuals, or other legal entity that is authorized to transact the business of property or casualty insurance in any State or that is engaged in a property or casualty insurance business.
Religious property.--The term ``religious property'' means any church, synagogue, mosque, or other religious property, and includes any buildings and support structures used primarily for worship and related activities.