This Act may be cited as the ``Great Lakes Preservation Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the Great Lakes are precious public natural resources, and are renewable but finite bodies of water that should be protected, conserved, and managed for the use, benefit, and enjoyment of all present and future generations of people of the United States; (2) the Great Lakes are crucial to the economies of the Great Lakes States for recreation, commercial shipping, industrial, and agricultural uses; (3) the Great Lakes contain \1/5\ of the world's fresh water supply and are a vital source of safe drinking water for millions of people; (4) the Great Lakes Charter of 1985 is a voluntary international agreement that provides the procedural framework for notice and consultation by the Great Lakes States and the Great Lakes Provinces concerning the diversion of the water of the Great Lakes basin; (5) the Governors of the Great Lakes States and the Premiers of the Great Lakes Provinces have based decisions on proposals to withdraw, divert, or use Great Lakes water on the extent to which the proposals conserve and protect water and water-dependent natural resources of the Great Lakes basin; and (6) decisionmaking concerning Great Lakes water should remain vested in the Governors of the Great Lakes States, who manage the water and resources on a day-to-day basis.
In this Act: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Bulk fresh water.--The term ``bulk fresh water'' means fresh water extracted in quantities intended for transportation by tanker or similar form of mass transportation, without further processing.
From the great lakes basin.--The term ``from the Great Lakes basin'', with respect to water, means-- (A) water from Lake Erie, Lake Huron, Lake Michigan, Lake Ontario, Lake St. Clair, or Lake Superior; (B) water from any interconnecting waterway within any watercourse that drains into or between any of those lakes; and (C) water from a tributary surface or underground channel or area that drains into or comprises part of any watershed that drains into any of those lakes.
Great lake.--The term ``Great Lake'' means-- (A) Lake Erie; (B) Lake Huron (including Lake Saint Clair); (C) Lake Michigan; (D) Lake Ontario (including the Saint Lawrence River from Lake Ontario to the 45th parallel of latitude); and (E) Lake Superior.
Great lakes province.--The term ``Great Lakes Province'' means the Province of Ontario or Quebec, Canada.
Great lakes state.--The term ``Great Lakes State'' means the State of Illinois, Indiana, Michigan, Minnesota, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, or Wisconsin.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service.
MORATORIUM ON EXPORT OF BULK FRESH WATER.
In General.--Bulk fresh water from the Great Lakes basin shall not be exported from the United States.
Sunset Provision.--Subsection (a) shall cease to be effective on the date of enactment of an Act of Congress approving the operation of a mechanism and conservation standard for making decisions concerning the withdrawal, diversion, and use of water of the Great Lakes that has been agreed to by each of the Governors of the Great Lakes States, acting in cooperation with the Premiers of the Great Lakes Provinces.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that the Federal Government should enter into an agreement with the Government of Canada stating that the United States and Canada shall abide by the terms of the moratorium under subsection (a) until the date specified in subsection (b).
PRESERVATION OF HISTORIC GREAT LAKES LIGHTHOUSES.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Great Lakes have greatly influenced settlement, commerce, transportation, industry, and recreation throughout the rich maritime history of the Great Lakes States; (2) lighthouses in Great Lakes States have helped mariners navigate dangerous shoals and find safe harbors for decades and are an important part of the maritime history of the Great Lakes; (3) many of the lighthouses have historical or architectural significance; and (4) the future of the lighthouses is uncertain because many are in poor condition because of neglect and deterioration.
Study.--Not later than 3 years after the date on which funds are made available to carry out this section, the Secretary shall conduct and submit to Congress a study to identify options to preserve the lighthouses in the Great Lakes States.
Procedure.--In conducting the study under subsection (b), the Secretary shall-- (1) review programs, policies, and standards of the National Park Service to determine the most appropriate means of ensuring that the lighthouses (including any associated natural, cultural, and historical resources) are preserved; and (2) consult with-- (A) State and local historical associations and societies in the Great Lakes States; (B) historic preservation agencies in the Great Lakes States; (C) the Commandant of the Coast Guard; and (D) other appropriate entities.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this section.