This Act may be cited as the ``Patent Sovereignty Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the quality of United States letters patent is essential for preserving the technological lead and economic well-being of the United States in the next century; (2) the quality of United States letters patent is highly dependent upon the maintenance and the comprehensiveness of patent examiners' search files; and (3) the quality of United States letters patent is inextricably linked to the professionalism of patent examiners and the quality of the training of patent examiners.
Section 3 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(f) All examination and search duties for the grant of United States letters patent are sovereign functions which shall be performed within the United States by United States citizens who are employees of the United States Government.''.
MAINTENANCE OF EXAMINERS' SEARCH FILES.
Section 9 of title 35, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``may revise and maintain'' and inserting ``shall maintain and revise''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following: ``United States letters patent, and all such other patents and printed publications shall be maintained in the examiners' search files under the United States Patent Classification System.''.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Patent examiner training ``(a) In General.--All patent examiners shall spend at least 5 percent of their duty time per annum in training to maintain and develop the legal and technological skills useful for patent examination.
Trainers of Examiners.--The Patent and Trademark Office shall develop an incentive program to retain as employees patent examiners of the primary examiner grade or higher who are eligible for retirement, for the sole purpose of training patent examiners who have not achieved the grade of primary examiner.''.
Limitations on Personnel.--Section 3(a) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``The Office shall not be subject to any administratively or statutorily imposed limitation on positions or personnel, and no positions or personnel of the Office shall be taken into account for purposes of applying any such limitation.''.
Retention of Fees.--(1) Section 255(g)(1)(A) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 905(g)(1)(A)) is amended by inserting after the item relating to the National Credit Union Administration, credit union share insurance fund, the following new item: ``Patent and Trademark Office''.
Section 10101(b)(2)(B) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1990 (35 United States Code 41 note) is amended by striking ``, to the extent provided in appropriation Acts,'' and inserting ``without appropriation''.
Section 42(c) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by amending by striking first sentence and inserting the following: ``Revenues from fees shall be available to the Commissioner to carry out the activities of the Patent and Trademark Office, in such allocations as are approved by Act of Congress.
Such revenues shall not be made available for any purpose other than that authorized for the Patent and Trademark Office.''.
Compensation of Commissioner.--(1) Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Under Secretary of Commerce and Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks.''.
Section 3(d) of title 35, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(d) The Commissioner of Patents and Trademarks shall be an Under Secretary of Commerce.''.
Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``Commissioner of Patents, Department of Commerce.''.
Use of Fees.--Section 42(c) of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``All patent application fees collected under paragraphs (1), (3)(A), (3)(B), and (4) through (8) of section 41(a), and all other fees collected under section 41 for services or the extension of services to be provided by patent examiners shall be used only for the pay and training of patent examiners.''.
Publications.--Section 11 of title 35, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(c) The Patent and Trademark Office shall make available for public inspection during regular business hours all solicitations issued by the Office for contracts for goods or services, and all contracts for goods or services entered into by the Office.
Notice of a proposal to change United States patent law that will be made on behalf of the United States to a foreign country or international body shall be published in the Federal Register before, or at the same time as, the proposal is transmitted.''.
This Act shall take effect 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.