This Act may be cited as the ``Railroad Grade Crossing Safety Act of 1994''.
GRADE CROSSING SIGNAL DEVICES.
Section 202 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 United States Code 431) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the subsections after the first subsection (r) as subsections (s), (t), (u), and (v), respectively; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(w) Grade Crossing Signal Devices.--The Secretary shall, within one year after the date of enactment of this subsection, establish nationally uniform standards regarding the allocation of responsibility for selection and installation of signal devices at public railroad- highway grade crossings.''.
STATE HIGHWAY SAFETY MANAGEMENT SYSTEMS.
Amendment of Regulations.--The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a rulemaking proceeding to amend the Secretary's regulations under section 500.407 of title 23, Code of Federal Regulations, to require that each highway safety management system developed, established, and implemented by a State shall, among countermeasures and priorities established under subsection (b)(2) of that section, include-- (1) public railroad-highway grade crossing closure plans that are aimed at eliminating high-risk or redundant crossings (as defined by the Secretary); and (2) railroad-highway grade crossing policies that limit the creation of new at-grade crossings for vehicle or pedestrian traffic, recreational use, or any other purpose.
Deadline.--The Secretary of Transportation shall complete the rulemaking proceeding described in subsection (a) and promulgate the required amended regulations, not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act.
EMERGENCY NOTIFICATION OF GRADE CROSSING PROBLEMS.
Toll Free Telephone Number.--The Secretary of Transportation shall establish, not later than one year after the date of enactment of this Act, and thereafter maintain an emergency notification system utilizing a toll free ``800'' telephone number that the public can use to convey to railroads, either directly or through public safety personnel, information about malfunctions or other safety problems at railroad-highway grade crossings.
In establishing such emergency notification system, the Secretary may coordinate with, or incorporate components of, existing notification systems.
Notices To Public.--Not later than ninety days after the establishment of the emergency notification system described in subsection (a), the Secretary of Transportation shall promulgate regulations requiring railroads with railroad-highway grade crossings to display publicly at each such crossing, in a manner prescribed by the Secretary, information-- (1) describing the emergency notification system; (2) instructing the public how to use the system; (3) stating the toll free telephone number that is available for such use; and (4) specifying the unique number (as assigned by the Secretary) identifying such grade crossing.
Treatment in Judicial Proceedings.--A court shall not hold the Secretary of Transportation or any other Federal official or agency, any State or agency or political subdivision of a State, or any railroad liable for damages caused by an action taken under this section or by failure to perform a duty imposed by this section.
No evidence may be introduced in a trial or other judicial proceeding that the emergency notification system required by this section exists or is relied upon by any governmental official or entity or any railroad.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation for the purpose of carrying out this section $1,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $500,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $500,000 for fiscal year 1997.
Cost Sharing.--At least 30 percent of the cost of establishing and maintaining the emergency notification system required by this section shall be provided from non-Federal sources.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Of amounts appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation for railroad research and development, there are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $300,000 for fiscal year 1995, $500,000 for fiscal year 1996, and $750,000 for fiscal year 1997, to support Operation Lifesaver, Inc. (b) Program Requirements.--The Secretary of Transportation shall not provide financial assistance to Operation Lifesaver, Inc., in excess of $150,000 for any fiscal year unless-- (1) such excess funding is for the development and implementation of a national, multiyear, multimedia public information and law enforcement program for the reduction of fatalities and serious injuries involving railroad-highway grade crossings and trespassing on railroad rights-of-way and property; and (2) at least 30 percent of the costs of developing and implementing such program is provided from non-Federal sources, including States and railroads.
In General.--In implementing the Intelligent Vehicle-Highway Systems Act of 1991 (23 United States Code 307 note), the Secretary of Transportation shall ensure that the National Intelligent Vehicle- Highway Systems Program addresses, in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, the use of intelligent vehicle-highway system technologies to promote safety at railroad-highway grade crossings.
The Secretary of Transportation shall ensure that two or more operational tests funded under such Act shall promote highway traffic safety and railroad safety.
PENALTIES FOR CERTAIN GRADE CROSSING VIOLATIONS.
Motor Vehicle Violations.--The Secretary of Transportation shall, within six months after the date of enactment of this Act, amend regulations-- (1) under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1801 et sequentes) to prohibit the driver of motor vehicle transporting hazardous materials in commerce, and (2) under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (49 App.
United States Code 2501 et sequentes) to prohibit the driver of any commercial motor vehicle, from driving the motor vehicle onto a railroad-highway grade crossing without having sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without stopping.
Vandalism; Trespassing.--Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall amend the Secretary's regulations under section 202 of the Federal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 United States Code 431) to make subject to a civil penalty under such Act any person who-- (1) defaces or disables, or commits any other act that adversely affects the function of, any signal system, sign, or device at a grade crossing; or (2) trespasses on a railroad-owned or railroad-leased right-of-way, roadbed, or bridge.
VIOLATION OF GRADE CROSSING LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
Federal Regulations.--The Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (49 App.
United States Code 2701 et sequentes), as amended by subsection (b) of this section, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
VIOLATION OF GRADE CROSSING LAWS AND REGULATIONS.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall issue regulations establishing sanctions and penalties relating to violations, by persons operating commercial motor vehicles, of laws and regulations pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings.
Minimum Requirements.--Regulations issued under subsection (a) shall, at a minimum, require that-- ``(1) any operator of a commercial motor vehicle who is found to have committed a first violation of a law or regulation pertaining to railroad-highway grade crossings shall be disqualified from operating such a vehicle for a period of not less than ninety days and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $1,000; ``(2) any operator of a commercial motor vehicle who is found to have committed a second violation of such a law or regulation shall be disqualified from operating such a vehicle for a period of not less than one year and not more than five years and shall be subject to a civil penalty of not less than $1,000; and ``(3) any employer that knowingly allows, permits, authorizes, or requires an employee to operate a commercial motor vehicle in violation of such a law or regulation shall be subject to a civil penalty of not more than $10, 000.
Deadline.--The regulations required under subsection (a) shall be issued not later than five years after the date of enactment of this section.''.
State Regulations.--Section 12009(a) of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (49 App.
United States Code 2708(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (21), by striking ``12020(a)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``12021(a)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(22) Grade crossing regulations.--The State shall adopt and enforce any regulations issued by the Secretary under section 12022.''.
Technical Amendment.--The Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (49 App.
United States Code 2701 et sequentes) is amended by redesignating the second section 12020 (as added by section 4009(a) of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-240; 105 United States Statutes at Large 2156)) as section 12021.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, and the Office of Motor Carrier Safety within the Federal Highway Administration, shall on a continuing basis cooperate with the National Association of Governors' Highway Safety Representatives, the Commercial Vehicle Safety Alliance, and Operation Lifesaver, Inc., to improve compliance with and enforcement of laws and regulations pertaining to reairoad- highway grade crossings.