This Act may be cited as the ``Western Shoshone Claims Distribution Act''.
DISTRIBUTION OF DOCKET 326-K FUNDS.
The funds appropriated in satisfaction of the judgment award granted to the Western Shoshone Indians in Docket Number 326-K before the Indian Claims Commission, including all earned interest, shall be distributed as follows: (1) The Secretary shall establish a Western Shoshone Judgment Roll consisting of all Western Shoshones who-- (A) have at least \1/4\ degree of Western Shoshone Blood; (B) are citizens of the United States; and (C) are living on the date of enactment of this Act.
Any individual determined or certified as eligible by the Secretary to receive a per capita payment from any other judgment fund awarded by the Indian Claims Commission, the United States Claims Court, or the United States Court of Federal Claims, that was appropriated on or before the date of enactment of this Act, shall not be eligible for enrollment under this Act.
The Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register rules and regulations governing the establishment of the Western Shoshone Judgment Roll and shall utilize any documents acceptable to the Secretary in establishing proof of eligibility.
The Secretary's determination on all applications for enrollment under this paragraph shall be final.
Upon completing the Western Shoshone Judgment Roll under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall make a per capita distribution of 100 percent of the funds described in this section, in a sum as equal as possible, to each person listed on the Roll.
(A) With respect to the distribution of funds under this section, the per capita shares of living competent adults who have reached the age of 19 years on the date of the distribution provided for under paragraph (4), shall be paid directly to them.
The per capita shares of deceased individuals shall be distributed to their heirs and legatees in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
The shares of legally incompetent individuals shall be administered pursuant to regulations and procedures established by the Secretary under section 3(b)(3) of Public Law 93-134 (25 United States Code 1403(b)(3)).
The shares of minors and individuals who are under the age of 19 years on the date of the distribution provided for under paragraph (4) shall be held by the Secretary in supervised individual Indian money accounts.
The funds from such accounts shall be disbursed over a period of 4 years in payments equaling 25 percent of the principal, plus the interest earned on that portion of the per capita share.
The first payment shall be disbursed to individuals who have reached the age of 18 years if such individuals are deemed legally competent.
Subsequent payments shall be disbursed within 90 days of the individual's following 3 birthdays.
Notwithstanding section 7 of the Indian Tribal Judgment Funds Use or Distribution Act (25 United States Code 1407), the per capita shares (or the availability of those shares) shall not-- (A) be subject to Federal or State income taxation; (B) be considered to be income or resources; or (C) be used as a basis for denying or reducing financial assistance or any other benefit to which a household or member would otherwise be entitled under-- (i) the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 301 et sequentes); or (ii) any other Federal or federally- assisted program.
All per capita shares belonging to living competent adults certified as eligible to share in the judgment fund distribution under this section, and the interest earned on those shares, that remain unpaid for a period of 6-years shall be added to the principal funds that are held and invested in accordance with section 3, except that in the case of a minor, such 6-year period shall not begin to run until the minor reaches the age of majority.
Any other residual principal and interest funds remaining after the distribution under paragraph (4) is complete shall be added to the principal funds that are held and invested in accordance with section 3.
DISTRIBUTION OF DOCKETS 326-A-1 AND 326-A-3.
The funds appropriated in satisfaction of the judgment awards granted to the Western Shoshone Indians in Docket Numbers 326-A-1 and 326-A-3 before the United States Court of Claims, and the funds referred to under paragraphs (7) and (8) of section 2, together with all earned interest, shall be distributed as follows: (1)(A) Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall establish in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Western Shoshone Educational Trust Fund'' for the benefit of the Western Shoshone members.
There shall be credited to the Trust Fund the funds described in the matter preceding this paragraph.
The principal in the Trust Fund shall not be expended or disbursed.
The Trust Fund shall be invested as provided for in section 1 of the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a).
(i) All accumulated and future interest and income from the Trust Fund shall be distributed, subject to clause (ii)-- (I) as educational grants and as other forms of educational assistance determined appropriate by the Administrative Committee established under paragraph (2) to individual Western Shoshone members as required under this Act; and (II) to pay the reasonable and necessary expenses of such Administrative Committee (as defined in the written rules and procedures of such Committee).
Funds shall not be distributed under this paragraph on a per capita basis.
(A) An Administrative Committee to oversee the distribution of the educational grants and assistance authorized under paragraph (1)(C) shall be established as provided for in this paragraph.
The Administrative Committee shall consist of 1 representative from each of the following organizations: (i) The Western Shoshone Te-Moak Tribe.
The Duckwater Shoshone Tribe.
The Yomba Shoshone Tribe.
The Ely Shoshone Tribe.
The Western Shoshone Committee of the Duck Valley Reservation.
The Fallon Band of Western Shoshone.
The at large community.
Each member of the Committee shall serve for a term of 4 years.
If a vacancy remains unfilled in the membership of the Committee for a period in excess of 60 days, the Committee shall appoint a replacement from among qualified members of the organization for which the replacement is being made and such member shall serve until the organization to be represented designates a replacement.
The Secretary shall consult with the Committee on the management and investment of the funds subject to distribution under this section.
The Committee shall have the authority to disburse the accumulated interest fund under this Act in accordance with the terms of this Act.
The Committee shall be responsible for ensuring that the funds provided through grants and assistance under paragraph (1)(C) are utilized in a manner consistent with the terms of this Act.
In accordance with paragraph (1)(C)(i)(II), the Committee may use a portion of the interest funds to pay all of the reasonable and necessary expenses of the Committee, including per diem rates for attendance at meetings that are the same as those paid to Federal employees in the same geographic location.
The Committee shall develop written rules and procedures that include such matters as operating procedures, rules of conduct, eligibility criteria for receipt of educational grants or assistance (such criteria to be consistent with this Act), application selection procedures, appeal procedures, fund disbursement procedures, and fund recoupment procedures.
Such rules and procedures shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary.
A portion of the interest funds in the Trust Fund, not to exceed $100,000, may be used by the Committee to pay the expenses associated with developing such rules and procedures.
At the discretion of the Committee, and with the approval of the appropriate tribal governing body, jurisdiction to hear appeals of the Committee's decisions may be exercised by a tribal court, or a court of Indian offenses operated under section 11 of title 25, Code of Federal Regulations.
The Committee shall employ an independent certified public accountant to prepare an annual financial statement that includes the operating expenses of the Committee and the total amount of educational grants or assistance disbursed for the fiscal year for which the statement is being prepared under this section.
The Committee shall compile a list of names of all individuals approved to receive such grants or assistance during such fiscal year.
The financial statement and the list shall be distributed to each organization represented on the Committee and the Secretary and copies shall be made available to the Western Shoshone members upon request.
In this Act: (1) Administrative committee; committee.--The terms ``Administrative Committee'' and ``Committee'' mean the Administrative Committee established under section 3(2).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Trust fund.--The term ``Trust Fund'' means the Western Shoshone Educational Trust Fund established under section 3(1).
Western shoshone members.--The term ``Western Shoshone members'' means an individual who appears on the Western Shoshone Judgment Roll established under section 2(1), or an individual who is the lineal descendant of an individual appearing on the roll, and who-- (A) satisfies all eligibility criteria established by the Administrative Committee under section 3(F); (B) fulfills all application requirements established by the Committee; and (C) agrees to utilize funds distributed in accordance with section 3(1)(C)(i)(I) in a manner approved by the Committee for educational purposes.
The Secretary may promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Passed the Senate November 13, 2002.
Attest: JERI THOMSON, Secretary.