This Act may be cited as the ``NO Tobacco for Kids Act''.
CHILD TOBACCO USE SURVEYS.
Annual Performance Survey.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter the Secretary shall conduct a survey to determine the number of children who used each manufacturer's tobacco products within the past 30 days.
Baseline Level.--The baseline level of child tobacco product use of a manufacturer is the number of children determined to have used the tobacco products of such manufacturer in the first annual performance survey.
Performance Standards for Existing Manufacturers.--Each manufacturer which manufactured a tobacco product on or before the date of the enactment of this Act shall reduce the number of children who use its tobacco products so that the number of children determined to have used its tobacco products on the basis of-- (1) the second annual performance survey is equal to or less than-- (A) 80 percent of the manufacturer's baseline level; or (B) the de minimis level; whichever is greater; (2) the third annual performance survey is equal to or less than-- (A) 60 percent of the manufacturer's baseline level; or (B) the de minimis level; whichever is greater; (3) the fourth annual performance survey is equal to or less than-- (A) 40 percent of the manufacturer's baseline level; or (B) the de minimis level; whichever is greater; (4) the fifth annual performance survey is equal to or less than-- (A) 20 percent of the manufacturer's baseline level; or (B) the de minimis level; whichever is greater; and (5) the sixth annual performance survey and each annual performance survey conducted thereafter is equal to or less than-- (A) 10 percent of the manufacturer's baseline level; or (B) the de minimis level; whichever is greater.
Performance Standards for New Manufacturers.--Any manufacturer of a tobacco product which begins to manufacture a tobacco product after the date of the enactment of this Act shall ensure that the number of children determined to have used the manufacturer's tobacco products in each annual performance survey conducted after the manufacturer begins to manufacture tobacco products is equal to or less than the de minimis level.
De Minimis Level.--The de minimis level shall be 0.5 percent of the total number of children determined to have used tobacco products in the first annual performance survey.
First Violation.--If a manufacturer of a tobacco product violates a performance standard, the manufacturer shall pay a noncompliance fee of $1 for each unit of its tobacco product which is distributed for consumer use in the year following the year in which the performance standard is violated.
Fee Increase for Subsequent Violations.--If a manufacturer violates the performance standards in 2 or more consecutive years, the noncompliance fee for such manufacturer shall be increased by $1 for each consecutive violation for each unit of its tobacco product which is distributed for consumer use.
Reduction in Noncompliance Fee.--If a manufacturer achieves more than 90 percent of the reduction in the number of children who use its tobacco products that is required under the applicable performance standard, the noncompliance fee required to be paid by the manufacturer shall be reduced on a pro rata basis such that there shall be a noncompliance fee reduction of 10 percent for each percentage point over 90 percent achieved by the manufacturer.
Payment.--The noncompliance fee to be paid by a manufacturer shall be paid on a quarterly basis, with the payments due within 30 days after the end of each calendar quarter.
USE OF NONCOMPLIANCE FEE.
Funds for Enforcement and Education.--The first $1,000,000,000 of noncompliance fees collected in any fiscal year shall go into a Tobacco Enforcement and Education Fund in the United States Treasury.
Fees in such fund shall be available to the Secretary, without fiscal year limitation, to enforce this Act and other Federal laws relating to tobacco use by children and for public education to discourage children from using tobacco products.
Funds for the Treasury.--Any amount of noncompliance fees collected in any fiscal year which exceeds $1,000,000,000 shall be paid into the United States Treasury.
A manufacturer of tobacco products may seek judicial review of any action under this Act only after a noncompliance fee has been assessed and paid by the manufacturer and only in the United States District Court for the District of Columbia.
In an action by a manufacturer seeking judicial review of an annual performance survey, the manufacturer may prevail-- (1) only if the manufacturer shows that the results of the performance survey were arbitrary and capricious; and (2) only to the extent that the manufacturer shows that it would have been required to pay a lesser noncompliance fee if the results of the performance survey were not arbitrary and capricious.
Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (28 United States Code 331) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(x) The failure to pay any noncompliance fee required under the NO Tobacco for Kids Act.''.
Nothing in this Act shall preempt or otherwise affect any other Federal, State, or local law or regulation which reduces the use of tobacco products by children.
In this Act: (1) Children.--The term ``children'' means individuals under the age of 18.
Cigarette.--The term ``cigarette'' has the same meaning given such term by section 3(1) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 United States Code 1332(1)).
Cigarette tobacco.--The term ``cigarette tobacco'' means any product that consists of loose tobacco that contains or delivers nicotine and is intended for use by consumers in a cigarette.
Manufacture.--The term ``manufacture'' means the manufacturing, including repacking or relabeling, fabrication, assembly, processing, labeling, or importing of a tobacco product.
Manufacturer.--The term ``manufacturer'' means any person who manufactures a tobacco product.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Smokeless tobacco.--The term ``smokeless tobacco'' has the same meaning given such term by section 9(1) of the Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Education Act of 1986 (15 United States Code 4408(1)).
Tobacco product.--The term ``tobacco product'' means a cigarette, cigarette tobacco, or smokeless tobacco.
Unit.--The term ``unit'' when used in connection with a tobacco product means 20 cigarettes in the case of cigarettes and the smallest amount of tobacco distributed by a manufacturer for consumer use in the case of any other tobacco product.