This Act may be cited as the ``National Clean Water Trust Fund Act of 1993''.
NATIONAL CLEAN WATER TRUST FUND.
Section 309 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) National Clean Water Trust Fund.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury a National Clean Water Trust Fund (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as the `Fund') consisting of amounts transferred to the Fund under paragraph (2) and amounts credited to the Fund under paragraph (3).
Transfer of amounts.--For fiscal year 1994, and each fiscal year thereafter, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer to the Fund an amount determined by the Secretary to be equal to the total amount deposited in the general fund of the Treasury in the preceding fiscal year from fines, penalties, and other moneys obtained through enforcement actions conducted pursuant to this section and section 505(a)(1), including moneys obtained under consent decrees and excluding any amounts ordered to be used to carry out mitigation projects under this section or section 505(a), as the case may be.
Investment of amounts.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest in interest-bearing obligations of the United States such portion of the Fund as is not, in the Secretary's judgment, required to meet current withdrawals.
Such obligations shall be acquired and sold and interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, such obligations shall be credited to the Fund in accordance with the requirements of section 9602 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Use of amounts for remedial projects.--Amounts in the Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriations Acts, to the Administrator to carry out projects to restore and recover waters of the United States from damages resulting from violations of this Act which are subject to enforcement actions under this section and similar damages resulting from the discharge of pollutants into the waters of the United States.
Selection of projects.-- ``(A) Priority.--In selecting projects to carry out under this subsection, the Administrator shall give priority to a project to restore and recover waters of the United States from damages described in paragraph (4), if an enforcement action conducted pursuant to this section or section 505(a)(1) against such violation, or another violation in the same administrative region of the Environmental Protection Agency as such violation, resulted in amounts being deposited in the general fund of the Treasury.
Consultation with states.--In selecting projects to carry out under this section, the Administrator shall consult with States in which the Administrator is considering carrying out a project.
Allocation of amounts.--In determining an amount to allocate to carry out a project to restore and recover waters of the United States from damages described in paragraph (4), the Administrator shall, in the case of a priority project under subparagraph (A), take into account the total amount deposited in the general fund of the Treasury as a result of enforcement actions conducted with respect to such violation pursuant to this section or section 505(a)(1).
Implementation.--The Administrator may carry out a project under this subsection either directly or by making grants to, or entering into contracts with, the Secretary of the Army or any other public or private entity.
Report to congress.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this subsection, and every 2 years thereafter, the Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report on implementation of this subsection.''.
USE OF CIVIL PENALTIES FOR MITIGATION PROJECTS.
In General.--Section 309(d) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1319(d)) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``The court may, in the court's discretion, order that a civil penalty be used for carrying out mitigation projects which are consistent with the purposes of this Act and which enhance the public health or environment.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 505(a) of such Act (33 United States Code 1365(a)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the last sentence the following: ``, including ordering the use of a civil penalty for carrying out mitigation projects in accordance with section 309(d)''.