This Act may be cited as the ``Defense Nuclear Programs Agency Organization Act''.
The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Establishment and organization of Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.
Functions of Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.
Limitation on transfers of funds.
Technical and conforming amendments.
Effective date and transition period.
In this Act: (1) The term ``defense nuclear programs matters'' means matters related to the military use of nuclear energy and nuclear weapons, including all such matters that were under the jurisdiction of the following entities on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act: (A) The Department of Energy.
The Defense Nuclear Agency of the Department of Defense.
The Strategic Systems Programs of the Department of the Navy.
The Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board.
The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.
The term ``Agency'' means the Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.
ESTABLISHMENT AND ORGANIZATION OF DEFENSE NUCLEAR PROGRAMS AGENCY.
Establishment of Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.--There is established an agency to be known as the Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.
Administrator.--The Agency shall be headed by an Administrator, who shall serve as the principal adviser to the President and the Secretary of Defense on defense nuclear programs matters.
In carrying out his duties under this Act, the Administrator shall, under the direction of the Secretary of Defense, have primary responsibility within the Government for defense nuclear programs matters.
The Administrator shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
A commissioned officer of the Armed Forces serving on active duty may not be appointed Administrator.
The Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided for level II of the Executive Schedule under section 5313 of title 5, United States Code.
Deputy Administrator.--A Deputy Administrator of the Agency shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Deputy Administrator shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as the Administrator may prescribe.
The Deputy Administrator shall act for, and exercise the powers of, the Administrator during the Administrator's absence or disability or during a vacancy in such office.
A commissioned officer of the Armed Forces serving on active duty may not be appointed Deputy Administrator.
The Deputy Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Assistant Administrators.--(1) Four Assistant Administrators of the Agency shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
They shall perform such duties and exercise such powers as the Administrator may prescribe.
One of the Assistant Administrators shall have as his principal duty the overall supervision of environmental restoration of defense nuclear weapons facilities.
One of the Assistant Administrators shall have as his principal duty the overall supervision of the oversight of the defense and nondefense functions and budgets of the Sandia National Laboratories, the Los Alamos National Laboratory, and the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory.
Each Assistant Administrator shall be compensated at the rate provided for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Inspector General.--There shall be an Inspector General of the Agency, who shall be appointed as provided in section 3 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.
The Inspector General shall perform the duties, have the responsibilities, and exercise the powers specified in the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.
General Counsel.--There shall be a General Counsel of the Agency, who shall be appointed by the Administrator.
The General Counsel shall be the chief legal officer for all legal matters arising from the conduct of the functions of the Agency.
The General Counsel shall be compensated at the rate provided for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
FUNCTIONS OF DEFENSE NUCLEAR PROGRAMS AGENCY.
In General.--The Administrator shall be responsible for the exercise of all powers and the discharge of all duties of the Agency.
Transferred Functions.--The Administrator shall carry out all functions transferred to the Administrator pursuant to section 6.
Staff Director of Nuclear Weapons Council.--Paragraph (2) of section 179(c) of title 10, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(2) The Administrator of the Defense Nuclear Programs Agency shall be the Staff Director of the Council.''.
Department of Energy.--(1) There are hereby transferred to the Administrator all functions performed by the Department of Energy on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act relating to the national security functions of the Department, including defense, nonproliferation, and defense-related environmental management programs.
There are hereby transferred to the Administrator all functions performed by the Department of Energy on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act relating to the oversight of the defense and nondefense functions and budgets of the following laboratories: (A) Sandia National Laboratories, Albuquerque, New Mexico, and Livermore, California.
Los Alamos National Laboratory, Los Alamos, New Mexico.
Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory, California.
Defense Nuclear Agency.--There are hereby transferred to the Administrator all functions performed by the Defense Nuclear Agency of the Department of Defense on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Department of the Navy.--There are hereby transferred to the Administrator all functions performed by the Department of the Navy on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act relating to its Strategic Systems Programs.
Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board.--There are hereby transferred to the Administrator all functions performed by the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Other Nuclear Weapons-Related Functions.--The Secretary of Defense may transfer to the Administrator such other functions performed in the Department of Defense on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act relating to nuclear weapons as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Conforming Repeals.-- (1) Assistant to the secretary of defense for atomic energy.--Section 141 of title 10, United States Code, is hereby repealed.
The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 4 of such title is amended by striking out the item relating to such section.
Defense nuclear facilities safety board.--Chapter 21 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2286) is hereby repealed.
References.--Any reference to the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy or the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board in any provision of law or in any rule, regulation, or other paper of the United States shall be treated as referring to the Administrator.
LIMITATION ON TRANSFERS OF FUNDS.
No amount appropriated to the Agency may be transferred to any other account (other than another account of the Agency) unless the transfer of such amount to such account is specifically authorized by law.
No amount appropriated to the Department of Defense or another department or agency may be transferred to the Administrator or to an account for the Agency unless the transfer of such amount to such account is specifically authorized by law.
Exercise of Authorities.--Except as otherwise provided by law, the Administrator may, for purposes of performing a function that is transferred to the Administrator by this Act, exercise all authorities under any other provision of law that were available with respect to the performance of that function to the official responsible for the performance of that function on the day before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Authorities To Wind Up Affairs.-- (1) In general.--(A) The Director of the Office of Management and Budget may take such actions as the Director considers necessary to wind up any outstanding affairs of the Department of Energy associated with the functions that are transferred pursuant to section 6(a).
The Secretary of Defense may take such actions as the Secretary considers necessary to wind up any outstanding affairs of the Defense Nuclear Agency associated with the functions that are transferred pursuant to section 6(b), any outstanding affairs of the Department of Defense associated with any functions that may be transferred pursuant to section 6(d), and any outstanding affairs of the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy.
The Secretary of the Navy may take such actions as the Secretary considers necessary to wind up any outstanding affairs of the Strategic Systems Programs of the Department of the Navy associated with the functions that are transferred pursuant to section 6(c).
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget may take such actions as the Director considers necessary to wind up any outstanding affairs of the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board.
Transfer of assets.--So much of the personnel, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, and other funds employed, used, held, available, or to be made available in connection with a function transferred to the Administrator by this Act are transferred to the Administrator for use in connection with the functions transferred.
Further measures and dispositions.--Such further measures and dispositions as the President considers necessary to effectuate the transfers referred to in subsection (b) shall be carried out in such manner as the President directs and by the heads of such agencies as the President designates.
Continuing Effect of Legal Documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, agreements, grants, contracts, certificates, licenses, registrations, privileges, and other administrative actions-- (1) which have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the President, any Federal agency or official thereof, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the performance of functions which are transferred under this Act, and (2) which are in effect at the time this Act takes effect, or were final before the effective date of this Act and are to become effective on or after the effective date of this Act, shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Attorney General or other authorized official, a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Proceedings Not Affected.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect any proceedings, including notices of proposed rulemaking, or any application for any license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending at the time this Act takes effect, with respect to functions transferred by this Act but such proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this Act had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceedings shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this subsection shall be deemed to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this Act had not been enacted.
Suits Not Affected.--The provisions of this Act shall not affect suits commenced before the effective date of this Act, and in all such suits, proceedings shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this Act had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of Actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against a department or agency, functions of which are transferred by this Act, or by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer of a department or agency, functions of which are transferred by this Act, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Inspector General Act of 1978.--Section 11 of the Inspector General Act of 1978 (5 United States Code App.)
is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting after ``International Development,'' the following: ``the Defense Nuclear Programs Agency,''; and (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out ``or the Social Security Administration;'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``the Social Security Administration, or the Defense Nuclear Programs Agency;''.
Executive Schedule.--(1) Section 5313 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Administrator, Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.''.
Section 5314 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Deputy Administrator, Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.''.
Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Assistant Administrators, Defense Nuclear Programs Agency (4).
``Inspector General, Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.''.
Section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``General Counsel, Defense Nuclear Programs Agency.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE AND TRANSITION PERIOD.
Effective Date.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Delayed Effective Date for Establishment of Agency and Transfers of Functions.--Section 4(a) and section 6 of this Act shall take effect one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Transition Period.--The Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Energy, the Assistant to the Secretary of Defense for Atomic Energy, and the Defense Nuclear Facilities Safety Board shall, beginning as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, plan for the orderly establishment of, and transfer of functions to, the Agency pursuant to this Act.
Appointment Authority.--The President may make appointments under section 2 notwithstanding the delayed effective date under subsection (b) for the establishment of the Agency.