This Act may be cited as the ``Interest on Business Checking Act of 2003''.
INTEREST-BEARING TRANSACTION ACCOUNTS AUTHORIZED FOR ALL BUSINESSES.
In General.--Section 2(a) of Public Law 93-100 (12 United States Code 1832(a)) is amended by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any depository institution may permit the owner of any deposit or account which is a deposit or account on which interest or dividends are paid and is not a deposit or account described in paragraph (2) to make not more than 24 transfers per month (or such greater number as the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may determine by rule or order), for any purpose, to another account of the owner in the same institution.
An account offered pursuant to this paragraph shall be considered a transaction account for purposes of section 19 of the Federal Reserve Act, unless the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System determines otherwise.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) In general.--Section 2(a) of Public Law 93-100 (12 United States Code 1832(a)), as amended by subsection (a), is further amended-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``but subject to paragraph (2)''; (B) by amending paragraph (2) to read as follows: ``(2) No provision of this section may be construed as conferring the authority to offer demand deposit accounts to any institution that is prohibited by law from offering demand deposit accounts.
''; and (C) in paragraph (3), by striking ``and is not a deposit or account described in paragraph (2)''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by paragraph (1) shall take effect on the date which is 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
AUTHORIZATION OF INTEREST-BEARING TRANSACTION ACCOUNTS.
Repeal of Prohibition on Payment of Interest on Demand Deposits.-- (1) Federal reserve act.--Section 19(i) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 371a) is repealed.
Home owners' loan act.--Section 5(b)(1)(B) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 United States Code 1464(b)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``savings association may not--'' and all that follows through ``(ii) permit any'' and inserting ``savings association may not permit any''.
Federal deposit insurance act.--Section 18(g) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1828(g)) is repealed.
Joint Rulemaking Required.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury and the Federal banking agencies shall issue joint final regulations authorizing the payment of interest and dividends on transaction accounts at depository institutions that are subject to regulation by those entities.
Contents.--Regulations required by this subsection shall-- (A) establish the scope of the authorization described in paragraph (1) and the types of transaction accounts to which that authorization shall apply; and (B) include any appropriate limitations, exceptions, or restrictions on that authorization, consistent with the purposes of this section.
Effective date of regulations.--The regulations required by this subsection shall take effect not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Definitions.--As used in this subsection-- (A) the terms ``depository institution'' and ``transaction account'' have the meanings given such terms in subparagraphs (A) and (C), respectively, of section 19(b)(1) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(1)); and (B) the term ``Federal banking agency'' has the meaning the term in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1813).
Effective Date of Repeal.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall become effective on the earlier of-- (1) 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) the date on which final regulations required to be issued under subsection (b) become effective.
PAYMENT OF INTEREST ON RESERVES AT FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS.
In General.--Section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(12) Earnings on reserves.-- ``(A) In general.--Balances maintained at a Federal reserve bank by or on behalf of a depository institution may receive earnings to be paid by the Federal reserve bank at least once each calendar quarter at a rate or rates not to exceed the general level of short-term interest rates.
Regulations relating to payments and distribution.--The Board may promulgate regulations concerning-- ``(i) the payment of earnings in accordance with this paragraph; ``(ii) the distribution of such earnings to the depository institutions which maintain balances at such banks or on whose behalf such balances are maintained; and ``(iii) the responsibilities of depository institutions, Federal home loan banks, and the National Credit Union Administration Central Liquidity Facility with respect to the crediting and distribution of earnings attributable to balances maintained, in accordance with subsection (c)(1)(A), in a Federal reserve bank by any such entity on behalf of depository institutions.
Depository institution defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `depository institution', in addition to any institution described in paragraph (1)(A), includes any trust company, corporation organized under section 25A or having an agreement with the Board under section 25, or any branch or agency of a foreign bank (as defined in section 1(b) of the International Banking Act of 1978).''.
Authorization for Pass Through Reserves for Member Banks.-- Section 19(c)(1)(B) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(c)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``which is not a member bank''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Section 19 of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(4), (A) by striking subparagraph (C); and (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (C) and (D), respectively; and (2) in subsection (c)(1)(A), by striking ``subsection (b)(4)(C)'' and inserting ``subsection (b)''.
INCREASED FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FLEXIBILITY IN SETTING RESERVE REQUIREMENTS.
Section 19(b)(2)(A) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(2)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``the ratio of 3 per centum'' and inserting ``a ratio not greater than 3 percent (and which may be zero)''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``and not less than 8 per centum,'' and inserting ``(and which may be zero),''.
TREATMENT OF CERTAIN ESCROW ACCOUNTS.
In General.--In the case of an escrow account maintained at a depository institution for the purpose of completing the settlement of a real estate transaction, activities described in subsection (b) shall not be treated as the payment or receipt of interest for purposes of this Act or any other provision of law relating to the payment of interest on accounts or deposits maintained at depository institutions, including such provisions in-- (1) Public Law 93-100; (2) the Federal Reserve Act; (3) the Home Owners' Loan Act; or (4) the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Exclusions.--For purposes of subsection (a), activities described in this paragraph are-- (1) the absorption, by the depository institution, of expenses incidental to providing a normal banking service with respect to an escrow account described in subsection (a); (2) the forbearance, by the depository institution, from charging a fee for providing any such banking function; and (3) any benefit which may accrue to the holder or the beneficiary of such escrow account as a result of an action of the depository institution described in paragraph (1) or (2) or a similar action.