SHORT TITLE AND TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Safe and Orderly Withdrawal From Iraq Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title and table of contents.
Withdrawal of United States Armed Forces and defense contractors from Iraq.
Transfer of United States military facilities in Iraq.
Prohibition on use of funds to further deploy United States Armed Forces to Iraq.
Assistance to Iraqi Security Forces and multinational forces in Iraq.
Continuation of social and economic reconstruction activities in Iraq.
Asylum or other means of protection for Iraqi citizens.
WITHDRAWAL OF UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES AND DEFENSE CONTRACTORS FROM IRAQ.
Commencement of Withdrawal.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall commence the withdrawal of units and members of the Armed Forces deployed in Iraq as part of Operation Iraqi Freedom and contractors operating in Iraq and funded using amounts appropriated to the Department of Defense.
Completion of Withdrawal.--The Secretary of Defense shall complete the withdrawal of the Armed Forces and defense contractors from Iraq not later than the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the commencement of the withdrawal under subsection (a).
No Increase in Troop Levels Pending or During Withdrawal.-- Funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense under any provision of law may not be obligated or expended to increase the number of members of the Armed Forces serving in Iraq in excess of the number of members serving in Iraq as of January 1, 2007, unless the increase has been specifically authorized in advance by an Act of Congress.
Redeployment Locations.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to restrict the locations outside of Iraq to which units and members of the Armed Forces withdrawn from Iraq may be redeployed, including redeployment to an adjacent or nearby country at the invitation of the government of the country or redeployment to bolster military forces deployed in Afghanistan as part of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Exceptions.-- (1) Personnel providing security for united states diplomatic missions in iraq.--The Secretary of Defense may retain in Iraq members of the Armed Forces for the purpose of providing security for the United States Embassy and other United States diplomatic missions in Iraq.
Personnel involved in reconstruction activities.--At the request of the Government of Iraq, the Secretary of Defense may retain in Iraq members of the Army Corps of Engineers and defense contractors engaged in reconstruction projects in Iraq, to the extent necessary to complete such projects.
Availability of Funds.--To carry out the safe and orderly withdrawal of the Armed Forces and defense contractors from Iraq, as required by this section, the Secretary of Defense may use any funds appropriated or otherwise made available to the Department of Defense.
TRANSFER OF UNITED STATES MILITARY FACILITIES IN IRAQ.
The President of the United States shall transfer to the Government of Iraq all right, title, and interest held by the United States in any military facility in Iraq that was constructed, repaired, or improved using amounts appropriated to the Department of Defense and occupied by a unit of the Armed Forces.
PROHIBITION ON USE OF FUNDS TO FURTHER DEPLOY UNITED STATES ARMED FORCES TO IRAQ.
Beginning on the date of the completion of the withdrawal of the Armed Forces from Iraq under section 2(b), funds appropriated or otherwise made available under any provision of law may not be obligated or expended to further deploy units or members of the Armed Forces to Iraq.
ASSISTANCE TO IRAQI SECURITY FORCES AND MULTINATIONAL FORCES IN IRAQ.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise restrict the use of funds available to the Department of Defense for the purpose of providing financial assistance or equipment to the Iraqi Security Forces or the multinational forces providing security or training in Iraq at the request of the Government of Iraq.
CONTINUATION OF SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC RECONSTRUCTION ACTIVITIES IN IRAQ.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise restrict the use of funds available to any department or agency of the United States (other than the Department of Defense) to carry out social and economic reconstruction activities in Iraq at the request of the Government of Iraq.
ASYLUM OR OTHER MEANS OF PROTECTION FOR IRAQI CITIZENS.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise restrict the authority of the President to arrange asylum or other means of protection for Iraqi citizens who might be physically endangered by the withdrawal of the Armed Forces from Iraq.
In this Act, the term ``Armed Forces'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a)(4) of title 10, United States Code.