This Act may be cited as the ``Bucket Drowning Prevention Act of 1993.''
On October 1, 1994, or 240 days after the date of the enactment of this title, whichever first occurs, there is established and effective a consumer product safety standard under section 9 of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2058), to eliminate or reduce the risk of injury or death resulting from infants falling into 4-gallon to 6- gallon buckets containing liquid.
Such standard, when established, shall require straight sided or slightly tapered, open head containers with a capacity of more than 4 gallons and less than 6 gallons (referred to in this Act as a ``bucket''), to bear one warning label in English and Spanish.
The label shall meet the following requirements: (1) The label shall be permanent so that such label cannot be removed, torn or defaced without the aid of tools or solvents.
The label shall be at least 7 inches in height, and 3\1/2\ inches in width, or any larger size as the labeler may choose.
The label shall be centered on one side of the bucket just below the point where the handle is inserted.
The label shall have a border or other form of contrast around its edges to delineate it from any other information on the bucket.
The label shall bear (A) the signal word ``WARNING'' in both English and Spanish, in bold uppercase lettering, and (B) in upper and lower case lettering the words ``Children Can Fall Into Bucket and Drown.
Keep Children Away From Buckets With Even a Small Amount of Liquid.
'', with an equivalent Spanish translation in at least the same type size as English.
The signal word panel shall be preceded by a safety alert symbol consisting of an exclamation mark in a triangle.
The label shall be clear and conspicuous and in contrasting colors.
The label shall include a picture of a child falling into a bucket containing liquid.
An encircled slash symbol shall be superimposed over, and surround the pictorial.
The picture shall be positioned between the signal word panel and the message panel.
CERTAIN BUCKETS NOT AFFECTED.
The standard established by section 2 applies only to buckets manufactured or imported on or after the effective date of such standard, and buckets manufactured or imported before such effective date may be sold without the warning label required by section 2 even though such sales occur after that date.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission, by rule, shall prohibit a manufacturer, filler, distributor, and retailer from stockpiling buckets to which consumer product safety standards established by section 2 of this title would have applied but for the preceding sentence.
For purposes of this section, the term ``stockpiling'' shall have the same meaning as that provided by section 9(g)(2) of the Consumer Product Safety Act.
Removal of Label.--Once placed on a bucket pursuant to the standard provided by section 2, it shall be a prohibited act under section 19 of the Consumer Product Safety Act for any person in the chain of distribution of the bucket to intentionally cover, obstruct, tear, deface or remove the label.
Consumer Product Safety Standard.--The standard established by section 2 of this title shall be considered a consumer product safety standard established under the Consumer Product Safety Act.
Notwithstanding section 2, any bucket label in use on September 1, 1993, may, if such label is substantially in conformance with the requirements of paragraphs (3), (4), (5), and (6) of section 2, continue to be placed on buckets until 12 months after the date of the enactment of this title.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, buckets subject to the provisions of this section must bear both an English and Spanish language label on and after the effective date of the standard established by section 2.
Section 553 of title 5, United States Code, shall apply with respect to the Consumer Product Safety Commission's issuance of any amendments or changes to the bucket labeling standard established by section 2 of this title.
Sections 7 and 9 of the Consumer Product Safety Act shall not apply to such amendments or changes.
Labeling.--The standard established by section 2 requires the labeling of buckets covered by such standard to be the responsibility of the manufacturer of any such buckets, unless otherwise specified by contract between the manufacturer, and either the filler, distributor, or retailer of such buckets.
Under no circumstances shall any such bucket enter the stream of commerce without such label.
Time for Placing Labels.--The required label must be on the bucket at the time it is sold or delivered to the end user of the bucket or its contents or, in the case of a bucket intended to be sold to the public in an empty state, at the time it is shipped to a retailer for sale to the public.
Performance Standard.--Within 30 days following the date of enactment of this title, the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall commence a proceeding under the Consumer Product Safety Act for the issuance of a performance standard for buckets to address the drowning hazard associated with this product.
Section 553 of title 5, United States Code, shall apply with respect to the issuance of such standard.
Sections 7 and 9 of the Consumer Product Safety Act shall not apply to the issuance of such standard.
Such standard shall take effect at such time as may be prescribed by the Consumer Product Safety Commission, but in no event later than 15 months following the date of the enactment of this title.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission shall consider any American Society for Testing and Materials voluntary performance standard in existence prior to such date of enactment.
Labeling Requirements.--The labeling requirements under section 2 shall not apply to buckets certified by the Consumer Product Safety Commission as meeting the performance standard in subsection (a).
To avoid duplicative and conflicting labeling, the Consumer Product Safety Commission shall complete a consultation with relevant Federal agencies within 30 days following the date of enactment of this Act.
REQUIREMENT FOR CPSC STUDY.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission shall conduct a study to determine: (1) consumer use patterns of new and used 4- to 6- gallon steel and metal buckets; and (2) the prevalence of incidents of death or injury to children associated with the use of such containers.
The study also shall be designed to identify use patterns that may signify that such containers are being used by consumers in and around a household, residence, school or otherwise.
The study shall be completed within 12 months of the date of enactment.
The study shall be repeated for two consecutive years following completion of the initial study.
The study shall be repeated if necessary to track any changes in use patterns or to identify incidents of death or injury.
During the pendency of this study and in the absence of any regulation of 4- to 6-gallon containers by the Commission thereafter, metal containers which would otherwise be required to comply with the labeling requirements of section 3 are exempt from such requirements.
For the purposes of section 26 of the Consumer Product Safety Act, such exemption shall be considered a consumer product safety standard.
Upon review of the results of the study, the CPSC shall decide whether to continue this exemption, to require compliance by metal containers, or to consider further study in the future.