This act may be cited as the ``American Travel Industry Stabilization Act''.
TRAVEL INDUSTRY DISASTER RELIEF.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the President shall take the actions described in subsection (b) to compensate eligible travel-related businesses.
Actions Described.-- (1) In general.--Subject to such terms and conditions as the President deems necessary, and upon application, the President is authorized to issue Federal credit instruments to eligible travel-related businesses described in subsection (c) that do not, in the aggregate, exceed $5,000,000,000 and provide the subsidy amounts necessary for such instruments in accordance with the provisions of the Federal Credit Reform Act of 1990 (2 United States Code 661 et sequentes).
Time for application.--An application for a Federal credit instrument shall be filed by an eligible travel-related business not later then 60 days after the promulgation of regulations.
Terms of credit instruments.--A loan guaranteed under this Act may be used exclusively for the purpose of meeting obligations and expenses to the extent that an applicant demonstrates-- (A) business operations were directly and adversely affected by the events of September 11, 2001; (B) the loan guarantee is necessary to meet such obligations; (C) the inability of the applicant to meet such obligations or expenses is directly attributable to the impact of September 11, 2001; and (D) the applicant has the ability to repay the loan.
Definitions.--In this Act: (1) Eligible travel-related business.--The term ``eligible travel-related business'' means a business that was injured by the Government shutdown of the airline industry following the terrorist attacks on the United States that occurred on September 11, 2001, and that on such date-- (A) had a contractual arrangement with an air carrier to provide goods or services, including those with a contractual relationship with the Airline Reporting Corporation; or (B) was a non-aeronautical for-profit business operating at an airport engaged in the sale of consumer goods or services to the public under an arrangement with the airport or the airport's governing body.
Federal credit instrument.--The term ``Federal credit instrument'' means any guarantee or other pledge by the Board issued under section 2(b) to pledge the full faith and credit of the United States to pay all or part of any of the principal of and interest on a loan or other debt obligation issued by an obligor and funded by a lender.
Emergency Designation.--Congress designates the amount of new budget authority and outlays in all fiscal years resulting from this Act as an emergency requirement pursuant to section 252(e) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 901(e)).
Such amount shall be available only to the extent that a request, that includes designation of such amount as an emergency requirement as defined in such Act, is transmitted by the President to Congress.
ADDITIONAL FUNCTIONS FOR THE AIRLINE STABILIZATION BOARD.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means the Air Transportation Stabilization Board established under Public Law 107-42.
Financial obligation.--The term ``financial obligation'' means any note, bond, debenture, or other debt obligation issued by an obligor in connection with financing under this section and section 2(b).
Lender.--The term ``lender'' means any non-Federal qualified institutional buyer (as defined by section 230.144A(a) of title 17, Code of Federal Regulations (or any successor regulatory) known as Rule 144A(a) of the Securities and Exchange Commission and issued under the Securities Act of 1933), including-- (A) a qualified retirement plan (as defined in section 4974(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 4974(c))) that is a qualified institutional buyer; and (B) a governmental plan (as defined in section 414(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (26 United States Code 414(d))) that is a qualified institutional buyer.
Obligor.--The term ``obligor'' means a party primarily liable for payment of the principal of, or interest on, a Federal credit instrument, which party may be a corporation, partnership, joint venture, trust, or governmental entity, agency, or instrumentality.
Additional Functions To Stabilize the Travel Industry.--The Board shall review and make recommendations to the President with respect to applications for Federal credit instruments submitted under section 2(b).
Federal Credit Instruments.-- (1) In general.--The Board may enter into agreements with 1 or more obligors to issue Federal credit instruments under section 2(b) if the Board determines, in its discretion, that-- (A) the obligor is an entity in a travel-related business for which credit is not reasonably available at the time of the transaction; (B) the intended obligation by the obligor is prudently incurred; and (C) such agreement is a necessary part of maintaining a safe, efficient, and viable travel industry in the United States.
Terms and limitations.-- (A) Forms, terms, and conditions.--A Federal credit instrument shall be issued under section 2(b) in such form and such terms and conditions and contain such covenants, representatives, warranties, and requirements (including requirements for audits) as the Board determines appropriate, provided that-- (i) a loan shall be repaid over a period not to exceed 5 years from the date that the loan is guaranteed under this Act; (ii) the government guarantee shall cover not less than 80 percent of the value of the loan; (iii) loan guarantees under this Act shall be extended based upon the ability of the eligible travel-related business to repay the loan without regard to collateral; (iv) any loan origination fee may not exceed one percent of the loan value.
Procedures.--Not later than 14 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, in consultation with the Board, shall issue regulations setting forth procedures for application and minimum requirements.
Financial Protection of Government.-- (1) In general.--To the extent feasible and practicable, as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), the Board shall ensure that the Government is compensated for the risk assumed in making guarantees under this Act.
Government participation in gains.--To the extent to which any participating corporation accepts financial assistance, in the form of accepting the proceeds of any loans guaranteed by the Government under this Act, the Board is authorized to enter into contracts under which the Government, contingent on the financial success of the participating corporation, would participate in the gains of the participating corporation or its security holders through the use of such instruments as warrants, stock options, common or preferred stock, or other appropriate equity instruments.
Deposit in treasury.--All amounts collected by the Secretary of the Treasury under this subsection shall be deposited in the Treasury as miscellaneous receipts.
Authorization of Funds.--Congress authorizes and hereby appropriates such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.