SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Responding to Urgent needs of Survivors of the Holocaust Act'' or the ``RUSH Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--RESPONDING TO THE NEEDS OF HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS Subtitle A--Definition, Grants, and Other Programs Sec.
Prevention of elder abuse, neglect, and exploitation.
Subtitle B--Activities for Health, Independence, and Longevity Sec.
Innovation to improve transportation for older individuals who are Holocaust survivors.
Subtitle C--Functions Within Administration for Community Living to Assist Holocaust Survivors Sec.
Designation of individual within the Administration.
Annual report to congress.
TITLE II--NUTRITION SERVICES FOR ALL OLDER INDIVIDUALS Sec.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to include ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors'' to the list of groups that receive preference for services as defined in section 305(a)(2)(E) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3025(a)(2)(E)); (2) to designate within the Administration on Aging an individual to have responsibility for older individuals who are Holocaust survivors; and (3) to create a grant program to increase and improve transportation services for older individuals, with preference to those older individuals who are Holocaust survivors.
Congress finds the following: (1) During the Holocaust, which took place between 1933 and 1945, an estimated 6,000,000 Jews, as well as millions from other targeted groups, were murdered by the Nazis and their collaborators.
Approximately 127,000 Holocaust survivors remain in the United States, and thousands pass away each year.
Holocaust survivors are getting older and frailer, and will be seeking additional support and assistance from social service providers to enable them to age in place.
Providers face increased levels of demand from vulnerable individuals without any additional revenue to cover needed services.
All Holocaust survivors are at least 65 years old, with approximately \3/4\ of them older than 75 and a majority in their 80s and 90s.
More than half of all Holocaust survivors who emigrated to the United States from the former Soviet Union after 1965 fell beneath 200 percent of the Federal poverty threshold in 2010 and constitute an extremely vulnerable at-risk population in the United States.
Holocaust survivors continue to live with the mental and physical scars of the unconscionable trauma caused by the Holocaust.
While institutionalized settings are beneficial for some older people, long-term care facilities can have an adverse effect on Holocaust survivors.
For many Holocaust survivors, institutionalized settings reintroduce sights, sounds, smells, emotions, and routines which can induce panic, anxiety, and re-traumatization as a result of experiences resulting from the Holocaust.
Approximately \2/3\ of Holocaust survivors live alone and living alone is a risk factor for institutionalization.
Low-income Holocaust survivors are more reliant on social service programs than most other older Americans, with proportionally more Holocaust survivors needing services such as personal care, home-delivered and congregate meals, transportation, counseling, and mental health support.
TITLE I--RESPONDING TO THE NEEDS OF HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS Subtitle A--Definition, Grants, and Other Programs SEC.
Section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3002) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (24)-- (A) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``and''; (B) in subparagraph (C)(ii), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) status as a Holocaust survivor.
''; (2) by redesignating paragraphs (26) through (54) as paragraphs (27) through (55); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (25) the following: ``(26) The term `Holocaust survivor' means an individual who-- ``(A)(i) lived in a country between 1933 and 1945 under a Nazi regime, under Nazi occupation, or under the control of Nazi collaborators; or ``(ii) fled from a country between 1933 and 1945 under a Nazi regime, under Nazi occupation, or under the control of Nazi collaborators; ``(B) was persecuted between 1933 and 1945 on the basis of race, religion, physical or mental disability, sexual orientation, political affiliation, ethnicity, or other basis; and ``(C) was a member of a group that was persecuted by the Nazis.''.
Section 305(a) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3025(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)(E), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,'' each place it appears; and (2) in paragraph (2)(E), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,''.
Section 306 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3026) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,'' each place it appears; (B) in paragraph (4)-- (i) in subparagraph (A)-- (I) in clause (i)(I)(bb), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,''; and (II) in clause (ii), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,'' each place it appears; (ii) in subparagraph (B)(i)-- (I) in subclause (VI), by striking ``and'' at the end; and (II) by inserting after subclause (VII) the following: ``(VIII) older individuals who are Holocaust survivors; and''; and (iii) in subparagraph (B)(ii), by striking ``subclauses (I) through (VI)'' and inserting ``subclauses (I) through (VIII)''; and (C) in paragraph (7)(B)(iii), by inserting ``, in particular, older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``placement''; and (2) in subsection (b)(2)(B), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``areas,''.
Section 307(a) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3027(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,''; (2) in paragraph (16)-- (A) in subparagraph (A)-- (i) in clause (v), by striking ``and'' at the end; and (ii) by adding at the end the following: ``(vii) older individuals who are Holocaust survivors; and''; and (B) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``clauses (i) through (vi)'' and inserting ``clauses (i) through (vii)''; and (3) in paragraph (28)(B)(ii), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``areas,''.
Section 315 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3030c-2) is amended-- (1) in subsection (c)(2), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,''; and (2) in subsection (d), by inserting ``older individuals who are Holocaust survivors,'' after ``proficiency,''.
Section 373(c)(2)(A) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3030s-1(c)(2)(A)) is amended by striking ``individuals)'' inserting ``individuals and older individuals who are Holocaust survivors)''.
PREVENTION OF ELDER ABUSE, NEGLECT, AND EXPLOITATION.
Section 721(b)(12) of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3058i(b)(12)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) older individuals who are Holocaust survivors.''.
Subtitle B--Activities for Health, Independence, and Longevity SEC.
INNOVATION TO IMPROVE TRANSPORTATION FOR OLDER INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS.
Part A of title IV of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3032 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
INNOVATION TO IMPROVE TRANSPORTATION FOR OLDER INDIVIDUALS WHO ARE HOLOCAUST SURVIVORS.
In General.--The Assistant Secretary shall award grants or contracts to nonprofit organizations to increase and improve transportation services, including affordable non-emergency transportation to medical appointments and shopping for food and other essential items, to enable older individuals to remain in the community, with preference toward those older individuals who are Holocaust survivors.
The Assistant Secretary shall make grants or enter into such contracts for period of not less than 5 years.
Use of Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--A nonprofit organization receiving a grant or contract under subsection (a) shall use the funds received through such grant or contract to carry out a demonstration project, or to provide technical assistance to assist local transit providers, area agencies on aging, senior centers, and local senior support groups, to encourage and facilitate coordination of Federal, State, and local transportation services and resources for older individuals who are Holocaust survivors.
The organization may use the funds to develop and carry out an innovative transportation demonstration project to create transportation services for older individuals.
Specific activities.--In carrying out a demonstration project or providing technical assistance under paragraph (1) the organization may carry out activities that include-- ``(A) developing innovative approaches for improving access by older individuals to transportation services, including volunteer driver programs, economically sustainable transportation programs, and programs that allow older individuals to transfer their automobiles to a provider of transportation services in exchange for the services; ``(B) preparing information on transportation options and resources for older individuals and organizations serving such individuals, and disseminating the information by establishing and operating a toll-free telephone number; ``(C) developing models and best practices for providing comprehensive integrated transportation services for older individuals, including services administered by the Secretary of Transportation, by providing ongoing technical assistance to agencies providing services under title III and by assisting in coordination of public and community transportation services; and ``(D) providing special services to link older individuals to transportation services not provided under title III.
Preference.--In awarding grants and entering into contracts under subsection (a), the Assistant Secretary shall give preference to organizations and institutions that have previous extensive experience working with and conducting assessment of the needs of Holocaust survivors who are older individuals.
Consultation.--In determining the type of programs and activities used to improve and increase transportation assistance for Holocaust survivors, the Assistant Secretary shall consult with the individual designated under section 122 of the Responding to Urgent needs of Survivors of the Holocaust Act and with national organizations with special expertise in serving Holocaust survivors who are older individuals.
Eligible Entities.--To be eligible to receive a grant or enter into a contract under subsection (a), an entity shall have previous extensive experience working with and conducting assessment of the needs of older individuals.''.
Subtitle C--Functions Within Administration for Community Living to Assist Holocaust Survivors SEC.
DESIGNATION OF INDIVIDUAL WITHIN THE ADMINISTRATION.
The Administrator for Community Living is authorized to designate within the Administration for Community Living a person who has specialized training, background, or experience with Holocaust survivor issues to have responsibility for implementing services for older individuals who are Holocaust survivors.
ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS.
The Administrator for Community Living, with assistance from the individual designated under section 121, shall prepare and submit to Congress an annual report on the status and needs, including the priority areas of concern, of older individuals (as defined in section 102 of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3002)) who are Holocaust survivors.
TITLE II--NUTRITION SERVICES FOR ALL OLDER INDIVIDUALS SEC.
In General.--Section 339(2) of the Older Americans Act of 1065 (42 United States Code 3030g-21(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by amending clause (iii) to read as follows: ``(iii) to the maximum extent practicable, are adjusted and appropriately funded to meet any special health-related or other dietary needs of program participants, including needs based on religious, cultural, or ethnic requirements,''; (2) in subparagraph (J), by striking ``, and'' and inserting a comma; (3) in subparagraph (K), by striking the period and inserting ``, and''; and (4) by adding at the end the following: ``(L) encourages individuals who distribute nutrition services under subpart 2 to engage in conversation with homebound older individuals and to be aware of the warning signs of medical emergencies, injury or abuse in order to reduce isolation and promote wellbeing.''.
Study of Nutrition Projects.--Section 317(a)(2) of the Older Americans Act Amendments of 2006 (Public Law 106-365) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (2) in subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(D) an analysis of service providers' abilities to obtain viable contracts for special foods necessary to meet a religious requirement, required dietary need, or ethnic consideration.