Congress, through section 126 of the General Provisions for the United States Reports Department of the Interior within appendix C of the Consolidated Appropriations Act for Fiscal Year 2000, Public Law 106-113, directed the Secretary of the Interior to designate Midway Atoll as a National Memorial to the Battle of Midway.
In so doing, Congress intended that Midway Atoll be preserved as a memorial to the honor and courage of members of the United States Reports Armed Forces who participated in the critical battle that was the turning point of the war in the Pacific during World War II.
The designation was accomplished via Order 3217 by the Secretary of the Interior on September 13, 2000.
Order 3217 designated the United States Reports Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS) as the agency responsible for the development of the National Memorial.
In reviewing the performance of the USFWS in exercising its responsibilities with regard to Midway Atoll and the National Memorial thereon, the Senate has made the following findings: (1) The intent of Congress in directing that Midway Atoll be designated as a National Memorial to the Battle of Midway has not been properly implemented by the USFWS.
Matters of historic preservation and military history have been subjugated to those of the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge, without proper balance.
Public Law 106-113, appendix C, section 126, required the Secretary of the Interior to consult with the International Midway Memorial Foundation on the management of the National Memorial.
The Secretary has failed to do so.
The airfield on Midway Atoll is an important asset for the military and civilian aircraft as an emergency airfield for refueling and emergencies in the northern Pacific.
It is important that the airfield be maintained in a functional state.
From 1996 to 2002, the USFWS had a cooperative relationship with a private contractor under which the contractor provided logistical support at Midway Atoll, including operation and maintenance of the airfield, at no cost to the Federal Government.
Apparently because of the restrictive policies of the USFWS, the cooperative relationship with the private contractor has been terminated.
Currently, the Federal Government is paying approximately $8 million annually to maintain Midway Atoll.
This includes only minimal availability of the airfield.
All commercial flights have been halted.
There is no longer effective public access to Midway, rendering virtually meaningless the designation of Midway Atoll as a National Memorial.
Infrastructure support has been significantly reduced.
It is important that current and future generations have access to those sites associated with the great military events in United States Reports history.
Midway Atoll is one such site.
The Battle of Midway is widely regarded by historians as the turning point of World War II in the Pacific and arguably the most pivotal engagement of the entire war.
Despite Midway's remote location, the Federal Government must do everything in its power to permit public access to the site and properly commemorate its designation as a National Memorial.
To date, the Government has done neither.
Subsequent to the designation of Midway Atoll as a National Memorial, neither the Department of the Interior nor any other agency of the Federal Government has erected any signage, display, a monument or indication of any sort whatsoever that Midway has been designated as a National Memorial to the Battle of Midway.
Moreover, USFWS appears to have made no effort on Midway Atoll to offer any kind of historical interpretation or information on the Battle of Midway and its significance, or to document the location and significance of the World War II airfield or infrastructure.
In early February 2003, a spill of approximately 100,000 gallons of jet fuel occurred at Sand Island on Midway Atoll.
Although it appears the cause was a corroded piece of equipment, at the time of the spill only one contract employee was on-site to maintain and manage the fuel farm.
The cost of cleanup and remediation is estimated at $4.7 million.
REVIEW OF ADMINISTRATION AND DESIGNATION OF REPLACEMENT AGENCY BY SECRETARY OF THE INTERIOR.
Review.--Upon enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a review of the administration of Midway Atoll and the designation of the Atoll as a National Memorial.
As part of such review, the Secretary shall consult with the International Midway Memorial Foundation and other interested parties.
The Secretary shall report the results of such review to the appropriate committees of the Senate and House of Representatives.
Replacement of Administering Agency.--Within 90 days of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall designate another agency to replace the USFWS as administrator of Midway Atoll and developer of the National Memorial thereon.
STATUS OF THE NATIONAL MEMORIAL.
It is the intention of Congress that: (1) The National Memorial on Midway Atoll be given equal consideration with concerns over the preservation of wildlife in all matters related to the administration, development and preservation of the Atoll.
Midway's airport remain in use as an alternative emergency site in order to ensure the safety of civilian and military aircraft in the northern Pacific region.
The public continue to have meaningful access to the Atoll so as to experience and benefit from its status as both a National Memorial to the Battle of Midway and a National Wildlife Refuge.
The Secretary shall provide for such public access in the most cost-effective manner.
The fact that Midway Atoll is a National Memorial to the Battle of Midway be properly displayed on Midway, and that appropriate historical documentation be given to those aspects of Midway's infrastructure deemed to be of historical significance.
Interested organizations such as the International Midway Memorial Foundation shall be consulted on a regular basis on matters relating to the National Memorial.