This Act may be cited as the ``Foreign Oil Displacement Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the strategic interests of the United States would be served by a reduction in the Nation's dependence upon imported oil to produce transportation fuels and other products vital to both the domestic economy and national security; (2) this goal would be served by the development of a viable, commercially competitive synthetic fuels industry reliant upon domestic coals and other plentiful, nontraditional carbonaceous feedstocks; and (3) temporary financial incentives are required to foster private investment in the technology, design, construction, and operation of strategic facilities capable of producing synthetic fuels on a commercial scale.
CARBONACEOUS FUELS FACILITY CREDIT.
Allowance of Carbonaceous Fuels Facility Credit.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) the carbonaceous fuels facility credit.''
Amount of Carbonaceous Fuels Facility Credit.--Section 48 of such Code (relating to the energy credit and the reforestation credit) is amended by adding after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Carbonaceous Fuels Facility Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 46, the carbonaceous fuels facility credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to 28 percent of the qualified investment in a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility for such taxable year.
Carbonaceous fuels conversion facility.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `carbonaceous fuels conversion facility' means a facility of the taxpayer-- ``(i)(I) the original use of which commences with the taxpayer or the reconstruction of which is completed by the taxpayer (but only with respect to that portion of the basis which is properly attributable to such reconstruction), or ``(II) that is acquired through purchase (as defined by section 179(d)(2)), ``(ii) that is depreciable under section 167, ``(iii) that has a useful life of not less than 4 years, and ``(iv) that is used to produce a qualified fuel.
Special rule for sale-leasebacks.--For purposes of clause (i) of subparagraph (A), in the case of a facility that-- ``(i) is originally placed in service by a person, and ``(ii) is sold and leased back by such person, or is leased to such person, within 3 months after the date such facility was originally placed in service, for a period of not less than 12 years, such facility shall be treated as originally placed in service not earlier than the date on which such property is used under the leaseback (or lease) referred to in clause (ii).
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any property if the lessee and lessor of such property make an election under this sentence.
Such an election, once made, may be revoked only with the consent of the Secretary.
Qualified fuel.--For purposes of clause (iv) of subparagraph (A), the term `qualified fuel'-- ``(i) has the meaning given such term by section 29(c), except that ``(ii) in respect of subparagraph (C) of paragraph (1) of section 29(c), the term `coal' shall, in addition to lignite, be deemed to include standard anthracite, peat, and any byproduct from a coal, culm, or silt preparation facility that contains fixed carbon.
Qualified investment.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `qualified investment' means, with respect to any taxable year, the basis of a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Qualified progress expenditures.-- ``(A) Increase in qualified investment.--In the case of a taxpayer who has made an election under subparagraph (E), the amount of the qualified investment of such taxpayer for the taxable year (determined under paragraph (3) without regard to this subsection) shall be increased by an amount equal to the aggregate of each qualified progress expenditure for the taxable year with respect to progress expenditure property.
Progress expenditure property defined.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `progress expenditure property' means any property being constructed by or for the taxpayer and which-- ``(i) cannot reasonably be expected to be completed in less than 18 months, and ``(ii) it is reasonable to believe will qualify as a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility which is being constructed by or for the taxpayer when it is placed in service.
Qualified progress expenditures defined.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) Self-constructed property.--In the case of any self-constructed property, the term `qualified progress expenditures' means the amount which, for purposes of this subpart, is properly chargeable (during such taxable year) to capital account with respect to such property.
Non-self-constructed property.--In the case of non-self-constructed property, the term `qualified progress expenditures' means the amount paid during the taxable year to another person for the construction of such property.
Other definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(i) Self-constructed property.--The term `self-constructed property' means property for which it is reasonable to believe that more than half of the construction expenditures will be made directly by the taxpayer.
Non-self-constructed property.--The term `non-self-constructed property' means property which is not self-constructed property.
Construction, etc.--The term `construction' includes reconstruction and erection, and the term `constructed' includes reconstructed and erected.
Only construction of carbonaceous fuels conversion facility to be taken into account.--Construction shall be taken into account only if, for purposes of this subpart, expenditures therefor are properly chargeable to capital account with respect to the property.
Election.--An election under this paragraph may be made at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe.
Such an election shall apply to the taxable year for which made and to all subsequent taxable years.
Such an election, once made, may not be revoked except with the consent of the Secretary.
Coordination with other credits.--This subsection shall not apply to any property with respect to which the energy credit or the rehabilitation credit is allowed unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such credits to such property.''
Recapture.--Subsection (a) of section 50 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Special rules relating to carbonaceous fuels conversion facility.--For purposes of applying this subsection in the case of any credit allowable by reason of section 48(c), the following shall apply: ``(A) General rule.--In lieu of the amount of the increase in tax under paragraph (1), the increase in tax shall be an amount equal to the investment tax credit allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years with respect to a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility (as defined by section 48(c)) multiplied by a fraction whose numerator is the number of years remaining to fully depreciate under this title the carbonaceous fuels conversion facility disposed of, and whose denominator is the total number of years over which such facility would otherwise have been subject to depreciation.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the year of disposition of the carbonaceous fuels conversion facility property shall be treated as a year of remaining depreciation.
Property ceases to qualify for progress expenditures.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraph (2) shall apply in the case of qualified progress expenditures for a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility under section 48(c), except that the amount of the increase in tax under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be substituted in lieu of the amount described in such paragraph (2).
This paragraph shall be applied separately with respect to the credit allowed under section 38 regarding a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (C) of section 49(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: ``(iv) the portion of the basis of any carbonaceous fuels conversion facility attributable to any qualified investment (as defined by section 48(c)(3)).''
Paragraph (4) of section 50(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and (2)'' and inserting ``, (2), and (6)''.
(A) The section heading for section 48 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 48 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Sale or Assignment of Unused Credit Amount.--Section 50 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Sale or Assignment of Unused Carbonaceous Fuels Facility Credit Amount.-- ``(1) General rule.--Any unused portion of a carbonaceous fuels facility credit may be sold or assigned in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Treatment of seller.-- ``(A) Liability.--The sale or assignment of any portion of a credit under paragraph (1) shall not relieve the seller or assignor of any penalty or interest charged under this title with respect to such portion.
Basis.--The basis of a carbonaceous fuels facility shall not be adjusted by reason of the sale or assignment of a credit under paragraph (1).
Treatment of acquirer.-- ``(A) Credit claimed.--The credit (or portion thereof) acquired under paragraph (1) may be claimed only by the person acquiring such credit in the taxable year of such person in which such sale or assignment occurred and only if such person notifies the Secretary of the derivative source of such credit.
Liability.--Such person shall not be subject to any penalty or interest in respect of such credit for which the seller or assignor remains subject under paragraph (2)(A).
Ordering rule.-- ``(i) In general.--Such credit shall be treated as a credit under this part allowable to such person and shall be used after the order of all other credits specified by section 38(d).
Limitation on carryforwards.--No amount of a credit acquired under paragraph (1) may be treated as a business carryforward in any taxable year beginning after December 31, 2010.
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of the Foreign Oil Displacement Act, the Secretary shall prescribe regulations to carry out this subsection.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to periods after the date of the enactment of this Act under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
EXEMPTION FROM MANUFACTURERS EXCISE TAX ON FUELS.
Gasoline.--Subsection (a) of section 4083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Qualified carbonaceous fuel.-- ``(A) Exemption.--For taxable years beginning after 90 days after the date of the enactment of this paragraph and ending before December 31, 2010, the terms `taxable fuel', `gasoline', and `diesel fuel' do not include qualified carbonaceous fuel or that portion of a blend that is qualified carbonaceous fuel.
Qualified carbonaceous fuel defined.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `qualified carbonaceous fuel' means qualified fuel produced by a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility.
Other definitions.--For purposes of subparagraph (B), the terms `qualified fuel' and `carbonaceous fuels conversion facility' have the meaning given such terms by section 48(c)(2).''
Aviation Fuel.--Subsection (a) of section 4093 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such term does not include qualified carbonaceous fuel (as defined by section 4083(a)(4)).''
Retail Uses.--Section 4041 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(n) Certain Carbonaceous Fuel.-- ``(1) Exemption.--For taxable years beginning after 90 days after the date of the enactment of this subsection and ending before December 31, 2010, no tax shall be imposed under this section on qualified carbonaceous fuel or that portion of a blend that is qualified carbonaceous fuel.
Qualified carbonaceous fuel defined.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `qualified carbonaceous fuel' has the meaning given such term by section 4083(a)(4).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to fuels produced after the date of the enactment of this Act.