This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Veterans Health Care Access Act of 2007''.
Congress finds the following: (1) One out of every six veterans who have returned from serving in Operation Enduring Freedom or Operation Iraqi Freedom have diagnosable post-traumatic stress disorder.
The Department of Veterans Affairs and the Department of Defense face a shortfall of trained mental health professionals.
The demands placed on the Department of Veterans Affairs health care system exceed the capacity of that system to serve veterans.
Veterans who live in rural areas serviced by distant Department of Veterans Affairs facilities have no option other than excessive travel for diagnosis and long-term treatment.
The variety of mental ailments acquired during or as a result of deployment in a war zone frequently require long- term, intensive, and highly-personalized care.
The system of the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs in effect as of the date of the enactment of this Act for providing long-term mental health care creates unnecessary and unacceptable stress for veterans and the Department of Veterans Affairs.
The long-term needs associated with mental health conditions require a positive change in the way the Department of Veterans Affairs provides mental health services.
PILOT PROGRAM TO PROVIDE MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES TO CERTAIN VETERANS OF CONTINGENCY OPERATIONS.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish and carry out a pilot program to provide mental health counseling to eligible veterans at facilities other than medical facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Eligible Veteran.--For purposes of this section, the term ``eligible veteran'' means a veteran who-- (1) served on active duty in support of a contingency operation, as that term is defined in section 101(13) of title 10, United States Code; (2) is eligible to receive hospital care and medical services under section 1710 of title 38, United States Code; (3) has been diagnosed with a mental health condition for which a certified mental health provider has recommended the veteran receive mental health counseling; and (4) resides at least 30 miles from a medical facility of the Department of Veterans Affairs that employs a full-time mental health professional.
Provision of Vouchers.-- (1) Vouchers.-- (A) Six month supply.--Under the pilot program established under subsection (a), upon the request of an eligible veteran, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall issue to the eligible veteran a six-month supply of vouchers that may be used to provide for full payment for counseling services provided by any mental health provider on the list established under paragraph (2).
Additional vouchers.--If a veteran receives a supply of vouchers under the preceding sentence and, not later than five months after receiving such vouchers requests an additional six-month supply of vouchers, the Secretary may issue to the veteran an additional six-month supplies of vouchers, as the Secretary determines is appropriate.
Deadline.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall issue the vouchers under this paragraph not later than 30 days after the date of the date on which the veteran requests the vouchers.
List of service providers.--The Secretary shall compile and maintain a list of mental health care providers, including family counseling providers, who have entered into an agreement with the Secretary to accept the vouchers issued under paragraph (1) as payment in full for visits to the provider for mental health counseling.
Compliance with department protocols.--Each mental health care provider on the list maintained by the Secretary under paragraph (2) shall comply with applicable protocols of the Department of Veterans Affairs before incurring any liability on behalf of the Department for the provision of services as part of the pilot program.
Family Counseling.--If a certified mental health provider or the Secretary of Veterans Affairs has recommended that an eligible veteran and the veteran's family receive family counseling, that veteran may use a voucher provided under subsection (c) as payment in full for visits to a family counseling provider on the list maintained under paragraph (2) of such subsection for such counseling.
Rate of Provider Reimbursement.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall provide for payment under the voucher of a mental health provider at the reimbursement rate (if any) in effect under the TRICARE program under chapter 55, of title 10, United States Code, for such services (or similar services) of such a provider in the area or, in the absence of such a reimbursement rate, at the payment rates for such services (or similar services) in effect under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
In order to receive payment under a voucher, a mental health provider shall submit to the Secretary the voucher bearing the signature of the provider and the veteran who received counseling from the provider in exchange for the voucher.
Veterans Integrated Service Networks.--The Secretary shall carry out the pilot program under this section in Veterans Integrated Service Networks 1, 4, 7, 12, 17, 20, and 23.
Termination; Extension.-- (1) Termination.--The authority of the Secretary to carry out a pilot program under this subsection shall terminate on the date that is five years after the date of enactment of this section.
Study; Extension.--Not later than four years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall conduct a study on the effectiveness of the pilot program under this section, in which the Secretary shall recommend whether the program should be extended or expanded.
Notwithstanding paragraph (1), if the Secretary determines the program should be extended or expanded, the Secretary may extend or expand the existing program.