AMENDMENT OF ACT ESTABLISHING GATEWAY NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
Statement of Purposes.--The first section of the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the Gateway National Recreation Area in the States of New York, and New Jersey, and for other purposes'', approved October 27, 1972 (16 United States Code 460cc), is amended by inserting the following after the first sentence: ``In addition, the Secretary may utilize the resources of Fort Wadsworth in the Staten Island Unit, Fort Hancock in the Sandy Hook Unit, and Floyd Bennett Field in the Jamaica Bay and Breezy Point Units of the recreation area to provide for and support programs and activities that foster research, education, and demonstration projects concerning the environment, international affairs, cultural understanding, and health and science.
The Secretary may also utilize the resources of Fort Wadsworth for any other purposes consistent with the community reuse plan or other initiatives for Naval Station New York, and is encouraged to do so to the greatest extent possible.''.
Administration.--Section 3 of such Act (16 United States Code 460cc-2) is amended by adding the following new subsection at the end thereof: ``(j)(1) In addition to other available authorities, the Secretary may, in his discretion, negotiate and enter into leases or other agreements, as appropriate, with any person, firm, association, organization, corporation, or governmental entity for the use of any property within Fort Wadsworth, Fort Hancock, and Floyd Bennett Field in accordance with the general management plan or for any of the purposes set forth in the first section of this Act.
The Secretary may further, in his discretion, negotiate and enter into leases or other agreements, as appropriate, with any Federal agency to house employees of the agency engaged in activities or programs at Fort Wadsworth, Fort Hancock, Floyd Bennett Field or in the New York City metropolitan area.
In addition to other available authorities, the Secretary may, in his discretion, enter into interagency permitting agreements or other appropriate agreements with the Secretary of Defense, Secretary of Transportation, and other Federal agencies to locate their activities and house their employees at Fort Wadsworth, Fort Hancock, and Floyd Bennett Field.
Any leases or other appropriate agreements entered into under this subsection shall be subject to such procedures, terms, conditions, and restrictions as the Secretary deems necessary.
Leases shall be entered into at fair market value, which shall be calculated taking into account the uses permitted by the general management plan or under this Act.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to (A) any interagency permitting agreement entered into between the Secretary and the Secretary of Defense or other Federal agencies regarding the location of activities or housing of employees at Fort Wadsworth, Fort Hancock, and Floyd Bennett Field; (B) leases entered into in accordance with a community reuse plan for Naval Station New York; (C) any lease or use agreement entered into with any State or local governmental unit or instrumentality for a public purpose; or (D) leases entered into with nonprofit organizations.
The Secretary shall establish competitive bidding procedures to be used for the issuance of leases under this section.
For leases and other appropriate agreements under this subsection, the Secretary may waive any requirement of any law or regulation otherwise applicable to the leasing of Federal properties if the Secretary determines that such waiver is necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary shall provide written notice of any such waiver to the United States Congress.
The notice to Congress shall contain an explanation of the reasons for such determination.
The proceeds from leases under this subsection, and from concession and other use authorizations and from other services that may be provided by the recreation area under this subsection, shall be retained by the Secretary and be credited to the appropriation bearing the cost of preservation, restoration, maintenance, improvement, repair, and related expenses including administration of the above, incurred by the Secretary with respect to Fort Wadsworth, Fort Hancock, and Floyd Bennett Field properties, with the balance used to defray other costs incurred by the Secretary in the administration of Fort Wadsworth, Fort Hancock, and Floyd Bennett Field.
Each lessee and sublessee of a lease entered into under this subsection shall keep such records as the Secretary may prescribe to enable the Secretary to determine that all terms of the lease or sublease have been and are being faithfully performed.
The Secretary and the Comptroller General of the United States and their duly authorized representatives shall, for the purpose of audit and examination, have access to all records and to other books, documents, and papers of the lessee and sublessee pertinent to the lease or sublease and all the terms and conditions thereof.
The Secretary shall annually prepare and submit to Congress a report on property leased under this subsection.
In addition to other available authorities, the Secretary may, in his discretion, enter into cooperative agreements and permits for any of the purposes of the recreation area set out in the first section of this Act.