This Act may be cited as the ``Healthcare Accessibility for Seniors Act of 2002''.
REQUIRING MEDICAID HEALTH MAINTENANCE ORGANIZATIONS TO MAKE PAYMENTS FOR SERVICES PROVIDED BY HEALTH CENTERS IN FEDERALLY-ASSISTED HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
In General.--Section 1903(m)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396b(m)(2)(A)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (xi); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (xii) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(xiii) such contract provides that-- ``(I) the entity's network of participating providers of such services shall include at least one health center in Federally-assisted housing for the elderly (as defined in section 1905(t)), or ``(II) the entity shall enter into a contract for the provision of such services to such individuals with each such center (as so defined) located in the entity's service area, under terms and conditions (including terms and conditions relating to patient referrals and the sharing of patient records) similar to those applicable to a contract between the entity and a similar provider of such services in the area (in accordance with standards established by the Secretary).''.
Health Center in Federally-Assisted Housing for the Elderly Described.--Section 1905 of such Act (42 United States Code 1396d) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(t) The term `health center in Federally-assisted housing for the elderly' means a clinic which is located at an Federally-assisted housing project (which may be receiving assistance under section 202 of the Housing Act of 1959) in which elderly persons (as defined in section 3(b)(3)(D) of the United States Housing Act of 1937) constitute a minimum of 25 percent of its residents and which-- ``(1) provides physical examinations, injury treatment, primary health services, mental health services, and other services (to the extent permitted under the laws or regulations of the State in which it is located) on an on-site basis to residents of the housing project (without regard to whether or not the residents are enrolled in the State plan under this title); ``(2) refers such residents to other providers of health care services for services which the center does not provide on-site; ``(3) has entered into arrangements with other providers of health care services providing services on a 24-hour, emergency basis; ``(4) has on its staff at least one physician (whether employed on a part-time or full-time basis); at least one physician assistant, nurse practitioner, or clinical nurse specialist; and at least one mental health professional; and ``(5) is approved or certified as such a clinic by the State in which it is located.''.
Prohibition Against Waiver of Requirement.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may not waive (pursuant to section 1115 or section 1915 of the Social Security Act or otherwise) the application of section 1903(m)(2)(A)(xii) of the Social Security Act (as added by subsection (a)) with respect to any State.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsections (a) and (b) shall apply to contracts between a State and a medicaid managed care entity for contract years or periods that begin on or after 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CLEARINGHOUSE FOR INFORMATION AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE ON HEALTH CENTERS IN FEDERALLY-ASSISTED HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish a clearinghouse through which interested parties may receive information and technical assistance on the establishment and operation of health centers in Federally-assisted housing for the elderly.
GRANTS FOR HEALTH CENTERS IN FEDERALLY-ASSISTED HOUSING FOR THE ELDERLY.
In General.--Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254b et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following subpart: ``Subpart X--Health Centers in Federally-Assisted Housing for the Elderly ``health centers in federally-assisted housing for the elderly ``Sec.
In General.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of making available to elderly persons health services specified in subsection (d) at sites that are on or in close proximity to Federally-assisted housing projects for the elderly (or at such other sites as the Secretary determines to be appropriate to provide residents of such housing projects with access to the services).
Elderly person.--For purposes of this section, the term `elderly person' has the meaning given such term in section 3(b)(3)(D) of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437(b)(3)(D)).
Federally-assisted housing projects for the elderly.--The term `Federally-assisted housing projects for the elderly' is a Federally-assistance housing project in which the elderly person constitute at least 25 percent of the residents of the project.
Minimum Qualifications for Grantees.-- ``(1) Status as medicaid provider.-- ``(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant is a provider of services under the State plan approved for the State involved under title XIX of the Social Security Act.
The requirements established in subparagraph (A) do not apply to an applicant that provides health services without charge and does not receive reimbursement for the services from any third-party payors.
Required consultations.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved, in preparing the application under subsection (j), has consulted with elderly persons in the community in which services under the grant are to be provided, with administrators at Federally- assisted housing projects for the elderly in the community, and with the area agencies on aging in the community.
Preferences in Making Grants.--In making grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give preference to qualified applicants that are experienced in delivering health care services to medically underserved populations or in areas in which a significant number of elderly persons are at risk for health problems.
Authorized Services.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees as follows: ``(A) Each of the following services will be made available under the grant (as medically appropriate for the child involved): ``(i) Comprehensive health examinations.
Health education and prevention services.
Follow-up care and referrals regarding routine health problems.
Services under subparagraph (A) will include screenings, follow-up care, and referrals (including referrals for specialty care) regarding dental, vision, and hearing services, and regarding sexually- transmitted diseases and other communicable diseases.
Other services.--In addition to services specified in paragraph (1), the Secretary may authorize a grantee under subsection (a) to expend the grant for such additional health or health-related services for elderly persons as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Cultural Context of Services.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees that services under the grant will be provided in the language and cultural context most appropriate for the individuals to whom the services are provided.
Limitation on Imposition of Fees for Services.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees that, if a fee is imposed for the provision of services under the grant, such fee-- ``(1) will be made according to a schedule of fees that is made available to the public; ``(2) will be adjusted to reflect the income and resources of the elderly persons involved; and ``(3) will not be imposed on any elderly person with an income of less than 150 percent of the applicable official poverty line (established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and revised by the Secretary in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981).
Matching Funds.-- ``(1) In general.--With respect to the costs of the program to be carried out under subsection (a) by an applicant, the Secretary, subject to paragraph (3), may make a grant under such subsection only if the applicant agrees to make available (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions toward such costs in an amount that is-- ``(A) for the first fiscal year for which the applicant receives such a grant, 10 percent of such costs; ``(B) for any second such fiscal year, 25 percent of such costs; and ``(C) for any subsequent such fiscal year, 50 percent of such costs.
Determination of amount contributed.--Non-Federal contributions required in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including plant, equipment, or services.
Amounts provided by the Federal Government, or services assisted or subsidized to any significant extent by the Federal Government, may not be included in determining the amount of such non-Federal contributions.
Waiver.--The Secretary may for an applicant waive the requirement of paragraph (1) for a fiscal year if the Secretary determines that the applicant will be unable to carry out a program under subsection (a) otherwise.
If the Secretary provides a waiver under the preceding sentence for a grantee under subsection (a) for a fiscal year, the Secretary may make a grant to the applicant for the following fiscal year only if the Secretary reviews the waiver to determine whether the waiver should remain in effect.
Additional Agreements.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees as follows: ``(1) The applicant will maintain the confidentiality of patient records.
The applicant will establish an ongoing quality assurance program regarding services provided under the grant.
The applicant will not expend more than 10 percent of the grant for administrative expenses regarding the grant.
Reports to Secretary.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant agrees that, not later than February 1 of the fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the grant is to be made, the applicant will submit to the Secretary a report describing the program carried out by the applicant under the grant, including provisions on the utilization, cost, and outcome of services provided under the grant.
Application for Grant; Plan.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary; the application contains a plan describing the proposal of the applicant for a program under subsection (a); and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Evaluation of Programs.--The Secretary, directly or through grants or contracts, shall provide for evaluations of programs carried out under subsection (a), including the cost-effectiveness and health- effectiveness of the programs.
Reports to Congress.--Not later than May 31 of each fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit to the Congress a report on the programs carried out under subsection (a).
The report shall include a summary of the evaluations carried out under subsection (k) for the preceding fiscal year.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, $550,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, $600,000,000 for fiscal year 2005, $650,000,000 for fiscal year 2006, and $700,000,000 for fiscal year 2007.