This Act may be cited as the ``Team B Act''.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) terrorism and domestic radicalization represent evolving, dynamic, multidimensional threats that necessitate a structured, iterative process to continuously revise plans, operations, concepts, organizations, and capabilities; and (2) past Federal experience in competitive analysis executed by experts drawn from outside the government has helped the intelligence community and policymakers better understand the nature of complex threats to the United States.
ESTABLISHMENT OF COUNTERTERRORISM COMPETITIVE ANALYSIS COUNCIL.
Establishment.--Title I of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``counterterrorism competitive analysis council ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established a council to be known as the `Counterterrorism Competitive Analysis Council' (in this section referred to as the `Council').
Duties.--The Council shall-- ``(1) advise the Director of National Intelligence on matters of policy relating to the threats of international terrorism and domestic radicalization based on all-source information; ``(2) prepare a competitive analysis of each national intelligence estimate concerning al-Qaeda and other foreign terrorist organizations and submit such analysis to the Director of National Intelligence and the National Intelligence Council; and ``(3) annually submit to Congress a report in unclassified form, which may include a classified annex, on trends in counterterrorism and domestic radicalization, including a summary of any competitive analysis prepared pursuant to paragraph (2).
Members.--(1) The Council shall be composed of eight members appointed by the Director of National Intelligence, in consultation with the Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence of the House of Representatives and the Select Committee on Intelligence of the Senate.
Members shall be selected on the basis of previous experience with matters of policy relating to international terrorism and domestic radicalization.
(A) The Director of National Intelligence may not appoint an individual to the Council if such individual has served as an officer or employee of the Federal Government within a five-year period of the date of appointment.
The Director of National Intelligence may not appoint an individual to the Council if-- ``(i) such individual has served as an officer or employee of the Federal Government within a 15-year period of the date of appointment; and ``(ii) on the date of appointment, three of the members of the Council have served as officers or employees of the Federal Government within a 15-year period of the date of appointment.
The term of a member is five years, and a member may not serve more than two terms, except that a member appointed to fill a vacancy may serve two additional terms after the expiration of the term in which that vacancy occured.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of a term shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Every two years, the Council shall select a chair and vice chair from among its members.
To the extent provided in advance in appropriation Acts, each member shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the annual rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Any member of the Council may, if authorized by the Council, take any action which the Council is authorized to take by this section.
Staff of Council.--(1) To the extent provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Council shall appoint and fix the compensation of a Director and such additional staff as may be necessary to enable the Council to carry out its duties.
The Director and staff of the Council may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay fixed for the Director and staff may not exceed the annual rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
In accordance with rules adopted by the Council, and to the extent provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Council may procure the services of experts and consultants under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Access to Intelligence Information.--(1) The Director of National Intelligence shall transmit to the Council each national intelligence estimate concerning al-Qaeda and other foreign terrorist organizations.
Upon request of the Council, the Director of National Intelligence shall make available to the Council any intelligence information in the possession of the intelligence community.
The Director of National Intelligence shall ensure that the appropriate executive departments and agencies cooperate with the Council in expeditiously providing to the members and staff appropriate security clearances in a manner consistent with existing procedures and requirements.
Applicability of Federal Advisory Committee Act.--Section 14(a)(2)(B) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), relating to the termination of advisory committees, shall not apply to the Council.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2017.
No amount is authorized to carry out this section for a fiscal year unless the appropriation for the Office of the Director of National Intelligence for such fiscal year is reduced by an amount equal to the amount appropriated to carry out this section for such fiscal year''.
Initial Report.--The initial report required to be submitted under section 120(b)(2) of the National Security Act of 1947, as added by subsection (a), shall be filed not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 119B the following: ``Sec.
Counterterrorism Competitive Analysis Council.