This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Pension Start-Up Credit Act of 1998''.
CREDIT FOR PENSION PLAN START-UP COSTS OF SMALL EMPLOYERS.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
SMALL EMPLOYER PENSION PLAN START-UP COSTS.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of an eligible employer, the small employer pension plan start-up cost credit determined under this section for any taxable year is an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified start-up costs paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Dollar Limitation.--The amount of the credit determined under this section for any taxable year shall not exceed-- ``(1) $1,000 for the first taxable year ending after the date the employer established the qualified employer plan to which such costs relate, ``(2) $500 for each of the second and third taxable years ending after such date, and ``(3) zero for each taxable year thereafter.
Eligible Employer.--For purposes of this section, ``(1) In general.--The term `eligible employer' has the meaning given such term by section 408(p)(2)(C)(i).
Employers maintaining qualified plans during 1997 not eligible.--Such term shall not include an employer if such employer (or any predecessor employer) maintained a qualified plan (as defined in section 408(p)(2)(D)(ii)) with respect to which contributions were made, or benefits were accrued, for service in 1997.
If only individuals other than employees described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 410(b)(3) are eligible to participate in the qualified employer plan referred to in subsection (d)(1), then the preceding sentence shall be applied without regard to any qualified plan in which only employees so described are eligible to participate.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified start-up costs.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified start-up costs' means any ordinary and necessary expenses of an eligible employer which-- ``(i) are paid or incurred in connection with the establishment of a qualified employer plan in which at least 2 individuals are eligible to participate, and ``(ii) are of a nonrecurring nature.
Plan must be established before january 1, 2001.--Such term shall not include any expense in connection with a plan established after December 31, 2000.
Qualified employer plan.--The term `qualified employer plan' has the meaning given to such term by section 4972(d).
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Aggregation rules.--All persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52, or subsection (n) or (o) of section 414, shall be treated as one person.
Disallowance of deduction.--No deduction shall be allowable under this chapter for any qualified start-up costs for which a credit is determined under subsection (a).
Election not to claim credit.--This section shall not apply to a taxpayer for any taxable year if such taxpayer elects to have this section not apply for such taxable year.''.
Credit Allowed as Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of such Code (defining current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) in the case of an eligible employer (as defined in section 45D(c)), the small employer pension plan start-up cost credit determined under section 45D(a).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 39(d) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) No carryback of small employer pension plan start-up cost credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the small employer pension plan start-up cost credit determined under section 45D may be carried back to a taxable year ending on or before the date of the enactment of section 45D.''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Small employer pension plan start-up costs.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to costs paid or incurred in taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.