This Act may be cited as the ``Environmental Excellence Recognition Act of 1993''.
PRESIDENT'S TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AWARD AND THE NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND TECHNOLOGY AWARD.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Award programs such as the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award Program have made substantial contributions to private enterprise by providing a framework upon which organizations can improve their operations and by focusing on issues important to their competitiveness.
A President's Total Environmental Quality Award Program modeled on the Malcolm Baldrige Award Program would contribute to environmental quality and sustainable economic development by-- (A) helping to stimulate United States companies to develop and deploy environmental technologies; (B) recognizing the achievements of such companies which successfully develop and deploy environmental technologies; and (C) establishing guidelines and criteria that can be used by business, industrial, governmental, and other organizations in evaluating their own development and deployment of environmental technologies.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to provide for the establishment and conduct of a President's Total Environmental Quality Award Program and a National Environmentally Sound Technology Award Program under which awards are given to recognize the successful development and deployment of environmental technologies and under which information is disseminated about such success.
Establishment of Awards.--The Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 United States Code 3701 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new sections: ``SEC.
PRESIDENT'S TOTAL ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY AWARD.
Establishment.--There is hereby established the President's Total Environmental Quality Award (in this section referred to as the `Award').
Design.--The Award shall be evidenced by a medal bearing the inscription `President's Total Environmental Quality Award'.
Award Selection Process.--The Secretary, in cooperation with the Secretary of Energy and the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, shall establish a process for the acceptance and evaluation of Award applicants.
The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, use the same procedures and facilities provided for the administration of the Malcolm Baldrige Award, including the definition of award categories, the delegation of responsibilities, and provisions for publicity, evaluation feed-back, and information transfer.
Presentation of award.-- ``(1) Recommendations by secretary.--The Secretary shall submit to the President the recommendations of the Secretary for the selection of Award applicants.
Selection by the president.--On the basis of recommendations received under paragraph (1), the President shall periodically select for receipt of the Award United States companies and other organizations which in the judgment of the President have substantially benefited the environmental, economic, and social well-being of the United States through the development and deployment of environmental technologies, and which as a consequence are deserving of special recognition.
Presentation ceremony.--The President or the Vice President shall present the Award to recipients selected under paragraph (2) with such ceremony as the President or the Vice President considers to be appropriate.
Limitation.--The information gathered in evaluating Award applications may be used only for the evaluation of such applications and for publicity by winners of the Award.
Such information may not be used for regulatory or compliance purposes.
Evaluation Criteria.--Criteria for evaluating Award applications shall include the following: ``(1) The effectiveness of the organization's development and deployment of environmental technologies, as well as the organization's provision for environmental technologies in its future plans.
The effectiveness of energy and materials use from the perspective of the life cycle of the production, use, recycle, and disposal of a product.
The effective use of an integrated approach to pollution prevention and control that considers all environmental media (liquid, solid, gaseous).
Funding.--The Secretary may seek and accept gifts from public and private sources to carry out this section.
The Secretary may provide for the imposition of a fee upon the organizations applying for the Award.
Report.--Not later than 3 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to the President and the Congress a report on the progress made in carrying out this section.
The report shall include any recommendations of the Secretary for any modifications of the Award the Secretary considers necessary.
NATIONAL ENVIRONMENTALLY SOUND TECHNOLOGY AWARD.
Establishment.--There is established a National Environmentally Sound Technology Award for the purpose of awarding individuals who have pioneered the development and use of a highly innovative environmental technology.
Administration.--Using the authority and procedures established in section 24 and subject to the conditions described in this section, the Secretary, in cooperation with the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Secretary of Energy, shall receive and evaluate applications for the National Environmentally Sound Technology Award and provide for presentation of such Award.
Qualified Technologies.--Technologies that qualify for such Award shall include following: ``(1) Manufacturing technologies.
Industrial or consumer products.
Qualified Applicants.--Any citizen or permanent resident of the Unites States may qualify for such Award.
Any such individual who is employed by or otherwise works for a business, Federal laboratory, or other organization may qualify for such Award only if the individual was substantially involved in the invention or innovation for which such Award is presented.
Limitation.--Not more than five such Awards may be presented annually.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `environmental technology' means-- ``(1) a technology that is primarily intended to improve the quality of the environment through pollution reduction or remediation; ``(2) a product, manufacturing process, or service that is capable of cost-effectively replacing the functions of an existing product, process, or service, and as compared with the product, process, or service it replaces, significantly reducing overall pollution or significantly improving the efficiency of energy or materials use; or ``(3) a technology within the meaning of paragraphs (1) and (2).