This Act may be cited as the ``Anti-Money Laundering and Paycheck Accountability Act''.
BAN ON NON-FEDERAL FUNDS OF POLITICAL PARTIES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``ban on use non-federal funds of political parties ``Sec.
Ban Described.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, no funds may be solicited, contributed, or expended by any political party committee for purposes of any activity influencing an election for Federal office (without regard to whether the activity involved also influences any other election) unless the funds are subject to the limitations, prohibitions, and reporting requirements of this Act.
Examples of activities covered.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the following activities shall be considered to be examples of activities influencing an election for Federal office: ``(A) Voter registration.
The making or disseminating of any communication which identifies (by name, likeness, or representation) any candidate for election for Federal office.
Funds Available for Party Communications With Members.-- ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to funds solicited, contributed, or expended by a political party committee for communications to the extent the communications are made to members of the party, except that funds used for any communications which are both for the purpose of expressly advocating the election or defeat of a specific candidate for election to Federal office and for any other purpose shall be allocated among the candidates involved on the basis of the time and space allocated to the candidates.
Party members described.--For purposes of paragraph (1), an individual shall be considered to be a `member' of a political party if any of the following apply: ``(A) The individual is registered to vote as a member of the party.
There is a public record that the individual voted in the primary of the party during the most recent primary election.
The individual has made a contribution to the party and the contribution has been reported to the Commission (in accordance with this Act) or to a State reporting agency.
The individual has indicated in writing that the individual is a member of the party.
Funds Available for State and Local Party Volunteer and Grassroots Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--Subsection (a) shall not apply with respect to funds solicited, contributed, or expended by a political party committee for activities described in paragraph (2), except that any payments which are both for the purpose of expressly advocating the election or defeat of a specific candidate for election to Federal office and for any other purpose shall be allocated among the candidates involved on the basis of the time and space allocated to the candidates for such activities.
Activities described.--The activities described in this paragraph are as follows: ``(A) The listing of the slate of the party's candidates, including the communication of the slate to the public.
The mailing of materials for or on behalf of specific candidates by volunteers (including labeling envelopes or affixing postage or other indicia to particular pieces of mail), other than the mailing of materials to a commercial list.
Conducting a telephone bank for or on behalf of specific candidates staffed by volunteers.
The distribution of collateral materials (such as pins, bumper stickers, handbills, brochures, posters, party tabloids, and yard signs) for or on behalf of specific candidates (whether by volunteers or otherwise).
Limit on Amount Contributed for Exempted Party-Building Activities.--No person may make contributions to a political party committee for activities described in subsection (b) or subsection (c) with respect to an election in an aggregate amount in excess of $25,000.
Any amounts contributed by an individual for such activities shall be included in determining whether the individual has made contributions in excess of the aggregate annual limit on contributions provided in section 315(a)(3).
Political Party Committee Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `political party committee' means a political committee which is a national, State, district, or local political party committee (including any subordinate committee thereof).''.
REQUIRING ANNUAL WRITTEN AUTHORIZATION FOR USE OF PAYROLL DEDUCTIONS FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
Title III of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes), as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``requiring annual written authorization for use of payroll deductions for political activities ``Sec.
Requirements for Authorization of Deduction.-- ``(1) In general.--No amounts withheld from an individual's wages or salary during a year may be used by any person receiving the withheld amounts for any political activity unless there is in effect an authorization in writing by the individual permitting the withholding of such amounts for such activities.
Period of authorization.--An authorization described in this subsection may be in effect with respect to an individual for such period as the individual may specify (subject to cancellation under paragraph (3)), except that the period may not be longer than 12 months.
Right of cancellation.--An individual with an authorization in effect under this subsection may cancel or revise the authorization at any time, and any such cancellation or revision shall apply to amounts used after the date of the cancellation or revision.
Political activity defined.--In this section, the term `political activity' means-- ``(A) attempting to influence legislation; ``(B) participating or intervening in (including the publishing or distributing of statements) any political campaign on behalf of (or in opposition to) any candidate for public office; or ``(C) influencing or attempting to influence the selection, nomination, election, or appointment of any individual to any Federal, State, or local public office or to any office in a political party, committee, association or fund.
Information Provided by Withholding Entity.-- ``(1) In general.--Each entity withholding wages or salary from an individual with an authorization in effect under subsection (a) shall provide the individual with a statement that the individual may at any time cancel or revise the authorization in accordance with subsection (a)(3).
Timing of notice.--The entity shall provide the information described in paragraph (1) to an individual at the beginning of each calendar year occurring during the period in which the individual's authorization is in effect.''.
PROHIBITION OF LEADERSHIP COMMITTEES.
Leadership Committee Prohibition.--Section 302 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) A candidate for Federal office or an individual holding Federal office may not establish, maintain, finance, or control a political committee, other than a principal campaign committee of the candidate or the individual.''.
Conforming Amendment Relating to Joint Fundraising.--Section 302(e)(3)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 432(e)(3)) is amended by striking ``except that--'' and all that follows and inserting the following: ``except that the candidate for the office of President nominated by a political party may designate the national committee of such political party as a principal campaign committee, but only if that national committee maintains separate books of account with respect to its function as a principal campaign committee.''.
Effective Date; Transition Rule.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to elections occurring in years beginning with 1999.
Transition rule.-- (A) In general.--Notwithstanding section 302(j) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (as added by subsection (a)), if a political committee established, maintained, financed, or controlled by a candidate for Federal office or an individual holding Federal office (other than a principal campaign committee of the candidate or individual) with respect to an election occurring during 1998 has funds remaining unexpended after the 1998 general election, the committee may make contributions or expenditures of such funds with respect to elections occurring during 1999 or 2000.
Disbanding committees; treatment of remaining funds.--Any political committee described in subparagraph (A) shall be disbanded after filing any post-election reports required under section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 with respect to the 2000 general election.
Any funds of such a committee which remain unexpended after the 2000 general election and before the date on which the committee disbands shall be returned to contributors or available for any lawful purpose other than use by the candidate or individual involved with respect to an election for Federal office.
REQUIRING REPORTING WITHIN 24 HOURS OF ALL CONTRIBUTIONS RECEIVED WITHIN 20 DAYS OF ELECTION.
In General.--Section 304(a)(6)(A) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)(A)) is amended to read as follows: ``(6)(A) Each political committee shall notify the Secretary or the Commission, and the Secretary of State, as appropriate, in writing, of any contribution received by the committee during the period which begins on the 20th day before an election and ends at the time the polls close for such election.
This notification shall be made within 24 hours (or, if earlier, by midnight of the day on which the contribution is deposited) after the receipt of such contribution and shall include the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate, the identification of the contributor, and the date of receipt and amount of the contribution.''.
Availability of Information on Internet.--Section 304(a)(6) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C)(i) The Commission shall make the information contained in the reports submitted under this paragraph available on the Internet and publicly available at the offices of the Commission as soon as practicable (but in no case later than 24 hours) after the information is received by the Commission.
In this subparagraph, the term `Internet' means the international computer network of both Federal and non-Federal interoperable packet-switched data networks.''.
Except where otherwise provided, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections occurring after December 1998.