This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Telecommunications Improvement Act of 1999''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF RURAL ADVOCACY IN THE FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION.
Establishment.--Title I of the Communications Act of 1934 (47 United States Code 151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
OFFICE OF RURAL ADVOCACY.
Establishment.--There shall be in the Commission an office to be known as the `Office of of Rural Advocacy'.
The office shall not be a bureau of the Commission.
Head of Office.--(1) The Office shall be headed by the Rural Advocate of the Federal Communications Commission.
The Rural Advocate shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among citizens of the United States.
The Rural Advocate shall have a status and rank in the Commission commensurate with the status and rank in the Commission of the heads of the bureaus of the Commission.
Responsibilities of Office.--The responsibilities of the Office are as follows: ``(1) To promote access to advanced telecommunications service for populations in the rural United States.
To develop proposals for the modification of policies and activities of the departments and agencies of the Federal Government in order to better fulfill the commitment of the Federal Government to universal service and access to advanced telecommunications services in rural areas, and submit such proposals to the departments and agencies.
To assess the effectiveness of existing Federal programs for providers of telecommunications services in rural areas, and make recommendations for legislative and non- legislative actions to improve such programs.
To measure the costs and other effects of Federal regulations on the capability of telecommunication carriers in rural areas to provide adequate telecommunications services (including advanced telecommunications and information services) in such areas, and make recommendations for legislative and non-legislative actions to modify such regulations so as to minimize the interference of such regulations with that capability.
To determine the effect of Federal tax laws on providers of telecommunications services in rural areas, and make recommendations for legislative and non-legislative actions to modify Federal tax laws so as to enhance the availability of telecommunications services in rural areas.
To serve as a focal point for the receipt of complaints, criticisms, and suggestions concerning policies and activities of any department or agency of the Federal Government which affect the receipt of telecommunications services in rural areas.
To counsel providers of telecommunications services in rural areas on the effective resolution of questions and problems in the relationships between such providers and the Federal Government.
To represent the views and interests of rural populations and providers of telecommunications services in rural areas before any department or agency of the Federal Government whose policies and activities affect the receipt of telecommunications services in rural areas.
To enlist the cooperation and assistance of public and private agencies, businesses, and other organizations in disseminating information about the telecommunications programs and services of the Federal Government which benefit rural populations and providers of telecommunications services in rural areas.
Staff and Powers of Office.-- ``(1) Staff.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of carrying out the responsibilities of the Office under this section, the Rural Advocate may employ and fix the compensation of such personnel for the Office as the Rural Advocate considers appropriate.
Pay.-- ``(i) In general.--The employment and compensation of personnel under this paragraph may be made without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the civil service and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title relating to the classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates.
Maximum rate of pay.--The rate of pay of personnel employed under this paragraph may not exceed the rate payable for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Limitation.--The total number of personnel employed under this paragraph may not exceed 14.
Temporary and intermittent services.--The Rural Advocate may procure temporary and intermittent services to the extent authorized by section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, for purposes of the activities of the Office under this section.
Consultation with experts.--The Rural Advocate may consult with individuals and entities possessing such expertise as the Rural Advocate considers appropriate for purposes of the activities of the Office under this section.
Hearing.--The Rural Advocate may hold hearings and sit and act as such times and places as the Rural Advocate considers appropriate for purposes of the activities of the Office under this section.
Assistance of Other Federal Departments and Agencies.-- ``(1) In general.--Any department or agency of the Federal Government may, upon the request of the Rural Advocate, provide the Office with such information or other assistance as the Rural Advocate considers appropriate for purposes of the activities of the Office under this section.
Reimbursement.--Assistance may be provided the Office under this subsection on a reimbursable basis.
Reports.-- ``(1) Annual report.--The Rural Advocate shall submit to Congress, the President, and the Commission on an annual basis a report on the activities of the Office under this section during the preceding year.
The report may include any recommendations for legislative or other action that the Rural Advocate considers appropriate.
Other reports.--The Rural Advocate may submit to Congress, the President, the Commission, or any other department or agency of the Federal Government at any time a report containing comments on a matter within the responsibilities of the Office under this section.
Direct submittal.--The Rural Advocate may not be required to submit any report under this subsection to any department or agency of the Federal Government (including the Office of Management and Budget or the Commission) before its submittal under a provision of this subsection.''.
Executive Schedule Level IV.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Rural Advocate, Federal Communications Commission.''.
Report on Initial Activities.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the appointment of the Rural Advocate of the Federal Communications Commission, the Rural Advocate shall submit to Congress a report on the actions taken by the Rural Advocate to commence carrying out the responsibilities of the Office of Rural Advocacy of the Federal Communications Commission under section 12 of the Communications Act of 1934, as added by subsection (a).