This Act may be cited as the ``Transition to Adulthood Program Act of 1999''.
TRANSITION OF FOSTER CHILDREN TO SELF-SUFFICIENCY.
In General.--Section 472 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 672) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) Each State with a plan approved under this part may make foster care maintenance payments (as defined in section 475(4)) under this part with respect to a child who has not attained 21 years of age and who would otherwise be ineligible for such payments by reason of age, but only if the child-- ``(1) is-- ``(A) in the process of completing secondary education; ``(B) enrolled in an institution that provides postsecondary education or vocational training; or ``(C) employed for at least 80 hours per month; and ``(2) has a case plan which includes a specific plan for how the child will achieve independent living, and which provides for the child to reside in a setting that promotes personal responsibility and encourages self-sufficiency.''.
Provision of Nonresidential Services To Assist in the Transition to Independent Adult Living.--Section 475(4)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 675(4)(A)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In the case of a child described in section 472(i), such term shall also include payments with respect to the child for programs designed to promote the education, training, or employment of the child.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
QUALIFIED FORMER FOSTER CARE RECIPIENTS ESTABLISHED AS A TARGETED GROUP FOR PURPOSES OF COMPUTING THE WORK OPPORTUNITY CREDIT FOR EMPLOYMENT OF CERTAIN NEW EMPLOYEES.
General Rule.--Paragraph (1) of section 51(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to members of targeted groups) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(I) a qualified former foster care recipient.''.
Qualified Former Foster Care Recipient Defined.--Section 51(d) of such Code (relating to members of targeted groups) is amended by redesignating paragraphs (10), (11), and (12) as paragraphs (11), (12), and (13), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (9) the following new paragraph: ``(10) Qualified former foster care recipient--The term `qualified former foster care recipient' means an individual who is certified by the local designated agency as-- ``(A) having attained age 18 but not age 25 on the hiring date, and ``(B) on the day before attaining age 18 being either-- ``(i) a recipient of foster care maintenance payments under a State plan approved under part E of title IV of the Social Security Act, or ``(ii) in the case of any individual not described in clause (i), in foster care under the responsibility of a State.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to individuals who begin work for the employer after December 31, 1999.
INCREASE IN AMOUNT OF ASSETS ALLOWABLE FOR CHILDREN IN FOSTER CARE.
Section 472(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 672(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In determining whether a child would have received aid under a State plan approved under section 402 (as in effect on July 16, 1996), a child whose resources (determined pursuant to section 402(a)(7)(B), as so in effect) have a combined value of not more than $10,000 shall be considered to be a child whose resources have a combined value of not more than $1,000 (or such lower amount as the State may determine for purposes of such section 402(a)(7)(B)).''.
INTERAGENCY COLLABORATION TO PROMOTE SELF-SUFFICIENCY OF CHILDREN AGING OUT OF FOSTER CARE.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish an action plan to promote collaboration between programs of the Department of Health and Human Services and programs of other Federal agencies, including housing programs, educational programs, and employment programs, for the purpose of promoting the self-sufficiency of children aging out of foster care.
UPDATING OF FUNDING FORMULA FOR THE FOSTER CARE INDEPENDENT LIVING INITIATIVES PROGRAM.
Use of Updated Foster Care Data.--Section 477(e)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 677(e)(1)) is amended by striking all that precedes subparagraph (C) and inserting the following: ``(e)(1)(A) The basic amount for a State for a fiscal year shall be an amount which bears the same ratio to the basic ceiling for the fiscal year as the State's average number of children receiving foster care maintenance payments under this part in fiscal year 1996 bears to the total of the average number of children receiving such payments under this part for all States for fiscal year 1996.
The maximum additional amount for a State for a fiscal year shall be an amount which bears the same ratio to the additional ceiling for the fiscal year as the basic amount for the State for the fiscal year bears to $58,000,000.''.
Funding Increase.--Section 477(e)(1)(C)(i) of such Act (42 United States Code 677(e)(1)(C)(i)) is amended to read as follows: ``(i) The term `basic ceiling' means $58,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and each succeeding fiscal year.''.
Hold Harmless Provision.--Section 474(a)(4) of such Act (42 United States Code 674(a)(4)) is amended to read as follows: ``(4) an amount equal to the greater of-- ``(A) the sum of-- ``(i) so much of the amounts expended by the State to carry out programs under section 477 as do not exceed the basic amount for the State for the fiscal year, as determined under section 477(e)(1)(A); and ``(ii) the lesser of-- ``(I) one-half of any additional amounts expended by the State for such programs; or ``(II) the maximum additional amount for the State for the fiscal year, as determined under section 477(e)(1)(B); or ``(B) the total amount required to be paid to the State under this paragraph (as in effect on September 30, 1999) for fiscal year 1999.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.