This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Price and Supply Information Act of 1993''.
SURVEY OF FUEL PRICES AND INVENTORIES.
In General.--The Administrator of the Energy Information Administration of the Department of Energy shall conduct and publish surveys of-- (1) wholesale and retail prices and primary and secondary inventory levels of home heating fuel on a national, State, and PADD basis; (2) wholesale prices and primary inventory levels of home heating fuel on a company-by-company basis (without identifying the names of such companies); (3) wellhead and citygate prices of natural gas by major interstate pipeline; (4) inventory levels of working natural gas and base natural gas held in underground storage by interstate and intrastate operator; (5) wholesale and retail prices and primary and secondary inventory levels of automotive fuel on a national, State, and PADD basis; and (6) wholesale prices and primary inventory levels of automotive fuel on a company-by-company basis (without identifying the names of such companies).
Frequency of Surveys.-- (1) Home heating fuel and natural gas.--The surveys described in paragraphs (1), (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (a) shall be conducted and published weekly during each winter heating season beginning with the first winter heating season following the date of enactment of this Act.
Automotive fuel.--The surveys described in paragraphs (5) and (6) of subsection (a) shall be conducted and published weekly throughout each year beginning 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
RECOMMENDED ADEQUATE INVENTORY LEVELS.
In General.--The Secretary shall, after consultation with the Administrator of the Energy Information Administration and State energy offices, establish recommended adequate inventory levels for home heating fuel, natural gas, and automotive fuel in accordance with this section.
Such levels shall constitute the amount of inventories necessary to prevent substantial disruptions in supply or substantial price increases and shall exceed levels regarded as minimum operating levels, below which operating problems and shortages would appear in the national distribution system.
Home Heating Fuel.--In the case of home heating fuel, such levels shall be established for primary and secondary inventories on a national, state, and PADD basis.
Such levels shall be established before each winter heating season and remain in effect for that season.
Natural Gas.--In the case of natural gas, such level shall be established on a national basis for natural gas held in underground storage.
Such level shall be established before each winter heating season and remain in effect for that season.
Automotive Fuel.--In the case of automotive fuel, such levels shall be established for primary and secondary inventories on a national and PADD basis.
Such levels shall be established for each 6 month period beginning 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
NOTIFICATION OF INVENTORY LEVELS.
Home Heating Fuel and Natural Gas.-- (1) Preseason notification.--Not later than October 1 of each year, the Secretary shall notify the Congress, the President, and State energy offices concerning whether inventories of home heating fuel and natural gas meet the recommended adequate inventory levels established under section 3 for the winter heating season beginning that October 1.
Supplemental notifications.--If, at any time during any winter heating season, inventories of home heating fuel or natural gas fall below the recommended adequate inventory levels established under section 3 for that winter heating season, the Secretary shall notify the Congress, the President, and the State energy office of any State concerned, and shall make recommendations for legislative and administrative actions necessary to restore inventories to such recommended adequate levels.
Automotive Fuel.--If, at any time, inventories of automotive fuel fall below the recommended adequate inventory levels established under section 3 for that 6 month period, the Secretary shall notify the Congress, the President, and the State energy office of any State concerned, and shall make recommendations for legislative and administrative actions necessary to restore inventories to such recommended adequate levels.
REPORT ON INTERRUPTIBLE NATURAL GAS CONTRACTS.
The Secretary shall conduct a study of the effect, if any, of interruptible natural gas contracts on the demand and supply of home heating fuel during the 1989-1990 winter heating season.
The Secretary shall issue a report on the findings of the study no later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
The report shall include any recommendations concerning alternate fuel storage requirements for holders of interruptible natural gas contracts and recommendations concerning other matters relevant to the purposes of this Act.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``home heating fuel'' means home heating oil, propane, and diesel fuel; (2) the term ``PADD'' means Petroleum Administration Defense District; (3) the term ``primary inventory'' means manufacturer inventory; (4) the term ``secondary inventory'' means bulk plant, wholesaler, and retailer inventory; (5) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy; and (6) the term ``winter heating season'' means the period beginning on October 1 of a year and ending on April 30 of the following year.