This Act may be cited as the ``International Child Labor Elimination Act of 1996''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Article 32 of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child recognizes ``the right of the child to be protected from economic exploitation and from performing any work that is likely to be hazardous or to interfere with the child's education or to be harmful to the child's health or physical, mental, spiritual, moral or social development.''.
Article 2 of the International Labor Organization Convention 138, the Minimum Age Convention, states that the minimum age for admission to employment or work ``shall not be less than the age of completion of compulsory schooling and, in any case, shall not be less than 15 years.''.
International Labor Organization Convention 29, the Forced Labor Convention, which has been in effect since 1930, prohibits most forms of ``forced or compulsory labor'', including all forced labor by people under the age of 18.
Although it is among the most universally condemned of all human rights abuses, child labor is widely practiced.
The International Labor Organization has estimated the total number of child workers to be between 100,000,000 and 200,000,000.
More than 95 percent of those child workers live in developing countries.
The International Labor Organization has estimated that 13.2 percent of all 10-to-14 year olds around the world were economically active in 1995.
There are no reliable figures on workers under 10 years of age, though their numbers are known to be significant.
Reliable child labor statistics are not readily available, in part because many governments in the developing world are reluctant to document those activities, which are often illegal under domestic laws, which violate international standards, and which may be perceived as a failure of internal public policy.
Notwithstanding international and domestic prohibitions, many children in developing countries are forced to work as debt-bonded and slave laborers in hazardous and exploitative industries.
According to the United Nations Working Group on Contemporary Forms of Slavery and the International Labor Organization, there are tens of millions of child slaves in the world today.
Large numbers of those slaves are involved in agricultural and domestic labor, the sex industry, the carpet and textile industries, and quarrying and brick making.
In many countries, children lack either the legal standing or the means to protect themselves from cruelty and exploitation in the workplace.
The employment of children often interferes with the opportunities of such children for basic education.
Furthermore, where it coexists with high rates of adult unemployment, the use of child labor likely denies gainful employment to millions of adults.
While child labor is a vast, complex, and multifaceted phenomenon that is tied to issues of poverty, educational opportunity, and culture, its most abusive and hazardous forms are repugnant to basic human rights and must be eliminated.
IDENTIFICATION OF FOREIGN COUNTRIES AND INDUSTRIES THAT USE CHILD LABOR IN PRODUCING GOODS.
Identification of Countries and Industries.--The Secretary of Labor shall, not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, and not later than the end of each 1-year period thereafter, identify those foreign countries that do not prohibit child labor, or that have laws prohibiting child labor but do not effectively enforce them, and those industries in such countries in which child labor is used.
The Secretary may revoke the identification of a country or an industry before the end of the 1-year period during which the identification would otherwise be effective, if revocation is warranted by new information or a change in the laws or practices of a country.
Sanctions.--The sanctions set forth in sections 4 and 5 shall apply with respect to those countries and industries identified under subsection (a) for so long as the identification is effective under such subsection.
Exemption.--The prohibition on imports under section 4(a), the prohibition under section 5(a)(1) on financing under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945, and the prohibition on multilateral assistance under section 5(a)(2) shall not apply to a business entity if it is established to the satisfaction of the Secretary of Labor that no goods produced by that entity are products of child labor.
Prohibition.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall prohibit the entry of any manufactured article that is a product of an industry identified under section 3(a).
Exception.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to the entry of a manufactured article-- (1) that is entered under any subheading in subchapter IV or VI of chapter 98 (relating to personal exemptions) of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States; or (2) that was exported from the foreign country in which the industry concerned is located and was en route to the United States before the first day on which the identification of the country and industry was effective.
PROHIBITION ON ASSISTANCE FOR FOREIGN COUNTRIES THAT USE CHILD LABOR IN PRODUCING GOODS.
Prohibition on Assistance.-- (1) Bilateral assistance.--The President may not provide United States assistance to a foreign country identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a).
Multilateral assistance.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director of each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose any loan or other utilization of the funds of their respective institution to or for any industry identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a).
Exception.--A foreign country or an industry identified by the Secretary of Labor under section 3(a) may receive United States assistance if the President determines and certifies to the Congress that it is in the vital national interest of the United States to provide such assistance to such country or industry, as the case may be.
The President shall include in any such certification-- (1) a full and complete description of the vital national interest of the United States that is placed at risk if such assistance is not provided to such country or industry; and (2) a statement weighing the risk described in paragraph (1) against the risk posed to the vital national interest of the United States by the failure of such country to adopt or enforce laws prohibiting child labor or by the use of child labor by such industry, as the case may be.
Unlawful Acts.--It is unlawful-- (1) to attempt to enter any manufactured article that is a product of an industry if the entry is prohibited under section 4(a); or (2) to violate any regulation prescribed under section 7.
Civil Penalty.--Any person who commits any unlawful act set forth in subsection (a) is liable for a civil penalty of not to exceed $25,000.
Criminal Penalty.--In addition to being liable for a civil penalty under subsection (b), any person who intentionally commits any unlawful act set forth in subsection (a) is, upon conviction, liable for a fine of not less than $10,000 and not more than $35,000, or imprisonment for not more than 1 year, or both.
Construction.--The violations set forth in subsection (a) shall be treated as violations of the customs laws for purposes of applying the enforcement provisions of the Tariff Act of 1930, including-- (1) the search, seizure, and forfeiture provisions; (2) section 592 (relating to penalties for entry by fraud, gross negligence, or negligence); and (3) section 619 (relating to compensation to informers).
The President shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
UNITED STATES SUPPORT FOR DEVELOPMENTAL ALTERNATIVES FOR UNDERAGE CHILD WORKERS.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the President the sum of $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2001 for a United States contribution to the International Labor Organization for the activities of the International Program on the Elimination of Child Labor.
As used in this Act: (1) Child labor.--The term ``child labor'' means-- (A) services performed by an individual who has not attained the age at which children complete compulsory schooling under the national laws of the country concerned, or the age of 15, whichever age is older, except for services performed on a part-time basis by an individual 14 years of age or older that does not interfere with the individual's health or education, and (B) services performed by an individual under the age of 18 that would likely jeopardize the health, safety, or moral character of a young person, in exchange for remuneration (regardless to whom paid), subsistence, goods or services, or any combination thereof, or under circumstances tantamount to involuntary servitude.
Product of child labor.--A manufactured article shall be treated as being a product of child labor if the article-- (A) was fabricated, assembled, or processed, in whole or part, (B) contains any part that was fabricated, assembled, or processed, in whole or in part, or (C) was mined, quarried, pumped, or otherwise extracted, with child labor.
Entered and entry.--The terms ``entered'' and ``entry'' mean entry, or withdrawal from warehouse for consumption, in the customs territory of the United States.
Business entity.--The term ``business entity''-- (A) means any entity that produces a manufactured article in a foreign country; and (B) includes, but is not limited to, entities owned or controlled in whole or in part by the government of a foreign country.
Foreign country.--The term ``foreign country'' means any foreign country and any possession or territory of a foreign country that is administered separately for customs purposes (and includes any designated zone within such country, possession, or territory).
International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institution'' means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the African Development Bank, the African Development Fund, the International Monetary Fund, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, and the International Finance Corporation.
Manufactured article.--The term ``manufactured article'' means any good that is fabricated, assembled, or processed.
The term also includes any mineral resource (including any mineral fuel) that is entered in a crude state.
Any mineral resource that at entry has been subjected to only washing, crushing, grinding, powdering, levigation, sifting, screening, or concentration by flotation, magnetic separation, or other mechanical or physical processes shall be treated as having been processed for the purposes of this Act.
United states assistance.--The term ``United States assistance'' means-- (A) any assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (including programs under title IV of chapter 2 of part I of such Act, relating to the Overseas Private Investment Corporation), other than-- (i) disaster relief assistance, including any assistance under chapter 9 of part I of such Act; (ii) assistance which involves the provision of food (including monetization of food) or medicine; and (iii) assistance for refugees; (B) sales, or financing on any terms, under the Arms Export Control Act; (C) the provision of agricultural commodities, other than food, under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954; and (D) financing under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945.
United states assistance to a foreign country.--The term ``United States assistance to a foreign country'' includes any sales, financing, or other assistance described in subsection (8) to or for programs, projects, business ventures, or other activities in the foreign country, whether or not such assistance is received by the government of the foreign country.