Section 103 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding the following: ``(j) National Transportation System.-- ``(1) Purpose.--The purpose of the National Transportation System is to provide a unified and interconnected system of transportation facilities that will move people and goods efficiently to promote mobility, economic productivity, congestion relief, energy conservation, and air quality improvement.
Components.--The National Transportation System shall consist of the following: ``(A) Public transportation corridors and systems.
Intercity public and private transportation corridors and systems.
The National Highway System.
Ports and inland waterways.
Other major intermodal transportation facilities.
Designation.-- ``(A) By secretary.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall submit to Congress the designation of the National Transportation System.
The submitted designation shall be the National Transportation System unless modified in accordance with this subsection or by law.
Basis.--The proposed system submitted by the Secretary shall be based on designations submitted to the Secretary by the States and the metropolitan planning organizations under sections 134(g)(2) and 135(e) of this title.
Limitations.-- ``(i) Nonattainment areas.--No proposed new route or facility shall be included on the National Transportation System in any area that is in nonattainment area for ozone or carbon monoxide under the Clean Air Act until it has been included in a metropolitan or State long- range plan and transportation improvement program that has been demonstrated to be in conformity with a State implementation plan developed pursuant to the Clean Air Act.
NHS segment.--A segment of the National Highway System shall not be a part of the National Transportation System until it has been included in a metropolitan or State long- range plan and transportation improvement program that has been demonstrated to be in conformity with a State implementation plan developed pursuant to the Clean Air Act.
Modification.--States or metropolitan planning organizations may request the addition or deletion of National Transportation System components.
The Secretary shall make such modifications at least once every 2 years unless they are determined not to be in the public interest or promote the goals of the National Transportation System.
Grants.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to pay 80 percent of the costs of development and implementation of processes and procedures that facilitate the goals of the National Transportation System, including operating agreements, public-private partnerships, information technologies such as traveler information systems, and intelligent vehicle highway and transit systems.''.
Section 134(g)(2)(A) of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting after ``transit,'' the following: ``airport, port, inland waterway, railroad,''; and (2) by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Such transportation system shall serve as the National Transportation System in that metropolitan area, unless the Secretary determines that designating all or any portion of such identified system as a part of the National Transportation System would not be in the public interest or promote the goals of the National Transportation System.''.
Section 135(e) of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``The plan shall, at a minimum, identify transportation facilities (including major roadways, transit, airport, port, inland waterway, railroad, and multimodal and intermodal facilities) that should function as an integrated State transportation system, giving emphasis to those facilities that serve important national and regional transportation functions.
Such transportation system shall serve as the National Transportation System in that State, unless the Secretary determines that designating all or any portion of such identified system as a part of the National Transportation System would not be in the public interest or promote the goals of the National Transportation System.''.
FUNDING FROM NHS APPORTIONMENTS.
Section 104(c) of title 23, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Set-asides and Transferability of NHS Apportionments.-- ``(1) Set-aside for grant program.--On October 1 of each fiscal year, the Secretary, after making the deduction authorized by subsection (a) of this section, shall set aside, for the purpose of making grants under section 103(j)(4), not to exceed 1 percent of the remaining funds authorized to be appropriated for expenditure upon the National Highway System.
Set-aside for connections to nts.-- ``(A) General rule.--Except if the Secretary provides otherwise, each State shall set-aside 10 percent of each apportionment made to the State under section 104(b)(1) for the National Highway System to provide intermodal connections to the National Highway System or connections between the National Highway System and other components of the National Transportation System.
New capacity for single-occupant passenger vehicles.--No funds set-aside by a State pursuant to this paragraph may be obligated for any project which adds new capacity for single-occupant passenger vehicles (other than for facilities which are part of a system to reduce the use of such vehicles).
Transferability.--Subject to paragraphs (4) and (5), a State may transfer not to exceed 50 percent of the State's apportionment under subsection (b)(1) to the apportionment of the State under subsection (b)(3).
A State may transfer not to exceed 90 percent of the State's apportionment under subsection (b)(1) to the apportionment of the State under subsection (b)(3) if the State requests to make such transfer and the Secretary approves such transfer as being in the public interest, after providing notice and sufficient opportunity for public comment.
Division between urbanized areas of over 50,000 population and other areas.-- ``(A) General rule.--Except as provided in subparagraph (C), after the set-aside under paragraph (2), at least 75 percent of the remaining 90 percent of the funds apportioned to a State under section 104(b)(1) for a fiscal year shall be obligated-- ``(i) in the urbanized areas of the State with an urbanized area population of more than 50,000 that are transportation management areas designated under section 134(i) of this title or areas that are in nonattainment for ozone or carbon monoxide under the Clean Air Act; and ``(ii) the other areas of the State; in proportion to their relative share of the State's population.
The remaining 25 percent may be obligated in any area of the State.
Special rule for rural areas.--Of the amounts required to be obligated under subparagraph (A)(ii), the State shall obligate in areas of the State (other than urban areas with a population greater than 5,000) an amount which is not less than 110 percent of the funds apportioned to the State for the Federal-aid secondary system for fiscal year 1991.
Nonapplicability to nonattainment areas.-- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to any State for which the entire geographic area of the State is in nonattainment for ozone or carbon monoxide under the Clean Air Act.
Limitation on expanding capacity.--No funds apportioned under section 104(b)(1) for the National Highway System may be obligated for any project which expands capacity by adding one or more new travel lanes, other than auxiliary lanes or high occupancy vehicle lanes, if any National Highway System facility in that State is maintained in poor condition as defined in the most recent report to Congress under section 307(h) of this title unless the Governor certifies that such obligation is in the public interest and the Secretary approves.
Allocation of obligation authority.--A State which is required to obligate in an urbanized area with an urbanized area population of over 200,000 under paragraph (4) funds apportioned to it under section 104(b)(1) shall allocate during the 3-fiscal-year period 1995 through 1997 an amount of obligation authority distributed to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction for use in such area determined by multiplying-- ``(A) the aggregate amount of funds which the State is required to obligate in such area under paragraph (4) during such period; by ``(B) the ratio of the aggregate amount of obligation authority distributed to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction during such period to the total sums apportioned to the State for Federal-aid highways and highway safety construction (excluding sums not subject to an obligation limitation) during such period.