This Act may be cited as the ``Neotropical Migratory Bird Habitat Enhancement Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Neotropical migratory bird populations in nations within the range of neotropical migratory birds have continued to decline to the point that the long-term survival of various species in the wild is in jeopardy.
90 North American bird species are listed as endangered species or threatened species under section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, and 124 species of migratory birds are currently on the United States Fish an Wildlife Service's List of Migratory Nongame Birds of Management Concern.
The United States, through 4 bilateral treaties, has responsibility of maintaining healthy populations of 778 species of migratory nongame birds and 58 species of migratory game birds that migrate between the Caribbean, Latin America, and North America.
The Government of Mexico presently lists approximately 390 birds species as endangered, threatened, vulnerable, or rare.
Healthy bird populations provide important economic benefits, such as control of detrimental insects on agricultural crops, thus preventing the loss of millions of dollars each year to farming and timber interests.
Neotropical migratory birds travel across many international borders, therefore the conservation of these species requires that safeguards be established at both the beginning and end of the migration routes, as well as at essential stopover areas along the way.
Because the challenges facing the conservation of neotropical migratory birds are so great, resources to date have not been sufficient to cope with continued loss of habitat and the consequent reduction of neotropical migratory bird populations.
To reduce, remove, or otherwise effectively address these treaties through the long-term viability of populations of neotropical migratory birds in the wild will require the joint commitment and efforts of nations within the range of neotropical migratory birds and the private sector.
A Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation fund would much-needed support for projects aimed at protecting critical habitat for declining migratory bird species,in an innovative way that promotes conservation partnerships and cost sharing through joint Federal and non-Federal support mechanisms.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To perpetuate healthy populations of neotropical migratory birds.
To assist in the conservation and protection of neotropical migratory birds by supporting the conservation programs of neotropical migratory bird range states and the CITES Secretariat.
To provide financial resources for those programs.
In this Act: (1) The term ``CITES'' means the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, signed on March 3, 1973, and its appendices.
The term ``Commission'' means the Migratory Bird Conservation Commission established by the Migratory Bird Conservation Act (16 United States Code 715 et sequentes).
The term ``conservation'' means the use of methods and procedures necessary to bring neotropical migratory birds to the point at which there are sufficient populations in the wild to ensure that the various species of such birds do not become extinct, including all activities associated with scientific resource management, such as conservation, protection, restoration, acquisition, and management of habitat; research and monitoring of known populations; CITES enforcement; law enforcement through community participation; conflict resolution initiatives; and community outreach and education.
The term ``Fund'' means the Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Fund established under section 6(a).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY BIRD CONSERVATION ASSISTANCE.
Assistance Authorized.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of funds and in consultation with the Commission, shall use amounts in the Fund to provide financial assistance for projects for the conservation of neotropical migratory birds for which final project proposals are approved by the Secretary in accordance with this section.
Priority.--The Secretary shall provide that assistance in accordance with the following priority: (A) First, for projects proposed by relevant wildlife management authorities referred to in subsection (b).
Second, for projects proposed by the CITES Secretariat.
Third, for projects proposed by any other person.
Project Proposal.--Any relevant wildlife management authority of a nation within the range of neotropical migratory birds whose activities directly or indirectly affect neotropical migratory bird populations, the CITES Secretariat, or any person with demonstrated expertise in the conservation of neotropical migratory birds, may submit to the Secretary a project proposal under this section.
Each proposal shall include the following: (1) The name of the individual responsible for conducting the project.
A succinct statement of the purposes of the project.
A description of the qualifications of the individuals who will conduct the project.
An estimate of the funds and time required to complete the project.
Evidence of support of the project by appropriate governmental entities of countries in which the project will be conducted, if the Secretary determines that the support is required for the success of the project.
Information regarding the source and amount of matching funding available to the applicant.
Any other information the Secretary considers to be necessary for evaluating the eligibility of the project for funding under this Act.
Project Review and Approval.-- (1) In general.--Within 30 days after receiving a final project proposal, the Secretary shall provide a copy of the proposal to the Commission.
The Secretary shall review each final project proposal to determine if it meets the criteria set forth in subsection (d).
Consultation; approval or disapproval.--Not later than 6 months after receiving a final project proposal, and subject to the availability of funds, the Secretary, after consulting with the Commission, shall-- (A) request written comments on the proposal from each country within which the project is to be conducted; (B) after requesting those comments, approve or disapprove the proposal; and (C) provide written notification of that approval or disapproval to the person who submitted the proposal, the Commission, and each of those countries.
Criteria for Approval.--The Secretary may approve a final project proposal under this section if the project will enhance programs for conservation of neotropical migratory birds by assisting efforts to-- (1) implement conservation programs; (2) develop sound scientific information on the condition of neotropical migratory bird habitat, neotropical migratory bird population numbers and trends, or the threats to such habitat, numbers, or trends; or (3) promote cooperative projects on those topics with other foreign governments, affected local communities, nongovernmental organizations, or others in the private sector.
Project Sustainability.--To the maximum extent practical, in determining whether to approve project proposals under this section, the Secretary shall give consideration to projects which will enhance sustainable integrated conservation development programs to ensure effective, long-term conservation of neotropical migratory birds.
Project Reporting.--Each person who receives assistance under this section for a project shall provide periodic reports, as the Secretary considers necessary, to the Secretary and the Commission.
Each report shall include all information required by the Secretary, after consulting with the Commission, for evaluating the progress and success of the project.
Matching Funds.--In determining whether to approve project proposals under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to those projects for which there exists some measure of matching funds.
NEOTROPICAL MIGRATORY BIRD CONSERVATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury a separate account to be known as the ``Neotropical Migratory Bird Conservation Fund'', which shall consist of amounts deposited into the Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b).
Deposits Into the Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Fund-- (1) all amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations under subsection (d); and (2) other amounts appropriated to the Fund.
Use.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may use amounts in the Fund without further appropriation to provide assistance under section 5.
Administration.--Of amounts in the Fund available for each fiscal year, the Secretary may use not more than 3 percent to administer the Fund.
Acceptance and Use of Donations.--The Secretary may accept and use donations to provide assistance under section 5.
Amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Fund.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $5,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002 to carry out this Act, which may remain available until expended.