The Congress finds the following: (1) The original Cheyenne-Arapaho Indian Reservation in western Oklahoma, which included the land known as the Fort Reno Military Reservation, was established by the Medicine Lodge Creek Treaty of 1867 and reaffirmed by Executive order in 1869.
The Fort Reno Military Reservation lands include sites used by the Tribe for the Sun Dance and other religious and cultural purposes, burial sites, and medicine gathering areas.
LAND TAKEN INTO TRUST.
In General.--The land described in subsection (b) is hereby taken into trust for the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma.
Land Described.--The land taken into trust pursuant to subsection (a) is that land in Canadian County, Oklahoma, described as follows: (1) All of sections 1, 2, 3, and 4, Township 12 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian.
Those portions of sections 25 and 26 lying south of the North Canadian River, Township 13 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian.
That portion of section 26 lying west of the North Canadian River, Township 13 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian.
All of sections 27, 28, 33, 34, 35, and 36, Township 13 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian.
USE OF PORTION OF LAND BY BUREAU OF PRISONS.
The Secretary, with the consent of and on terms agreeable to the Business Committee of the Tribe, may lease to the United States for use by the Bureau of Prisons of the Department of Justice in connection with the Federal Reformatory at El Reno, Oklahoma, all or part of the land described as the south half of section 1 and the south half of section 2, Township 12 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian.
PRIOR EASEMENTS, LICENSES, PERMITS, AND COMMITMENTS.
Nonrevocable; time-limited.--(1) A nonrevocable easement, license, permit, or commitment with respect to the lands described in section 2 shall continue in effect for the period for which it was granted or made if such nonrevocable easement, license, permit, or commitment was granted or made-- (A) on or before the date of the enactment of this Act; (B) by the Secretary of War or by the Secretary of Agriculture; and (C) for a specified, limited period of time.
An easement, license, permit, or commitment described in paragraph (1) may be renewed by the Secretary upon such terms and conditions as the Secretary considers advisable.
Revocable; indefinite duration.--An easement, license, permit, or commitment which exists on the date of the enactment of this Act with respect to the lands described in section 2 may be continued or renewed by the Secretary if-- (1) the easement, license, permit, or commitment is revocable or of indefinite duration, and (2) the Secretary considers such continuance or renewal to be in the public interest.
Use of Land by Bureau of Prisons.--(1) In the case of lands described in paragraph (2), the Secretary may continue or renew an easement, right-of-way, or permit to land, only if such easement, right-of-way, or permit is-- (A) in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act; (B) limited to use or maintenance of water lines, roads to and from the sewage disposal plant, or sewage effluent lakes from the sewage disposal plant located on the land; (C) granted for use by Bureau of Prisons of the Department of Justice; and (D) useful to the Bureau of Prisons for purposes of maintaining the sewage disposal plant located on the land.
The land referred to in paragraph (1) is that land described in section 2 that is located in-- (A) section 1, Township 12 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian; and (B) the southeast quarter of section 36, Township 13 North, Range 8 West, Indian Meridian.
BUILDINGS AND OTHER IMPROVEMENTS.
The Secretary may-- (1) make any Federally owned buildings, improvements, or facilities (including any personal property used in connection with such buildings, improvements, or facilities) located on the land described in section 2 available to the Tribe for their use; and (2) convey any Federally owned buildings, improvements, or facilities (including any personal property used in connection with such buildings, improvements, or facilities) located on the land described in section 2 to the Tribe in accordance with the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize the Secretary of the Interior to convey to Indian tribes certain federally owned buildings, improvements, or facilities on tribal lands or on lands reserved for Indian administration'' approved August 6, 1956 (25 United States Code 443a).
ELIGIBILITY FOR FEDERAL SERVICES AND BENEFITS.
For the purposes of the eligibility for and delivery of all services and benefits provided to Indians because of their status as federally recognized, those members of the Tribe residing in Canadian County, Oklahoma, shall be deemed to be resident on or near an Indian reservation.
No provision of this Act shall be construed to constitute an amendment, modification, or interpretation of any treaty to which the Tribe or any other Indian tribe is a party nor to any right secured to the Tribe or any other Indian tribe by any treaty.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
The term ``Tribe'' means the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma.