This Act may be cited as the ``Olympic Sports Revitalization Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) Chapter 2205 of title 36, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Ted Stevens Olympic and Amateur Sports Act), requires the United States Olympic Committee (USOC) to obtain for the United States ``the most competent representation possible in each event of the Olympic Games''.
A traditional route in the United States to participation in the Olympic Games has been participation in athletics at United States four-year colleges and universities.
United States four-year colleges and universities are producing a much smaller number of participants in certain sports of the Olympic Games than they have in the past.
A 2001 report of the General Accounting Office entitled ``Intercollegiate Athletics: Four-Year Colleges' Experiences Adding and Discontinuing Teams'' reveals that, between 1981 and 1999, in five Olympic women's sports--gymnastics, fencing, field hockey, archery, and badminton--and eleven Olympic men's sports--wrestling, tennis, gymnastics, rifle/shooting, fencing, outdoor track, swimming, skiing, ice hockey, water polo, and archery--discontinuations of teams by such colleges and universities have resulted in a net loss in the number of such teams nationwide.
The largest percentage loss in such teams occurred in women's gymnastics (a 53 percent loss) and in men's wrestling (a 40 percent loss).
The report also indicates that while the number of women participating in college athletics increased between 1981 and 1999, the number of men participating in college athletics in 1999 still significantly exceeded the number of women participating in college athletics in that year.
According to the report, such discontinuations stem from declining student interest in the Olympic sports referred to in paragraph (3) and from administrative decisions of colleges and universities regarding the allocation of resources.
While there has been a loss of teams at colleges and universities in the Olympic sports referred to in paragraph (3), three other Olympic sports, called ``Emerging Sports for Women'' by the National Collegiate Athletic Association, have yet to be fully established.
These sports are team handball, synchronized swimming, and equestrian.
These sports merit additional support if the USOC is to meet the basic requirement referred to in paragraph (1).
Because the Olympic sports referred to in paragraphs (3) and (5) tend not to generate revenue for colleges and universities, such sports have little leverage in decisions of colleges and universities about the allocation of their resources for sports programs.
The discontinuation by colleges and universities of teams in the Olympic sports referred to in paragraphs (3) disrupts the amateur careers of athletes participating in such sports and makes it more difficult for the USOC to fulfill one of its primary missions.
In addition to the basic requirement referred to in paragraph (1), the Ted Stevens Olympic and Amateur Sports Act also identifies other objectives of the USOC, including-- (A) that it ``assist organizations and persons concerned with sports in the development of amateur athletic programs for amateur athletes''; (B) that it ``encourage and provide assistance to amateur athletic activities for women''; and (C) that it ``encourage and provide assistance to amateur athletes of racial and ethnic minorities for the purpose of eliciting the participation of such minorities in amateur athletic activities in which they are underrepresented''.
Due to a lack of public dissemination of data collected by the Department of Education under the Equity in Athletics Disclosure Act, prospective student-athletes often lack information to determine what athletic opportunities colleges and universities provide their students.
According the report referred to in paragraph (3), colleges and universities often discontinue sports teams in a manner that gives student-athletes no advance notice of consideration of such discontinuations and no opportunity for appeal of the decision--thereby disrupting the amateur careers affected by such discontinuations.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to encourage United States representation in the events of the Olympic Games by-- (1) promoting the revitalization of amateur athletics; and (2) encouraging amateur careers in athletics.
GRANTS FOR SUPPORT OF CERTAIN AMATEUR ATHLETICS.
Authority.--Chapter 2205 of title 36, United States Code (commonly referred to as the Ted Stevens Olympic and Amateur Sports Act), is amended by adding at the end the following new subchapter: ``SUBCHAPTER III--MISCELLANEOUS ``Sec.
Grants for support of certain amateur athletics ``(a) Authority To Make Grants.--The Secretary of Commerce may, from funds authorized to be appropriated by subsection (d), make grants to the corporation to provide funds for the purpose described in subsection (b).
Purpose.--(1) The corporation shall use amounts received under subsection (a) for the purpose of encouraging participation in covered Olympic sports by individuals under 18 years of age, with particular emphasis on the participation in such sports of such individuals who have previously had limited opportunity for participation in such sports.
The corporation may use amounts so received for the purpose described in paragraph (1) directly or by making grants for that purpose to national governing bodies of covered Olympic sports recognized under subchapter II.
To the maximum extent practicable, participation in covered Olympic sports shall be encouraged under paragraph (1) through the establishment or support of appropriate community sports organizations.
Covered Olympic Sports.--For purposes of this section, a covered Olympic sport is as follows: ``(1) Women's gymnastics.
Any other Olympic women's or men's sport determined by the Secretary of Education to be-- ``(A) a sport in which the discontinuation of teams in the sport by four-year colleges and universities in the United States has resulted in a net decrease in the number of college and university teams in the sport nationwide; or ``(B) an emerging sport.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Commerce for purposes of activities under this section, $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
Annual Report.--Section 220511 of that title is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by inserting ``of Quadrennial Report'' after ``Submission''; and (B) by striking ``transmit'' and inserting ``submit''; (2) by redesignating subsection (b) as subsection (c); (3) by inserting after subsection (a) the following new subsection (b): ``(b) Submission of Annual Report to President and Congress.--The corporation shall, on or before January 31 each year, submit simultaneously to the President and to each House of Congress a detailed report on its activities under section 220541 of this title during the preceding year.
''; and (4) in subsection (c), as so redesignated, by striking ``the report'' and inserting ``each report under this section''.
Conforming and Clerical Amendments.--(1) The section heading of section 220511 of that title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
The table of sections at the beginning of that chapter is amended-- (A) by striking the item relating to section 220511 and inserting the following new item: ``220511.
''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``SUBCHAPTER III--MISCELLANEOUS ``220541.
Grants for support of certain amateur athletics.''.
EXPANSION OF OLYMPIC SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
Title XV of the Higher Education Amendments of 1992 (Public law 102-235) is amended by inserting after part E the following: ``PART F--OLYMPIC SPORTS REVITALIZATION ``SEC.
Olympic Sports Revitalization.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of Education may provide funds to the United States Olympic Committee, or the national governing body of the sport concerned, for distribution to institutions of higher education for disbursement to students of such institutions who-- ``(A) participate in an intercollegiate athletic program in an Olympic sport described in paragraph (4); and ``(B) are full-time students.
Distributions.-- ``(A) In general.--The United States Olympic Committee or the national governing body concerned shall, from funds received under paragraph (1), make distributions to institutions of higher education for purposes of disbursements under paragraph (3) to students of such institutions of higher education who are described in paragraph (1).
Each such distribution shall be for purposes of students of the institution of higher education concerned in one particular intercollegiate athletic program described in paragraph (1).
Amount of distribution.--The aggregate amount of the distribution under this paragraph for a particular intercollegiate athletic program may not be less than $100,000 or exceed $200,000.
Allocation of distribution.--The amount of the distribution under this paragraph shall be allocated to the institution of higher education concerned in equal portions over four years.
Limitation on number of recipient athletic programs.--No more than three intercollegiate athletic programs of an institution of higher education may have a distribution in effect under this paragraph at any one time.
Cancellation of athletic program.-- Notwithstanding subparagraphs (B) and (C), if an institution of higher education receiving a distribution under this paragraph for an intercollegiate athletic program cancels the program, no further portion of the distribution may be allocated to the institution of higher education under this paragraph for the program.
Disbursements.-- ``(A) In general.--An institution of higher education receiving a distribution under paragraph (2) with respect to an intercollegiate athletic program shall disburse the distribution among full-time students of the institution of higher education who are participating in the intercollegiate athletic program.
Limitation.--The amount of the disbursement to a student under subparagraph (A) may not exceed the cost of educational expenses at the institution of higher education concerned.
Olympic sports.--An Olympic sport described in this paragraph is-- ``(A) women's gymnastics; ``(B) women's fencing; ``(C) women's field hockey; ``(D) women's archery; ``(E) women's badminton; ``(F) women's team handball; ``(G) women's synchronized swimming; ``(H) women's equestrian; ``(I) men's wrestling; ``(J) men's tennis; ``(K) men's gymnastics; ``(L) men's rifle/shooting; ``(M) men's fencing; ``(N) men's outdoor track; ``(O) men's swimming; ``(P) men's skiing; ``(Q) men's ice hockey; ``(R) men's water polo; ``(S) men's archery; and ``(T) any other Olympic women's or men's sport determined by the Secretary to be-- ``(i) a sport in which the discontinuation of teams in the sport by four-year colleges and universities in the United States has resulted in a net decrease in the number of college and university teams in the sport nationwide; or ``(ii) an emerging sport.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a distribution under subsection (a), an institution of higher education shall prepare and submit to the United States Olympic Committee or the national governing body of the sport concerned an application at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Committee or such body, as the case may be, may reasonably require.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.''.
REPORTING OF EQUITY IN ATHLETIC DISCLOSURE ACT DATA.
Section 485(g) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1092(g)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4)-- (A) by redesignating subparagraph (D) as subparagraph (E); and (B) by inserting after subparagraph (C), the following: ``(D) The Secretary shall ensure that reports are disseminated to the public under subparagraph (C) by means that include the Internet and in a manner that is easily understandable.
Beginning in the year in which data for a 5- year period is available, such reports shall include information on the 5-year trends in the data reported.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(F) There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this paragraph, $1,250,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 and 2003.''.
TEAM TERMINATION NOTIFICATION AND APPEAL REQUIREMENT.
Part D of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1018 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
TEAM TERMINATION NOTIFICATION AND APPEAL REQUIREMENT.
``Effective on the date of enactment of this section, an institution of higher education that receives assistance under this Act shall not terminate funding for any intercollegiate sport, or reduce funding or participation levels to such an extent so as to effectively terminate such a sport, unless such institution provides to the members of the team participating in that sport-- ``(1) a written statement of the justification for the termination or reduction that includes the reasons relating to why the termination is necessary; and ``(2) an internal process for appealing the termination.