This Act may be cited as the ``Daniel Keysar Memorial and Childhood Consumer Product Safety Act of 1999''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) On May 12, 1998, Chicago resident Linda Ginzel and her husband, Boaz Keysar, lost their 16-month old son, Danny, when a defective crib collapsed and strangled him at a Chicago day care home.
Although the licensed day care facility had been inspected just 8 days before the incident and the crib had been recalled by the Consumer Product Safety Commission in 1993, the day care home was not aware of the recall and it never removed the defective crib.
Danny was the twelfth child to die in this type of defective crib nationwide.
Moreover, the thirteenth child was killed in Fair Haven, New Jersey just 3 months later.
The Consumer Product Safety Commission (CPSC) is an independent Federal regulatory agency created in 1972 to protect the public against unreasonable risks of injuries and deaths associated with consumer products.
Although the CPSC has jurisdiction over about 15,000 types of consumer products, its budget is less than the Food and Drug Administration's budget for regulating animal medicines.
The budget for the Consumer Product Safety Commission has failed to keep pace with inflation.
In fact, when indexed for inflation, the Commission's 1974 budget allocation of $30 million would be $98 million today, compared to the current level of $47 million.
Although manufacturers are required by law to report safety problems with their products, on average only about 260 reports are filed each year.
Yet, annual CPSC inspections of over 2,000 products consistently revealed close to half the products in violation of CPSC regulations.
On average, the CPSC recalls about 200-300 products each year, the majority of which are children's products or toys.
In 1998, 38 million individual units of children's products were recalled.
Although the CPSC is able to have recalled products removed from retail stores, it is more difficult to have recalled products removed from consumers' homes, the secondary market, including resale stores and child care facilities.
On average, only 10 to 30 percent of the products recalled are repaired or returned.
The number of products destroyed by the consumer is unknown.
As a result, children and other consumers are likely to be injured and some killed by recalled products that have not been returned, destroyed, or repaired.
The Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2501 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``recalled products ``Sec.
Within 180 days from the date of enactment of this section, the Commission shall establish a comprehensive list of all children's products subject to recall or corrective action under the statutes it administers over the last 15 years and shall undertake to make the list widely available to the general public, State and local governments, and the secondary market, including retail stores and child care facilities through its toll free telephone hotline, electronic mail, and web site listings.
The Commission shall develop a strategy for partnering with State and local governments to produce and distribute the list under this subsection to individual consumers and the secondary market, including resale stores and child care centers.
Section 6(b) shall not apply to Commission announcements of corrective actions.
All Commission announcements of corrective actions, including press releases, shall be identified as `recall'.
The announcements shall, with respect to the product for which the announcements are made-- ``(1) state clearly and concisely, in the strongest possible language, the nature and extent of the product hazard and any potential risk of injury; and ``(2) shall include the number of known deaths, injuries and incidents associated with the product hazard being corrected.
In stating the hazard and risk of injury, the announcement shall use clear and unambiguous language intended to motivate consumers to participate in the recall.
In addition, the Commission shall publicly post press releases and other announcements of corrective action, e.g.
annual report listings in a timely manner.
The Commission shall establish a pilot program to work with manufacturers and retailers to obtain the identity of consumers who purchase specified juvenile or children's products so the consumer can be notified in the event of a product recall.
The Commission shall report to Congress annually on the effectiveness of the recalls ordered under section 15(d) for each specific product so that the percentage of products sold and subject to such recall or corrective action and actually recalled or repaired may be determined and made available to the general public through its toll free telephone hotline, electronic mail, and website.''.
The first sentence of section 32(a) of the Consumer Product Safety Act (15 United States Code 2081) is amended by striking out ``not to exceed'' and all that follows and inserting ``$100 million for each of the fiscal years 2001, 2002, and 2003.