This Act may be cited as the ``Foster Care Reform Commission Act''.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Foster Care Reform Commission'' (in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall study the ongoing foster care crisis in the United States as well as individual efforts undertaken by States, localities, and through privately administered foster care programs.
In reviewing the efforts of localities, States and private foster care programs, the Commission shall determine a list of best practices that would help advance safe and reliable foster care in the United States.
Number and Appointment.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act: (1) Congressional members.--4 Commission members shall be appointed as follows: (A) 1 Senator appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
1 Senator appointed by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
1 Representative appointed by the Speaker of the House.
1 Representative appointed by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
Other members.--The 4 Commission members appointed under paragraph (1) shall meet and select from among themselves a chairman, who shall preside over a meeting to appoint 11 additional Commission members-- (A) 5 of whom shall be experts on child care and foster care issues from the private sector; (B) 1 of whom shall be an expert on child care and foster care issues from the public sector; and (C) 5 of whom shall be experts on child care and foster care issues from academia.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 8 Commission members appointed may be of the same political party.
Terms.-- (1) Life of commission.--Each Commission member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
No Pay.--Commission members shall not receive compensation by reason of service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each Commission member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--8 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson; Co-Chairperson.--The Commission shall have a Chairperson and a co-Chairperson, only 1 of whom shall be a Member of Congress.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson and co-Chairperson, or of a majority of its members.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson and co-Chairperson of the Commission, with the approval of the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
To the extent or in the amounts provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the rate of basic pay for Level V of the Executive Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the Chairperson and the co- Chairperson of the Commission, the Director may appoint additional personnel as the Chairperson and co-Chairperson consider appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission shall be appointed subject to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and shall be paid in accordance with the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson and co-Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may request any department or agency of the United States to furnish the Commission with such information as the Commission deems necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Not later than 2 years after all original Commission members are appointed, the Commission shall transmit to the President, the Congress, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services a report that contains a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission regarding reform of the foster care system, together with its recommendations for such legislation and administrative action as the Commission deems appropriate.
The Commission shall terminate on the date the report required by section 7 is so transmitted.