This Act may be cited as the ``Small, Safe Schools Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Research related to school size indicates that elementary and middle schools with 300-400 students, and secondary schools with 400-800 students, are more effective than schools with larger student populations.
Smaller school size promotes learning and improves students' grades and test scores, especially for ethnic minority and low income students.
Smaller school size has been found to be the second most important factor, after high socioeconomic status, in creating positive educational outcomes.
Students who attend smaller schools have more positive personal and academic self-concepts.
Students and staff at smaller schools have a stronger sense of personal efficacy, and the students take more of the responsibility for their own learning, which includes more individualized and experimental learning relevant to the world outside of school.
Studies on school dropout rates show a decrease in the rates as schools get smaller.
Creating smaller schools and smaller learning communities within larger schools promotes school safety.
Behavioral problems, including truancy, classroom disruption, vandalism, aggressive behavior, theft, substance abuse, and gang participation are greater in larger schools.
Teachers in smaller schools learn of disagreements between students and can resolve problems before problems become severe.
School size plays a very important role in shaping the kinds of social relationships that form within schools.
Smaller schools and learning communities reduce the isolation that causes violence.
Smaller schools allow students to form closer relationships with their teachers and create a sense of ownership and belonging to their school.
Young people who feel more connected to their school are less likely to be involved in violence.
Smaller schools and learning communities are especially effective in reducing the types of violence parents fear most, particularly gang activity and serious violent incidents.
Students in smaller schools are less likely to have problems with drugs or alcohol.
Based on studies of secondary school violence, researchers have concluded that the first step in ending school violence must be to break through the impersonal atmosphere of larger secondary schools by creating smaller communities of learning within larger structures, where students and teachers can come to know each other well.
Research demonstrates that students attending smaller schools are more likely to participate in extracurricular activities.
The students are also involved in a greater variety of activities, while students in larger schools tend to be polarized into a group that participates and a group that does not participate in any extracurricular activities.
Because everyone in smaller schools is needed to populate teams, offices, and clubs, even shy and less able students are encouraged to participate and given a sense of belonging.
Larger schools contribute to negative teacher attitudes and low staff morale.
Smaller schools can be established cost effectively.
Larger schools can be more expensive because the sheer size of the larger schools requires more administrative support.
More importantly, additional bureaucracy translates into less flexibility and innovation.
SMALL SCHOOLS AND SMALLER LEARNING COMMUNITIES.
Title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Part L--Small Schools and Smaller Learning Communities ``SEC.
``In this part: ``(1) Eligible applicant.--The term `eligible applicant' means a local educational agency, an elementary school, a secondary school, or a Bureau funded school (as defined in section 1146(3) of this Act (25 United States Code 2026(3))) that is working independently or in partnership with other public agencies or private non-profit organizations.
Small school.--The term `small school' means a school-- ``(A) that has few enough students and teachers so that all teachers are able to know all students, and has a maximum student population of-- ``(i) 350 students in the case of an elementary school; and ``(ii) 400 to 800 students in the case of a secondary school; ``(B) in which teachers coordinate and cooperate in developing and implementing curricula; ``(C) in which a sense of shared leadership and ownership among teachers, administrators, and staff exists; and ``(D) in which parents are considered a valued part of the educational team.
Smaller learning community.--The term `smaller learning community' means a cohesive unit that-- ``(A) exists within a larger school; and ``(B) meets the requirements of subparagraphs (B) through (D) of paragraph (2).
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible applicants to enable eligible applicants to carry out the authorized activities described in subsection (c).
Applications.--Each eligible applicant desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Each such application shall describe-- ``(1) strategies and methods the eligible applicant will use to create the smaller learning community; ``(2) curriculum and instructional practices, including any particular themes or emphases, to be used in the learning environment; ``(3) the extent of involvement of teachers and other school personnel in investigating, designing, implementing, and sustaining the smaller learning community; ``(4) the process to be used for involving students, parents, and other stakeholders in the development and implementation of the smaller learning community; ``(5) any cooperation or collaboration among community agencies, organizations, businesses, and others to develop or implement a plan to create the smaller learning community; ``(6) the training and professional development activities that will be offered to teachers and others involved in the activities assisted under this section; ``(7) the goals and objectives of the activities assisted under this section, including a description of how such activities will better enable all students to reach challenging State content standards and State student performance standards; ``(8) the methods by which the eligible applicant will assess progress in meeting such goals and objectives; ``(9) if the smaller learning community exists as a school- within-a-school, the relationship, including governance and administration, of the smaller learning community to the rest of the school; ``(10) a description of the administrative and managerial relationship between the eligible applicant and the smaller learning community, including how such eligible applicant will demonstrate a commitment to the continuity of the smaller learning community, including the continuity of student and teacher assignment to a particular learning community; ``(11) how the eligible applicant will coordinate or use funds provided under this section with other funds provided under this Act or other Federal laws; ``(12) grade levels or ages of students who will participate in the smaller learning community; and ``(13) the method of placing students in the smaller learning community, such that students are not placed according to ability, performance, or any other measure, so that students are placed at random or by their own choice, not pursuant to testing or other judgments.
Authorized Activities.--Funds under this section may be used-- ``(1) to study the feasibility of creating the smaller learning community as well as effective and innovative organizational and instructional strategies that will be used in the smaller learning community; ``(2) to research, develop, and implement strategies for creating the smaller learning community, as well as effective and innovative changes in curriculum and instruction, geared to high State content standards and State student performance standards; ``(3) to provide professional development for school staff in innovative teaching methods that challenge and engage students and will be used in the smaller learning community; and ``(4) to develop and implement strategies to include parents, business representatives, local institutions of higher education, community-based organizations, and other community members in the smaller learning communities as facilitators of activities that enable teachers-- ``(A) to participate in professional development activities; and ``(B) to provide links between students and their community.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 3 succeeding fiscal years.
Technical Assistance.--The Secretary is authorized to provide technical assistance to eligible applicants seeking to create smaller learning communities in the elementary schools or secondary schools served by the eligible applicants.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $1,500,000 for fiscal year 2001 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 3 succeeding fiscal years.
SCHOOL CONSTRUCTION AND RENOVATION.
Grants Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible applicants to enable the eligible applicants to carry out construction described in paragraph (c), or renovation described in paragraph (d), of elementary schools or secondary schools.
Applications.-- ``(1) In general.--Each eligible applicant desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Increasing the number of small schools and smaller learning environments.--Each such application shall describe how the construction or renovation assisted under this section will enable more students to be educated in a small school or smaller learning environment than would otherwise be possible without funds made available under this section.
Priority.--The Secretary shall give priority to an application submitted under this subsection that demonstrates-- ``(A) that the eligible applicant is located in an area densely populated with school-aged children; or ``(B) that more students will be educated in the small school or smaller learning environment than would otherwise be possible without funds made available under this section.
Construction.--The Secretary shall only award grants under subsection (a) for construction of elementary schools or secondary schools that have the following maximum student capacities: ``(1) 350 students in the case of an elementary school.
400 students in the case of a middle school.
800 students in the case of a secondary school.
Renovation.--The Secretary shall only award a grant under subsection (a) for renovation of an elementary school or a secondary school, that has the maximum student capacity described in subsection (b), related to the creation of small schools, or smaller learning environments, within a larger school.
Report.--Each recipient of funds under this section shall provide the Secretary with an annual report that contains a capital budget for the construction or renovation to be assisted under this section.
Such report shall include a description of-- ``(1) the proposed uses for grant funds authorized under this section; and ``(2) the actual uses of grant funds received under this section in a preceding year.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 3 succeeding fiscal years.