This Act may be cited as the ``Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research Enhancement Act''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis are serious inflammatory diseases of the gastrointestinal tract.
Crohn's disease may occur in any section of the gastrointestinal tract but is predominately found in the lower part of the small intestine and the large intestine.
Ulcerative colitis is characterized by inflammation and ulceration of the innermost lining of the colon.
Complete removal of the colon in patients with ulcerative colitis can potentially alleviate and cure symptoms.
Because Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis behave similarly, they are collectively known as inflammatory bowel disease.
Both diseases present a variety of symptoms, including severe diarrhea, abdominal pain with cramps, fever, and rectal bleeding.
There is no known cause of inflammatory bowel disease, or medical cure.
It is estimated that up to 1,400,000 people in the United States suffer from inflammatory bowel disease, 30 percent of whom are diagnosed during their childhood years.
Children with inflammatory bowel disease miss school activities because of bloody diarrhea and abdominal pain, and many adults who had onset of inflammatory bowel disease as children had delayed puberty and impaired growth and have never reached their full genetic growth potential.
Inflammatory bowel disease patients are at high risk for developing colorectal cancer.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE OF DIABETES AND DIGESTIVE AND KIDNEY DISEASES; INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE RESEARCH EXPANSION.
Subpart 3 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285c et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
In General.--The Director of the Institute shall expand, intensify, and coordinate the activities of the Institute with respect to research on inflammatory bowel disease.
Such research may be focused on, but not limited to, the following areas: ``(1) Genetic research on susceptibility for inflammatory bowel disease, including the interaction of genetic and environmental factors in the development of the disease.
Research targeted to increase knowledge about the causes and complications of inflammatory bowel disease in children.
Animal model research on inflammatory bowel disease, including genetics in animals.
Clinical inflammatory bowel disease research, including clinical studies and treatment trials.
Expansion of the Institute's Inflammatory Bowel Disease Centers program with a focus on pediatric research.
The training of qualified health professionals in biomedical research focused on inflammatory bowel disease, including pediatric investigators.
Other research priorities identified by the scientific agendas `Challenges in Inflammatory Bowel Disease Research' (Crohn's and Colitis Foundation of America) and `Chronic Inflammatory Bowel Disease' (North American Society for Pediatric Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Nutrition).
Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $80,000,000 for fiscal year 2008, $90,000,000 for fiscal year 2009, and $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2010.''.
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION; EXPANSION OF INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGY PROGRAM.
Part A of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION; EXPANSION OF INFLAMMATORY BOWEL DISEASE EPIDEMIOLOGY PROGRAM.
In General.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention shall expand the Inflammatory Bowel Disease Epidemiology Program within the National Center for Chronic Disease Prevention and Health Promotion to include additional studies focused on-- ``(1) the incidence and prevalence of pediatric inflammatory bowel disease in the United States; ``(2) genetic and environmental factors associated with pediatric inflammatory bowel disease; ``(3) age, race or ethnicity, gender, and family history of individuals diagnosed with pediatric inflammatory bowel disease; and ``(4) treatment approaches and outcomes in pediatric inflammatory bowel disease.
Consultation.--The Director shall carry out subsection (a) in consultation with a national voluntary patient organization with experience serving the population of individuals with pediatric inflammatory bowel disease and organizations representing physicians and other health professionals specializing in the treatment of such populations.
Authorization of Appropriations.--To carry out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2008, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2009 and 2010.