This Act may be cited as the ``Library of Congress Fiscal Operations Improvement Act of 2000''.
TITLE I--LIBRARY OF CONGRESS REVOLVING FUNDS SEC.
REVOLVING FUND FOR AUDIO AND VIDEO DUPLICATION SERVICES ASSOCIATED WITH AUDIOVISUAL CONSERVATION CENTER.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Treasury a revolving fund for audio and video duplication and delivery services provided by the Librarian of Congress (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Librarian'') which are associated with the national audiovisual conservation center established under the Act entitled ``An Act to authorize acquisition of certain real property for the Library of Congress, and for other purposes'', approved December 15, 1997 (Public Law 105-144; 2 United States Code 141 note).
Fees for Services.--The Librarian may charge a fee for providing services described in subsection (a), and shall deposit any such fees charged into the revolving fund under this section.
Contents of Fund.-- (1) In general.--The revolving fund under this section shall consist of the following amounts: (A) Amounts deposited by the Librarian under subsection (b).
Any other amounts received by the Librarian which are attributable to the services described in subsection (a).
Amounts deposited by the Librarian under paragraph (2).
Such other amounts as may be appropriated under law.
Deposit of funds during transition.--The Librarian shall transfer to the revolving fund under this section the following: (A) Any obligated, unexpended balances existing as of the date of the transfer which are attributable to the services described in subsection (a).
An amount equal to the difference as of such date between-- (i) the total value of the supplies, inventories, equipment, gift fund balances, and other assets attributable to such services; and (ii) the total value of the liabilities attributable to such services.
Use of Amounts in Fund.--Amounts in the revolving fund under this section shall be available to the Librarian, in amounts specified in appropriations Acts and without fiscal year limitation, to carry out the services described in subsection (a).
REVOLVING FUND FOR GIFT SHOP, DECIMAL CLASSIFICATION, PHOTO DUPLICATION, AND RELATED SERVICES.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Treasury a revolving fund for the following programs and activities of the Librarian: (1) Decimal classification development.
The operation of a gift shop or other sales of items associated with collections, exhibits, performances, and special events of the Library of Congress.
Document reproduction and microfilming services.
Individual Accounting Requirement.--A separate account shall be maintained in the revolving fund under this section with respect to the programs and activities described in each of the paragraphs of subsection (a).
Fees for Services.--The Librarian may charge a fee for services under any of the programs and activities described in subsection (a), and shall deposit any such fees charged into the account of the revolving fund under this section for such program or activity.
Contents of Accounts in Fund.-- (1) In general.--Each account of the revolving fund under this section shall consist of the following amounts: (A) Amounts deposited by the Librarian under subsection (c).
Any other amounts received by the Librarian which are attributable to the programs and activities covered by such account.
Amounts deposited by the Librarian under paragraph (2).
Such other amounts as may be appropriated under law.
Deposit of funds during transition.--The Librarian shall transfer to each account of the revolving fund under this section the following: (A) Any obligated, unexpended balances existing as of the date of the transfer which are attributable to the programs and activities covered by such account.
An amount equal to the difference as of such date between-- (i) the total value of the supplies, inventories, equipment, gift fund balances, and other assets attributable to such programs and activities; and (ii) the total value of the liabilities attributable to such programs and activities.
Use of Amounts.--Amounts in the accounts of the revolving fund under this section shall be available to the Librarian, in amounts specified in appropriations Acts and without fiscal year limitation, to carry out the programs and activities covered by such accounts.
REVOLVING FUND FOR FEDLINK PROGRAM AND FEDERAL RESEARCH PROGRAM.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Treasury a revolving fund for the Federal Library and Information Network program (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``FEDLINK program'') of the Library of Congress (as described in subsection (f)(1)) and the Federal Research program of the Library of Congress (as described in subsection (f)(2)).
Individual Accounting Requirement.--A separate account shall be maintained in the revolving fund under this section with respect to the programs described in subsection (a).
Fees for Services.-- (1) In general.--The Librarian may charge a fee for services under the FEDLINK program and the Federal Research program, and shall deposit any such fees charged into the account of the revolving fund under this section for such program.
Advances of funds.--Participants in the FEDLINK program and the Federal Research program shall pay for products and services of the program by advance of funds-- (A) if the Librarian determines that amounts in the Revolving Fund are otherwise insufficient to cover the costs of providing such products and services; or (B) upon agreement between participants and the Librarian.
Contents of Fund.-- (1) In general.--Each account of the revolving fund under this section shall consist of the following amounts: (A) Amounts deposited by the Librarian under subsection (c).
Any other amounts received by the Librarian which are attributable to the program covered by such account.
Amounts deposited by the Librarian under paragraph (2).
Such other amounts as may be appropriated under law.
Deposit of funds during transition.--Notwithstanding section 1535(d) of title 31, United States Code, the Librarian shall transfer to the appropriate account of the revolving fund under this section the following: (A) Any obligated, unexpended balances existing as of the date of the transfer which are attributable to the FEDLINK program or the Federal Research program.
An amount equal to the difference as of such date between-- (i) the total value of the supplies, inventories, equipment, gift fund balances, and other assets attributable to such program; and (ii) the total value of the liabilities attributable to such program.
Use of Amounts in Fund.--Amounts in the accounts of the revolving fund under this section shall be available to the Librarian, in amounts specified in appropriations Acts and without fiscal year limitation, to carry out the program covered by each such account.
Programs Described.-- (1) FEDLINK.--In this section, the ``FEDLINK program'' is the program of the Library of Congress under which the Librarian provides the following services on behalf of participating Federal libraries, Federal information centers, other entities of the Federal Government, and the District of Columbia: (A) The procurement of commercial information services, publications in any format, and library support services.
Related education, information, and support services.
Federal research program.--In this section, the ``Federal Research program'' is the program of the Library of Congress under which the Librarian provides research reports, translations, and analytical studies for entities of the Federal Government and the District of Columbia (other than any program of the Congressional Research Service).
AUDITS BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Each of the revolving funds established under this title shall be subject to audit by the Comptroller General at the Comptroller General's discretion.
The provisions of this title shall apply with respect to fiscal year 2002 and each succeeding fiscal year.
TITLE II--LIBRARY OF CONGRESS TRUST FUND BOARD SEC.
REVISIONS TO MEMBERSHIP AND OPERATION OF LIBRARY OF CONGRESS TRUST FUND BOARD.
Addition of Vice Chair of Joint Committee on the Library as Board Member.--Section 1 of the Act entitled ``An Act to create a Library of Congress Trust Fund Board, and for other purposes'', approved March 3, 1925 (2 United States Code 154), is amended in the first sentence of the first paragraph by inserting ``and the vice chair'' after ``chairman''.
Quorum Requirement.--Section 1 of such Act (2 United States Code 154) is amended in the second sentence of the first paragraph by striking ``Nine'' and inserting ``Seven''.
Temporary Extension of Board Member Term.--Section 1 of such Act (2 United States Code 154) is amended in the first paragraph by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``Upon request of the chair of the Board, any member whose term has expired may continue to serve on the Trust Fund Board until the earlier of the date on which such member's successor is appointed or the expiration of the 1-year period which begins on the date such member's term expires.''.
The amendments made by this title shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.