Congress finds the following: (1) As of the date of enactment of this Act, the existing infrastructure of Grand Canyon National Park is not adequate to serve the purposes for which the Park was established.
Improving the infrastructure of the Park would enhance the natural and cultural resources of the Park and the quality of the experiences of visitors to the Park.
Through the development of a general management plan, the Director of the National Park Service has identified reasonable measures that are necessary to improve the infrastructure and related services of the Park, including making improvements to transportation facilities and visitor services, and reusing historic structures appropriately.
In order for the Director to implement the general management plan referred to in paragraph (3) at the Park, it is necessary for the Director to be authorized to-- (A) enter into agreements with non-Federal entities to share the costs of the improvements; and (B) assess and collect a special surcharge in addition to the entrance fees otherwise collected by the National Park Service.
GRAND CANYON ENTRANCE FEE SURCHARGE.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) authorize the Superintendent of the Grand Canyon National Park to charge and collect, in addition to the entrance fee collected pursuant to section 4 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a), a surcharge in an amount not to exceed $2 for each individual charged such entrance fee; and (2) remit to the special account for Grand Canyon National Park infrastructure improvement amounts collected as a surcharge under such authority.
SPECIAL ACCOUNT FOR GRAND CANYON NATIONAL PARK INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENT.
Establishment.--The Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall establish in the Treasury of the United States a special account for Grand Canyon National Park infrastructure improvement.
Administration of Account.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall-- (1) credit to the special account amounts remitted pursuant to section 2(2); and (2) make funds in the special account available for use only as provided in subsection (c).
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, may use funds in the special account only to pay the Federal share of the cost of eligible projects.
Daily operations.--No funds in the special account may be used for daily operation of the Grand Canyon National Park.
Eligible Projects.--Subject to subsection (b), any project for the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of a facility within the Grand Canyon National Park is eligible for funding in accordance with this Act.
Limitation.--A project referred to in subsection (a) shall be consistent with-- (1) the laws governing the National Park Service; (2) the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the Grand Canyon National Park in the State of Arizona'', approved February 26, 1919 (16 United States Code 221 et sequentes), the Grand Canyon National Park Enlargement Act (16 United States Code 228a et sequentes), and any related law; and (3) the general management plan for the Park.
COST-SHARING AGREEMENTS WITH NON-FEDERAL ENTITIES.
Agreements Required.--The Director of the National Park Service, in consultation with the Superintendent of the Grand Canyon National Park, shall enter into a cost-sharing agreement with a non- Federal Government entity for each eligible project.
Content.--The cost-sharing agreement shall specify the Federal share and the non-Federal share of the cost of the project and shall provide for payment of the non-Federal share by the non-Federal entity.
Authority To Cover Several Projects.--A cost-sharing agreement may cover more than one eligible project.
Regulations Required.--The Secretary of the Interior shall prescribe regulations to carry out this Act.
Content.--The regulations shall include the following matters: (1) The procedures for the management of the special account.
The manner in which funds for payment of the non- Federal share of the cost of an eligible project may be solicited and acknowledged.
Provisions for ensuring the protection of the natural, cultural, and other resources that the Park was established to protect.
Provisions to encourage funding from the private sector only for projects that contribute to the restoration and protection of the resources referred to in paragraph (3).
Protections against the commercialization of the Grand Canyon National Park.
Procedures to prevent the creation of a conflict of interest with respect to an employee of the Federal Government.
Provisions for continuous participation of the general public in the oversight of the implementation of this Act.
Notice and Public Comment.--The Secretary shall carry out subsection (a) in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code (relating to publication of notice and opportunity for public comment), without regard to any applicable exception provided in such section.
Report Required.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to Congress a report on the Grand Canyon National Park infrastructure improvement authority provided in this Act.
Content of Report.--The report shall include the following matters: (1) An assessment of the effectiveness of the exercise of authority under this Act to improve the infrastructure of the Grand Canyon National Park.
Any recommended legislation with respect to-- (A) the surcharge authorized under section 2; (B) the special account; (C) the use of the special account for funding eligible projects; or (D) any other matter that the Secretary determines to be related to the authority provided under this Act.
As used in this Act: (1) Facility.--The term ``facility'' includes any structure, road, trail, utility, or other facility that is used or to be used for or in support of-- (A) the protection or restoration of a natural or cultural resource; (B) an interpretive service; or (C) any other service or activity that the Secretary determines to be related to the operation of the Grand Canyon National Park.
Federal share.--The term ``Federal share'', with respect to the cost of an eligible project, means the percent of the cost of such project that is paid with Federal funds, including funds disbursed from the special account.
Non-federal share.--The term ``non-Federal share'', with respect to the cost of an eligible project, means the percent of the cost of such project that is paid with funds other than funds referred to in paragraph (2).
Eligible project.--The term ``eligible project'' is any project that is eligible for funding in accordance with this Act.
Special account.--The terms ``special account for Grand Canyon National Park infrastructure improvement'' and ``special account'' mean the account established pursuant to section 3.