This Act may be cited as the ``Office of Ocean and Coastal Policy Creation Act of 2003''.
The Congress finds that there is a demonstrated need for there to be an Office of Oceans and Coastal Policy in the Executive Office of the President.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF OCEANS AND COASTAL POLICY.
Establishment.--There is established in the Executive Office of the President the Office of Oceans and Coastal Policy.
Purpose.--The purpose of the office is to develop comprehensive oceans and coastal policy and to advise the President on scientific, environmental, economic, technological, and international considerations involved in areas of national concern to ocean and coastal policy, including the sustainable use of the Nation's ocean and coastal resources, in order to provide for a better understanding and knowledge of the world's oceans.
DIRECTOR AND ASSOCIATE DIRECTORS.
Director.--There shall be at the head of the Office a Director of the Office of Oceans and Coastal Policy, who shall-- (1) be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate; and (2) be compensated at a rate consistent with the compensation of the Directors of other Offices within the Executive Office of the President.
Associate Directors.--The President may appoint not more than 2 Associate Directors of the Office of Oceans and Coastal Policy, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, who shall each-- (1) be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate provided for other Associate Directors of Offices within the Executive Office of the President; and (2) shall perform such functions as the Director may prescribe.
FUNCTIONS OF THE DIRECTOR.
Primary Function.--The primary function of the Director is to provide, within the Executive Office of the President, advice on the scientific environmental, economic, technological, and international aspects of ocean and coastal issues that require the attention at the highest levels of the Government.
Other Functions.--The Director shall-- (1) advise the President on scientific, environmental, economic, technological, and international considerations involved in areas of national concern relating to ocean and coastal policy, including the sustainable use of the Nation's ocean and coastal resources; (2) evaluate the scale, quality, and effectiveness of the Federal effort in management and conservation of the Nation's oceans and coastal resources, and advise the President on appropriate actions to take with respect to such management and conservation; (3) advise the President on scientific, environmental, economic, technological, and international aspects of ocean and coastal considerations with regard to Federal budgets, assist the Office of Management and Budget with an annual review and analysis of funding proposed for research and development in budgets of all Federal agencies, and aid the Office of Management and Budget and the agencies throughout the budget development process; (4) assist the Office of Management and Budget with an annual review and analysis of funding proposed for research and development relating to such policy in budgets of all Federal agencies, and aid the Office of Management and Budget and Federal agencies regarding oceans and coastal policy throughout the budget development process; (5) assist the President in providing general leadership and coordination of the research and development programs of the Federal Government relating to the oceans and coastal concerns; (6) coordinate the scientific, environmental, economic, technological, and international aspects of ocean and coastal issues with the Council on Environmental Quality, the Office of Science and Technology, the Council of Economic Advisers, and other offices within the Executive Office of the President; and (7) perform such other functions and activities relating to the oceans and coastal policy as the President may prescribe.
CITIZENS ADVISORY COMMISSION ON OCEAN AND COASTAL POLICY.
Establishment.--The President shall establish a Commission on Ocean and Coastal Policy.
The purpose of the Commission shall be to advise and assist the Director of the Office of Ocean and Coastal Policy in identifying and fostering policies to conserve and manage the ocean and coastal environments and resources.
Membership.--(1) The Commission shall consist of no less than 18 and no more than 36 members, who shall be appointed for three year terms.
The Commission shall be composed of the Director, the Chair of the Council on Environmental Quality, the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, at least eight members to represent the interests of the States, and representatives of various interested stakeholders.
The Director of the Office of Ocean and Coastal Policy shall serve as the Chairman of the Commission.
Each member of the Commission shall, while serving on business of the Commission, be entitled to receive compensation at a rate not to exceed a daily rate to be determined by the President consistent with other Federal advisory boards.
Federal and State officials serving on the Commission and serving in their official capacity shall not receive compensation in addition to their Federal or State salaries for their time on the Commission.
Members of the Commission may be compensated for reasonable travel expenses while performing their duties as members of the Commission.
The Commission shall meet at least twice per year, or as prescribed by the President.