This Act may be cited as the ``Providing Our Support to Troops Act of 2003''.
In General.--Chapter 34 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Free postage for personal correspondence and certain parcels mailed to members of Armed Forces of the United States ``(a) In General.--The matter described in subsection (b) (other than matter described in subsection (c)) may be mailed free of postage, if-- ``(1) such matter is sent from within an area served by a United States post office; ``(2) such matter is addressed to an individual who is a member of the Armed Forces of the United States on active duty, as defined in section 101 of title 10, or a civilian, authorized to use postal services at Armed Forces installations, who holds a position or performs one or more functions in support of military operations, as designated by the military theater commander; and ``(3)(A) such matter is addressed to the individual referred to in paragraph (2) at an Armed Forces post office established in an overseas area with respect to which a designation under section 3401(a)(1)(A) is in effect; or ``(B) in the case of an individual who is hospitalized at a facility under the jurisdiction of the Armed Forces of the United States as a result of a disease or injury described in section 3401(a)(1)(B), such matter is addressed to such individual at an Armed Forces post office determined under subsection (f).
Mail Matter Described.--The free mailing privilege provided by subsection (a) is extended to-- ``(1) letter mail or sound- or video-recorded communications having the character of personal correspondence; and ``(2) parcels not exceeding 10 pounds in weight and 60 inches in length and girth combined.
Limitation.--The free mailing privilege provided by subsection (a) does not extend to mail matter that contains any advertising.
Rate of Postage.--Any matter which is mailed under this section shall be mailed at the equivalent rate of postage which assures that the mail will be sent by the most economical means practicable.
Marking.--All matter mailed under this section shall bear, in the upper right-hand corner of the address area, the words `Free Matter for Members of the Armed Forces of the United States', or words to that effect specified by the Postal Service.
Regulations.--This section shall be administered under such conditions, and under such regulations, as the Postal Service and the Secretary of Defense jointly may prescribe.''.
Funding.-- (1) Free postage.--Sections 2401(c) and 3627 of title 39, United States Code, are amended by striking ``3406'' and inserting ``3407''.
Air transportation.-- (A) In general.--Section 2401 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by redesignating subsections (d) through (g) as subsections (e) through (h), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (c) the following: ``(d) There are authorized to be appropriated to the Postal Service each year a sum determined by the Postal Service to be equal to the expenses incurred by the Postal Service in providing air transportation for mail sent to members of the Armed Forces of the United States free of postage under section 3407, not including the expense of air transportation that is provided by the Postal Service at the same postage rate or charge for mail which is not addressed to an Armed Forces post office.''.
Amendment to prevent duplicative funding.-- Section 3401(e) of title 39, United States Code, is amended by striking ``office.''
and inserting ``office or (3) for which amounts are authorized to be appropriated to the Postal Service under section 2401(d).''.
Technical and conforming amendments.-- (i) Annual budget.--Section 2009 of title 39, United States Code, is amended in the next to last sentence by striking ``(b) and (c)'' and inserting ``(b), (c), and (d)''.
Comprehensive plan references.-- Sections 2803(a) and 2804(a) of such title 39 are amended by striking ``2401(g)'' and inserting ``2401(f)''.
Chapter Analysis.--The analysis for chapter 34 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``3407.
Free postage for personal correspondence and certain parcels mailed to Members of the Armed Forces of the United States.