TREATMENT OF CONTRIBUTIONS IN AID OF CONSTRUCTION.
Treatment of Contributions in Aid of Construction.-- (1) In general.--Section 118 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to contributions to the capital of a corporation) is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (e), and (B) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsections: ``(c) Special Rules for Water and Sewage Disposal Utilities.-- ``(1) General rule.--For purposes of this section, the term `contribution to the capital of the taxpayer' includes any amount of money or other property received by any person (whether or not a shareholder) by a regulated public utility which provides water or sewerage disposal service if-- ``(A) such amount is a contribution in aid of construction, ``(B) in the case of contribution of property other than water or sewerage disposal facilities, such amount meets the requirements of the expenditure rule of paragraph (2), and ``(C) such amount (or any property acquired or constructed with such amount) is not included in the taxpayer's rate base for ratemaking purposes.
Expenditure rule.--An amount meets the requirements of this paragraph if-- ``(A) an amount equal to such amount is expended for the acquisition or construction of tangible property described in section 1231(b)-- ``(i) which is the property for which the contribution was made or is of the same type as such property, and ``(ii) which is used predominantly in the trade or business of furnishing water or sewerage disposal services, ``(B) the expenditure referred to in subparagraph (A) occurs before the end of the second taxable year in which such amount was received, and ``(C) accurate records are kept of the amounts contributed and expenditures made, the expenditures to which contributions are allocated, and the year in which the contributions and expenditures are received and made.
Definitions.--For purpose of this subsection: ``(A) Contribution in aid of construction.--The term `contribution in aid of construction' shall be defined by regulations prescribed by the Secretary, except that such term shall not include amounts paid as service charges for starting or stopping services.
Predominantly.--The term `predominantly' means 80 percent or more.
Regulated public utility.--The term `regulated public utility' has the meaning given such term by section 7701(a)(33), except that such term shall not include any utility which is not required to provide water or sewerage disposal services to members of the general public in its service area.
Disallowance of deductions and investment credit; adjusted basis.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subtitle, no deduction or credit shall be allowed for, or by reason of, any expenditure which constitutes a contribution in aid of construction to which this subsection applies.
The adjusted basis of any property acquired with contributions in aid of construction to which this subsection applies shall be zero.
Statute of Limitations.--If the taxpayer for any taxable year treats an amount as a contribution to the capital of the taxpayer described in subsection (c), then-- ``(1) the statutory period for the assessment of any deficiency attributable to any part of such amount shall not expire before the expiration of 3 years from the date the Secretary is notified by the taxpayer (in such manner as the Secretary may prescribe) of-- ``(A) the amount of the expenditure referred to in subparagraph (A) of subsection (c)(2), ``(B) the taxpayer's intention not to make the expenditure referred to in such subparagraph, or ``(C) a failure to make such expenditure within the period described in subparagraph (B) of subsection (c)(2); and ``(2) such deficiency may be assessed before the expiration of such 3-year period notwithstanding the provisions of any other law or rule of law which would otherwise prevent such assessment.''
Conforming amendment.--Section 118(b) of such Code is amended by inserting ``except as provided in subsection (c),'' before ``the term''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to amounts received after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Recovery Method and Period for Water Utility Property.-- (1) Requirement to use straight line method.--Section 168(b)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Water utility property described in subsection (e)(5).''
25-Year recovery period.--The table contained in section 168(c)(1) of such Code is amended by inserting the following item after the item relating to 20-year property: ``Water utility property............................. 25 years''.
Water utility property.-- (A) In general.--Section 168(e) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Water utility property.--The term `water utility property' means property-- ``(A) which is an integral part of the gathering, treatment, or commercial distribution of water, and ``(B) which, without regard to this paragraph, would be 20-year property.''
Conforming amendment.--Subparagraph (F) of section 168(e)(3) of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Such term does not include water utility property.''
Alternative system.--Clause (iv) of section 168(g)(2)(C) of such Code is amended by inserting ``, water utility property,'' and ``grading''.
Effective date.--The amendments made by this subsection shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act, other than property placed in service pursuant to a binding contract in effect on such date and at all times thereafter before the property is placed in service.