DEATH GRATUITIES PAYABLE WITH RESPECT TO DECEASED MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES.
Increased Amount of Death Gratuity.--Section 1478(a) of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``$12,000'' in the first sentence and inserting ``$100,000''.
Additional Death Gratuity Payable to Child of Deceased.-- (1) Payment at age 21.--Section 1477 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Additional Death Gratuity for Dependent Children.--(1) If, in the case of a death for which a death gratuity is payable under section 1475 or 1476 of this title, the deceased is survived by one or more children described in subsection (b) who are under 18 years of age on the date of the death, the Secretary concerned shall pay an additional death gratuity to each such child when that child attains 21 years of age.
A death gratuity payable to any person under this subsection with respect to a death is in addition to any death gratuity that is payable to that person under section 1475 or 1476 of this title with respect to such death pursuant to subsection (a)(2).''.
Amount.-- (A) Subsection (a) of section 1478 of such title, as amended by subsection (a) of this section, is further amended by inserting after the first sentence the following new sentence: ``The death gratuity payable to a child of a deceased person under section 1477(e) of this title shall be $25,000.''.
Subsection (c) of such section is amended by striking ``the amount'' and inserting ``each amount''.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 1477(d) of such title is amended by striking ``he receives the death gratuity,'' and inserting ``receiving payment of a death gratuity under section 1475 or 1476 of this title,''.
Section 1479 of such title is amended-- (i) by striking ``immediate''; and (ii) by inserting ``or 1477(e)'' after ``section 1475''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), this section and the amendments made by this section shall take effect as of October 1, 2001, and shall apply with respect to deaths occurring on or after such date.
Exception.--The amendment made by subsection (b)(2)(B) shall take effect as of October 28, 2004, immediately following the enactment of Public Law 108-375.
INCREASED PERIOD OF CONTINUED TRICARE COVERAGE OF CHILDREN OF MEMBERS OF THE UNIFORMED SERVICES WHO DIE WHILE SERVING ON ACTIVE DUTY FOR A PERIOD OF MORE THAN 30 DAYS.
Period of Eligibility.--Section 1079(g) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(g)''; and (2) by striking the second sentence and inserting the following: ``(2) In addition to any continuation of eligibility for benefits under paragraph (1), when a member dies while on active duty for a period of more than 30 days, the member's dependents who are receiving benefits under a plan covered by subsection (a) shall continue to be eligible for such benefits during the three-year period beginning on the date of the member's death, except that, in the case of such a dependent who is a child of the deceased, the period of continued eligibility shall be the longer of the following periods beginning on such date: ``(A) Three years.
The period ending on the date on which the child attains 21 years of age.
In the case of a child of the deceased who, at 21 years of age, is enrolled in a full-time course of study in a secondary school or in a full-time course of study in an institution of higher education approved by the administering Secretary and was, at the time of the member's death, in fact dependent on the member for over one-half of the child's support, the period ending on the earlier of the following dates: ``(i) The date on which the child ceases to pursue such a course of study, as determined by the administering Secretary.
The date on which the child attains 23 years of age.
For the purposes of paragraph (2)(C), a child shall be treated as being enrolled in a full-time course of study in an institution of higher education during any reasonable period of transition between the child's completion of a full-time course of study in a secondary school and the commencement of an enrollment in a full-time course of study in an institution of higher education, as determined by the administering Secretary.
No charge may be imposed for any benefits coverage under this chapter that is provided for a child for a period of continued eligibility under paragraph (2), or for any benefits provided to such child during such period under that coverage.''.
Effective Date.--This section and the amendments made by this section shall take effect as of October 1, 2001, and shall apply with respect to deaths occurring on or after such date.
INCREASE AND ENHANCEMENT OF DEPENDENCY AND INDEMNITY COMPENSATION FOR SURVIVING SPOUSES.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 1311 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``$967'' and inserting ``$1,500''; (2) in paragraph (2), by inserting ``or (4)'' after ``paragraph (1)''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of a surviving spouse who remarries, dependency and indemnity compensation shall be paid to the surviving spouse at a monthly rate equal to 50 percent of the monthly rate otherwise provided under paragraph (1) for-- ``(A) the first 60 months beginning after the date of such remarriage; or ``(B) in the case of a surviving spouse with one or more children below the age of 18, each month until the first month beginning after the date on which each such child has attained the age of 18.''.
Rates for Surviving Spouses With Dependent Children.--Such section is further amended-- (1) by striking subsection (b) and inserting the following new subsection (b): ``(b)(1) If there is a surviving spouse with one or more children below the age of 18, the dependency and indemnity compensation paid monthly to the surviving spouse shall be increased by $750 for each such child.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the increase in dependency and indemnity compensation payable to a surviving spouse under paragraph (1) shall cease beginning with the first month commencing after the month in which all children of the surviving spouse have attained the age of 18.
The cessation under subparagraph (A) of the increase in dependency and indemnity compensation payable to a surviving spouse under paragraph (1) shall not occur with respect to any child of the surviving spouse who, before attaining the age of 18, becomes permanently incapable of support.
''; and (2) by striking subsection (e), as added by section 301(a) of the Veterans Benefits Improvements Act of 2004 (Public Law 104-454).
Effective Date.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2001, and shall apply with respect to months beginning on or after that date.
The amendment made by subsection (b)(2) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXPANSION AND ENHANCEMENT OF SURVIVORS' AND DEPENDENTS' EDUCATIONAL ASSISTANCE.
Termination of Durational Limitation on Use of Educational Assistance.-- (1) Termination of limitation and restatement of continuing requirements.--Subsection (a) of section 3511 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a)(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter or chapter 36 of this title, any payment of educational assistance described in paragraph (2) shall not be charged against the entitlement of any individual under this chapter.
The payment of educational assistance referred to in paragraph (1) is the payment of such assistance to an individual for pursuit of a course or courses under this chapter if the Secretary finds that the individual-- ``(A) had to discontinue such course pursuit as a result of being ordered to serve on active duty under section 688, 12301(a), 12301(d), 12301(g), 12302, or 12304 of title 10; and ``(B) failed to receive credit or training time toward completion of the individual's approved educational, professional, or vocational objective as a result of having to discontinue, as described in subparagraph (A), the course pursuit.''.
Conforming amendments.--(A) The heading of section 3511 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Treatment of certain interruptions in pursuit of programs of education''.
Section 3532(g) of such title, as amended by section 106(b)(3) of the Veterans Earn and Learn Act of 2004 (title I of Public Law 108-454), is further amended-- (i) by striking paragraph (2); and (ii) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
Section 3541 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Special restorative training ``(a) The Secretary may, at the request of an eligible person-- ``(1) determine whether such person is in need of special restorative training; and ``(2) if such need is found to exist, prescribe a course which is suitable to accomplish the purposes of this chapter.
A course of special restorative training under subsection (a) may, at the discretion of the Secretary, contain elements that would contribute toward an ultimate objective of a program of education.''.
Section 3695(a)(4) of such title is amended by striking ``35,''.
Extension of Delimiting Age of Eligibility for Dependents.-- Section 3512(a) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``twenty-sixth birthday'' each place it appears and inserting ``thirtieth birthday''.
Amount of Educational Assistance.-- (1) In general.--Section 3532 of title 38, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Amount of educational assistance ``(a) The aggregate amount of educational assistance to which an eligible person is entitled under this chapter is $80,000, as increased from time to time under section 3564 of this title.
Within the aggregate amount provided for in subsection (a), educational assistance under this chapter may be paid for any purpose, and in any amount, as follows: ``(1) A program of education consisting of institutional courses.
A full-time program of education that consists of institutional courses and alternate phases of training in a business or industrial establishment with the training in the business or industrial establishment being strictly supplemental to the institutional portion.
A farm cooperative program consisting of institutional agricultural courses prescheduled to fall within forty-four weeks of any period of twelve consecutive months that is pursued by an eligible person who is concurrently engaged in agricultural employment which is relevant to such institutional agricultural courses as determined under standards prescribed by the Secretary.
A course or courses or other program of special educational assistance as provided in section 3491(a) of this title.
A program of apprenticeship or other on-job training pursued in a State as provided in section 3687(a) of this title.
In the case of an eligible spouse or surviving spouse, a program of education exclusively by correspondence as provided in section 3686 of this title.
A special training allowance for special restorative training as provided in section 3542 of this title.
If a program of education is pursued by an eligible person at an institution located in the Republic of the Philippines, any educational assistance for such person under this chapter shall be paid at the rate of $0.50 for each dollar.
(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the amount of educational assistance payable under this chapter for a licensing or certification test described in section 3501(a)(5) of this title is the lesser of $2,000 or the fee charged for the test.
In no event shall payment of educational assistance under this subsection for such a test exceed the amount of the individual's available entitlement under this chapter.''.
Conforming amendments.--(A) Section 3533 of such title is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Tutorial assistance ``An eligible person shall, without any charge to any entitlement of such person to educational assistance under section 3532(a) of this title be entitled to the benefits provided an eligible veteran under section 3492 of this title.''.
Section 3534 of such title is repealed.
Section 3542 of such title is amended-- (i) in subsection (a), by striking ``computed at the basic rate'' and all that follows through the end of the subsection and inserting a period; and (ii) in subsection (b), by striking ``an educational assistance allowance'' and inserting ``educational assistance''.
Section 3543(c) of such title is amended-- (i) in paragraph (1), by adding ``and'' at the end; (ii) by striking paragraph (2); and (iii) by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (2).
Section 3564 of such title is amended by striking ``rates payable under sections 3532, 3534(b), and 3542(a)'' and inserting ``aggregate amount of educational assistance payable under section 3532''.
Paragraph (1) of section 3565(b) of such title is amended to read as follows: ``(1) educational assistance payable under section 3532 of this title, including the special training allowance referred to in subsection (b)(7) of such section, shall be paid at the rate of $0.50 for each dollar; and''.
Section 3687 of such title is amended-- (i) in subsection (a)-- (I) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by striking ``or an eligible person (as defined in section 3501(a) of this title)''; and (II) in the flush matter following paragraph (2), by striking ``chapters 34 and 35'' and inserting ``chapter 34''; (ii) in subsection (c), by striking ``chapters 34 and 35'' and inserting ``chapter 34''; and (iii) in subsection (e), as added by section 102(a) of the Veterans Earn and Learn Act of 2004 (title I of Public Law 108-454), by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following new paragraph (3): ``(3) In this subsection, the term `individual' means an eligible veteran who is entitled to monthly educational assistance allowances payable under section 3015(e) of this title.''.
Other Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 3524 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``allowance'' each place it appears.
(A) Section 3531 of such title is amended-- (i) in subsection (a), by striking ``an educational assistance allowance'' and inserting ``educational assistance''; and (ii) in subsection (b), by striking ``allowance''.
The heading of such section is amended by striking ``allowance''.
Section 3537(a) of such title is amended by striking ``additional''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 35 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking the item relating to section 3511 and inserting the following new item: ``3511.
Treatment of certain interruptions in pursuit of programs of education.
''; (2) by striking the items relating to section 3531, 3532, and 3533 and inserting the following new items: ``3531.
Amount of educational assistance.
''; (3) by striking the item relating to section 3534; and (4) by striking the item relating to section 3541 and inserting the following new item: ``3541.
Effective Dates.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 2001.
The amendments made by subsections (a)(2)(B) and (c)(2)(G)(iii) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Notwithstanding the effective date under paragraph (1) of the amendment to section 3564 of title 38, United States Code, made by subsection (c)(2)(E), the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make the first increase in the aggregate amount of educational assistance under section 3532 of such title as required by such section 3564 (as so amended) for fiscal year 2006.