This Act may be cited as the ``Veteran Women's Health Improvement Act of 1993''.
Women's Health Services.--Section 1701 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6)(A)(i), by inserting ``women's health services,'' after ``preventive health services,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(10) The term `women's health services' means health care services provided to women, including counseling and services relating to the following: ``(A) Papanicolaou tests (pap smear).
Breast examinations and mammography.
Comprehensive reproductive health care, including pregnancy-related care.
The management of infertility.
The management and prevention of sexually-transmitted diseases.
Menopause, osteoporosis, and other conditions relating to aging.
Physical or psychological conditions arising out of acts of sexual violence.''.
Contracts for Women's Health Services.--Section 1703(a) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(9) Women's health services for veterans on an ambulatory or outpatient basis.''.
Repeal of Superseded Authority.--Section 106 of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 1710 note) is amended-- (1) by striking out subsection (a); and (2) by striking out ``(b) Responsibilities of Directors of Facilities.--'' before ``The Secretary''.
Report on Health Care and Research.--Section 107(b) of such Act (38 United States Code 1710 note) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by inserting ``and women's health services (as such term is defined in section 1701(10) of title 38, United States Code)'' after ``section 106 of this Act''; (2) in paragraph (2), by striking out ``and (B)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(B) the type and amount of services provided by such personnel, including information on the numbers of inpatient stays and the number of outpatient visits through which such services were provided, and (C)''; (3) by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (7); (4) by adding after paragraph (3) the following new paragraphs: ``(4) A description of the personnel of the Department who provided such services to women veterans, including the number of employees (including both the number of individual employees and the number of full-time employee equivalents) and the professional qualifications or specialty training of such employees and the Department facilities to which such personnel were assigned.
A description of any actions taken by the Secretary to ensure the retention of the personnel described in paragraph (4) and any actions undertaken to recruit additional such personnel or personnel to replace such personnel.
An assessment by the Secretary of any difficulties experienced by the Secretary in the furnishing of such services and the actions taken by the Secretary to resolve such difficulties.
''; and (5) by adding after paragraph (7), as redesignated by paragraph (3) of this subsection, the following: ``(8) A description of the actions taken by the Secretary to foster and encourage the expansion of such research.''.
EXPANSION OF RESEARCH RELATING TO WOMEN VETERANS.
Health Research.--Section 109(a) of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 7303 note) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``The Secretary''; (2) in paragraph (1), as so designated, by striking out ``veterans who are women'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``women veterans''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall consult with the following: ``(A) The Director of the Nursing Service.
Officials of the Central Office assigned responsibility for women's health programs and sexual trauma services.
The members of the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans established under section 542 of title 38, United States Code.
Members of appropriate task forces and working groups within the Department of Veterans Affairs (including the Women Veterans Working Group and the Task Force on Treatment of Women Who Suffer Sexual Abuse).
The Secretary shall foster and encourage research under this section on the following matters as they relate to women: ``(A) Breast cancer.
Gynecological and reproductive health, including gynecological cancer, infertility, sexually-transmitted diseases, and pregnancy.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
Mental health, including post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, combat related stress, and trauma.
Diseases related to aging, including menopause, osteoporosis, and Alzheimer's Disease.
Sexual violence and related trauma.
Exposure to toxic chemicals and other environmental hazards.
The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure that personnel of the Department of Veterans Affairs engaged in the research referred to in paragraph (1) include the following: ``(A) Personnel of the geriatric research, education, and clinical centers designated pursuant to section 7314 of title 38, United States Code.
Personnel of the National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder established pursuant to section 110(c) of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-528; 98 United States Statutes at Large 2692).
The Secretary shall ensure that personnel of the Department engaged in research relating to the health of women veterans are advised and informed of such research engaged in by other personnel of the Department.''.
Inclusion of Women and Minorities in Clinical Research Projects.--(1) In conducting or supporting clinical research, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that-- (A) women who are veterans are included as subjects in each project of such research; and (B) members of minority groups who are veterans are included as subjects of such research.
The requirement in paragraph (1) regarding women and members of minority groups who are veterans may be waived by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs with respect to a project of clinical research if the Secretary determines that the inclusion, as subjects in the project, of women and members of minority groups, respectively-- (A) is inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects; (B) is inappropriate with respect to the purpose of the research; or (C) is inappropriate under such other circumstances as the Secretary of Veterans Affairs may designate.
In the case of a project of clinical research in which women or members of minority groups will under paragraph (1) be included as subjects of the research, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that the project is designed and carried out so as to provide for a valid analysis of whether the variables being tested in the research affect women or members of minority groups, as the case may be, differently than other persons who are subjects of the research.
Population Study.--Section 110(a) of such Act (38 United States Code 1710 note) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking out the second sentence; and (2) by amending paragraph (3) to read as follows: ``(3)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the study shall be based on-- ``(i) an appropriate sample of veterans who are women; and ``(ii) an examination of the medical and demographic histories of the women comprising such sample.
The sample referred to in subparagraph (A) shall constitute a representative sampling (as determined by the Secretary) of the ages, the ethnic, social and economic backgrounds, the enlisted and officer grades, and the branches of service of all veterans who are women.
In carrying out the examination referred to in subparagraph (A)(ii), the Secretary shall determine the number of women of the sample who have used medical facilities of the Department, nursing home facilities of or under the jurisdiction of the Department, and outpatient care facilities of or under the jurisdiction of the Department.''.
Applicability to Department of Veterans Affairs of Mammography Quality Standards Act of 1992.--Subsections (a) through (k) of section 354 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b) shall apply with respect to facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs without regard to the last sentence of subparagraph (A) of subsection (a)(3) of such section.
Extension of Deadlines.--Any deadline for the completion of any action prescribed under any provision referred to in subsection (a) shall be applied with respect to facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs by extending such deadline so as to be two years after the date of the enactment of this Act or two years after the date which would otherwise be applicable under such provision, whichever is later.
Interagency Cooperation.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall take appropriate steps to cooperate with the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the implementation of this section.