This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Assistance Act of 2001''.
In this Act: (1) Eligible small business concern.--The term ``eligible small business concern'' means an entity that-- (A) is a small business concern within the meaning of section 3 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632); (B) is not covered by a State-mandated program that limits retail electric commodity rates; and (C)(i) in the case of an entity located in the State of California-- (I) is a commercial business customer of Pacific Gas and Electric Company, Southern California Edison, or San Diego Gas & Electric; and (II)(aa) has an electricity usage rate that, during the period beginning June 1, 2000, has never exceeded 300 kilowatts per hour; or (bb) has a natural gas consumption rate that, during the period beginning June 1, 2000, has never exceeded 300 therms per month; or (ii) in the case of an entity located in any other State, experienced an increase in the entity's expenses for electricity or natural gas of not less than 100 percent, as determined by comparing-- (I) the monthly average of those expenses for the period of March through May 2000; and (II) the monthly average of those expenses for the period of June through August 2000.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Small Business Energy Expense Assistance Fund established by section 3(b).
Program.--The term ``program'' means the small business assistance program established under section 3(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce, acting through the Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Economic Development.
SMALL BUSINESS ASSISTANCE PROGRAM.
In General.--Using amounts in the Fund, the Secretary shall establish a program to make no-interest loans to eligible small business concerns.
Small Business Energy Expense Assistance Fund.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a revolving fund to be used in carrying out the program, to be known as the ``Small Business Energy Expense Assistance Fund'', consisting of-- (A) such amounts as are appropriated to the Fund under paragraph (2); (B) such amounts as are appropriated to the Fund under section 4; and (C) any interest earned on investment of amounts in the Fund under paragraph (4).
Transfers to fund.--There are appropriated to the Fund amounts equivalent to amounts repaid on loans under the program.
Expenditures from fund.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), upon request by the Secretary, the Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer from the Fund to the Secretary such amounts as the Secretary determines are necessary to carry out the program.
Administrative expenses.--An amount not to exceed $250,000 shall be available to pay the administrative expenses necessary to carry out the program.
Investment of amounts.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary of the Treasury, required to meet current withdrawals.
Investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States.
Acquisition of obligations.--For the purpose of investments under subparagraph (A), obligations may be acquired-- (i) on original issue at the issue price; or (ii) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Sale of obligations.--Any obligation acquired by the Fund may be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at the market price.
Credits to fund.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
Transfers of amounts.-- (A) In general.--The amounts required to be transferred to the Fund under this subsection shall be transferred at least monthly from the general fund of the Treasury to the Fund on the basis of estimates made by the Secretary of the Treasury.
Adjustments.--Proper adjustment shall be made in amounts subsequently transferred to the extent prior estimates were in excess of or less than the amounts required to be transferred.
There is authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $25,000,000 to carry out the program.