This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Prevention Benefit Act of 1993''.
Annual Screening Mammography for Women Over Age 64.--Section 1834(c)(2)(A) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m(b)(2)(A)) is amended-- (1) in clause (iv), by striking ``but under 65 years of age,''; and (2) by striking clause (v).
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to screening mammography performed on or after January 1, 1994.
COVERAGE OF COLORECTAL SCREENING.
In General.--Section 1834 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395m) is amended by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Frequency and Payment Limits for Screening Fecal-Occult Blood Tests and Screening Flexible Sigmoidoscopies.-- ``(1) Screening fecal-occult blood tests.-- ``(A) Payment limit.--In establishing fee schedules under section 1833(h) with respect to screening fecal- occult blood tests provided for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer, except as provided by the Secretary under paragraph (3)(A), the payment amount established for tests performed-- ``(i) in 1994 shall not exceed $5; and ``(ii) in a subsequent year, shall not exceed the limit on the payment amount established under this subsection for such tests for the preceding year, adjusted by the applicable adjustment under section 1833(h) for tests performed in such year.
Frequency limit.--Subject to revision by the Secretary under paragraph (3)(B), no payment may be made under this part for a screening fecal-occult blood test provided to an individual for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer-- ``(i) if the individual is under 50 years of age; or ``(ii) if the test is performed within 11 months after a previous screening fecal-occult blood test.
Screening flexible sigmoidoscopies.-- ``(A) Payment amount.--The Secretary shall establish a payment amount under section 1848 with respect to screening flexible sigmoidoscopies provided for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer that is consistent with payment amounts under such section for similar or related services, except that such payment amount shall be established without regard to subsection (a)(2)(A) of such section.
Frequency limit.--Subject to revision by the Secretary under paragraph (3)(B), no payment may be made under this part for a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy provided to an individual for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer-- ``(i) if the individual is under 50 years of age; or ``(ii) if the procedure is performed within 59 months after a previous screening flexible sigmoidoscopy.
Reductions in payment limit and revision of frequency.-- ``(A) Reductions in payment limit.--The Secretary shall review from time to time the appropriateness of the amount of the payment limit established for screening fecal-occult blood tests under paragraph (1)(A).
The Secretary may, with respect to tests performed in a year after 1996, reduce the amount of such limit as it applies nationally or in any area to the amount that the Secretary estimates is required to assure that such tests of an appropriate quality are readily and conveniently available during the year.
Revision of frequency.-- ``(i) Review.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the National Cancer Institute, shall review periodically the appropriate frequency for performing screening fecal-occult blood tests and screening flexible sigmoidoscopies based on age and such other factors as the Secretary believes to be pertinent.
Revision of frequency.--The Secretary, taking into consideration the review made under clause (i), may revise from time to time the frequency with which such tests and procedures may be paid for under this subsection, but no such revision shall apply to tests or procedures performed before January 1, 1997.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Paragraphs (1)(D) and (2)(D) of section 1833(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l(a)) are each amended by striking ``subsection (h)(1),'' and inserting ``subsection (h)(1) or section 1834(d)(1),''.
Section 1833(h)(1)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l(h)(1)(A)) is amended by striking ``The Secretary'' and inserting ``Subject to paragraphs (1) and (3)(A) of section 1834(d), the Secretary''.
Clauses (i) and (ii) of section 1848(a)(2)(A) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395w-4(a)(2)(A)) are each amended by striking ``a service'' and inserting ``a service (other than a screening flexible sigmoidoscopy provided to an individual for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer)''.
Section 1862(a) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1)-- (i) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'' at the end, (ii) in subparagraph (F), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting ``, and'', and (iii) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(G) in the case of screening fecal-occult blood tests and screening flexible sigmoidoscopies provided for the purpose of early detection of colon cancer, which are performed more frequently than is covered under section 1834(d);''; and (B) in paragraph (7), by striking ``paragraph (1)(B) or under paragraph (1)(F)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (B), (F), or (G) of paragraph (1)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to screening fecal-occult blood tests and screening flexible sigmoidoscopies performed on or after January 1, 1994.
COVERAGE OF CERTAIN IMMUNIZATIONS.
In General.--Section 1861(s)(10) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(10)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) by striking ``, subject to section 4071(b) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987,'', and (B) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a comma; (2) in subparagraph (B), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) tetanus-diphtheria booster and its administration;''.
Limitation on Frequency.--Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(1)), as amended by section 3(b)(4)(A), is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (F), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (G), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting ``, and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(H) in the case of an influenza vaccine, which is administered within the 11 months after a previous influenza vaccine, and, in the case of a tetanus- diphtheria booster, which is administered within the 119 months after a previous tetanus-diphtheria booster;''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 1862(a)(7) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(7)), as amended by section 3(b)(4)(B), is amended by striking ``or (G)'' and inserting ``(G), or (H)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to influenza vaccines and tetanus-diphtheria boosters administered on or after January 1, 1994.
COVERAGE OF WELL-CHILD CARE.
In General.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (O); (2) by striking the semicolon at the end of subparagraph (P) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(Q) well-child services (as defined in subsection (ll)(1)) provided to an individual entitled to benefits under this title who is under 7 years of age;''.
Services Defined.--Section 1861 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended-- (1) by redesignating the subsection (jj) as subsection (kk); and (2) by inserting after subsection (kk) (as so redesignated) the following new subsection: ``Well-Child Services ``(ll)(1) The term `well-child services' means well-child care, including routine office visits, routine immunizations (including the vaccine itself), routine laboratory tests, and preventive dental care, provided in accordance with the periodicity schedule established with respect to the services under paragraph (2).
The Secretary, in consultation with the American Academy of Pediatrics, the Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices, and other entities considered appropriate by the Secretary, shall establish a schedule of periodicity which reflects the appropriate frequency with which the services referred to in paragraph (1) should be provided to healthy children.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 1862(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(1)), as amended by sections 3(b)(4)(A) and 4(b), is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (G), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in subparagraph (H), by striking the semicolon at the end and inserting ``, and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(I) in the case of well-child services, which are provided more frequently than is provided under the schedule of periodicity established by the Secretary under section 1861(ll)(2) for such services;''.
Section 1862(a)(7) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395y(a)(7)), as amended by sections 3(b)(4)(B) and 4(c), is amended by striking ``or (H)'' and inserting ``(H), or (I)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to well-child services provided on or after January 1, 1994.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS FOR COVERAGE OF OTHER PREVENTIVE SERVICES.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall establish and provide for a series of ongoing demonstration projects under which the Secretary shall provide for coverage of the preventive services described in subsection (c) under the medicare program in order to determine-- (1) the feasibility and desirability of expanding coverage of medical and other health services under the medicare program to include coverage of such services for all individuals enrolled under part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act; and (2) appropriate methods for the delivery of those services to medicare beneficiaries.
Sites for Project.--The Secretary shall provide for the conduct of the demonstration projects established under subsection (a) at the sites at which the Secretary conducts the demonstration program established under section 9314 of the Consolidated Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1985 and at such other sites as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Services Covered Under Projects.--The Secretary shall cover the following services under the series of demonstration projects established under subsection (a): (1) Glaucoma screening.
Cholesterol screening and cholesterol-reducing drug therapies.
Screening and treatment for osteoporosis, including tests for bone-marrow density and hormone replacement therapy.
Screening services for pregnant women, including ultra- sound and clamydial testing and maternal serum alfa-protein.
One-time comprehensive assessment for individuals beginning at age 65 or 75.
Prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing.
Other services considered appropriate by the Secretary.
Reports to Congress.--Not later than October 1, 1995, and every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives describing findings made under the demonstration projects conducted pursuant to subsection (a) during the preceding 2- year period and the Secretary's plans for the demonstration projects during the succeeding 2-year period.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated from the Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Fund for expenses incurred in carrying out the series of demonstration projects established under subsection (a) the following amounts: (1) $4,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.
$4,000,000 for fiscal year 1995.
$5,000,000 for fiscal year 1996.
$5,000,000 for fiscal year 1997.
$6,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
OTA STUDY OF PROCESS FOR REVIEW OF MEDICARE COVERAGE OF PREVENTIVE SERVICES.
Study.--The Director of the Office of Technology Assessment (hereafter referred to as the ``Director'') shall, subject to the approval of the Technology Assessment Board, conduct a study to develop a process for the regular review for the consideration of coverage of preventive services under the medicare program, and shall include in such study a consideration of different types of evaluations, the use of demonstration projects to obtain data and experience, and the types of measures, outcomes, and criteria that should be used in making coverage decisions.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director shall submit a report to the Committee on Finance of the Senate and the Committee on Ways and Means and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives on the study conducted under subsection (a).