This Act may be cited as the ``Seniors Mental Health Access Improvement Act of 2007''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Symptoms of depression are displayed by 37 percent of seniors (individuals ages 65 and over) in the United States.
The suicide rate for seniors is higher than such rate for other age groups in the United States.
Many Medicare beneficiaries lack access to mental health services because mental health providers do not furnish services in many medically underserved communities in which such beneficiaries inhabit.
Marriage and family therapists are the only core mental health professionals recognized by the Department of Health and Human Services but not recognized by the Medicare program for purposes of coverage of services provided by such professionals and reimbursement for such services.
Psychiatrists, clinical psychologists, clinical social workers, and psychiatric nurses are recognized Medicare providers.
Out of all counties in the United States, nearly 75 percent of such counties do not have psychiatrists, 58 percent of such counties do not have clinical social workers, and 50 percent of such counties do not have psychologists with a professional degree to serve their population.
Marriage and family therapists provide critical, cost-effective mental health services for populations that have no other mental health providers.
The shortage of mental health providers who participate in the Medicare program is a result of the Medicare program not covering the services of the 50,0000 licensed marriage and family therapists.
Many marriage and family therapists work in medically underserved communities.
Twenty-five percent of patients are ethnic minorities and in 2006, 27 percent of marriage and family therapy students were ethnic minorities, a percentage that continues to increase annually.
There are 25 percent more marriage and family therapists than psychiatrists in rural counties, and in the most rural areas, there are twice as many marriage and family therapists than psychiatrists.
Medicare coverage of marriage and family therapy services can increase Medicare beneficiaries' access to mental health care in rural areas.
COVERAGE OF MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPIST SERVICES UNDER PART B.
Coverage of Services.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (Z), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) in subparagraph (AA), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(BB) marriage and family therapist services (as defined in subsection (ccc)(1));''.
Definition.--Section 1861 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``Marriage and Family Therapist Services ``(ccc)(1) The term `marriage and family therapist services' means services performed by a marriage and family therapist (as defined in paragraph (2)) for the diagnosis and treatment of mental illnesses, which the marriage and family therapist is legally authorized to perform under State law (or the State regulatory mechanism provided by State law) of the State in which such services are performed, as would otherwise be covered if furnished by a physician or as an incident to a physician's professional service, but only if no facility or other provider charges or is paid any amounts with respect to the furnishing of such services.
The term `marriage and family therapist' means an individual who-- ``(A) possesses a master's or doctoral degree which qualifies for licensure or certification as a marriage and family therapist pursuant to State law; ``(B) after obtaining such degree has performed at least two years of clinical supervised experience in marriage and family therapy; and ``(C) in the case of an individual performing services in a State that provides for licensure or certification of marriage or family therapists, is licensed or certified as a marriage and family therapist in such State.''.
Provision for Payment Under Part B.--Section 1832(a)(2)(B) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395k(a)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(v) marriage and family therapist services;''.
Amount of Payment.--Section 1833(a)(1) of such Act (42 United States Code 13951(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and (V)'' and inserting ``(V)''; and (2) by inserting before the semicolon at the end the following: ``, and (W) with respect to marriage and family therapist services under section 1861(s)(2)(BB), the amounts paid shall be 80 percent of the lesser of the actual charge for the services or 75 percent of the amount determined for payment of a psychologist under clause (L)''.
Exclusion of Marriage and Family Therapist Services From Skilled Nursing Facility Prospective Payment System.--Section 1888(e)(2)(A)(ii) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395yy(e)(2)(A)(ii)) is amended by inserting ``marriage and family therapist services,'' after ``qualified psychologist services,''.
Inclusion of Marriage and Family Therapists as Practitioners for Assignment of Claims.--Section 1842(b)(18)(C) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395u(b)(18)(C)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(vii) A marriage and family therapist (as defined in section 1861(ccc)(2)).''.
COVERAGE OF MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPIST SERVICES PROVIDED IN CERTAIN SETTINGS.
Rural Health Clinics.--Section 1861(aa)(1)(B) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(aa)(1)(B)) is amended by inserting ``, by a marriage and family therapist (as defined in subsection (ccc)(2)),'' after ``by a clinical psychologist (as defined by the Secretary)''.
Hospice Programs.--Section 1861(dd)(2)(B)(i)(III) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(dd)(2)(B)(i)(III)) is amended by inserting ``or marriage and family therapist (as defined in subsection (ccc)(2))'' after ``social worker''.
AUTHORIZATION OF MARRIAGE AND FAMILY THERAPISTS TO DEVELOP DISCHARGE PLANS FOR POST-HOSPITAL SERVICES.
Section 1861(ee)(2)(G) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(ee)(2)(G)) is amended by inserting ``marriage and family therapist (as defined in subsection (ccc)(2)),'' after ``social worker,''.
The amendments made by this Act apply with respect to services furnished on or after January 1, 2008.