This Act may be cited as the ``Renewable Energy, Fuel Reduction, and Economic Stabilization and EnHancement Act of 2007'' or the ``REFRESH Act''.
TITLE I--RENEWABLE ENERGY INCENTIVES SEC.
In General.--The Secretary of Energy, acting through the Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (referred to in this title as the ``Secretary''), shall make grants to eligible entities (as determined by the Secretary) to promote geothermal power development, including high- and low-temperature geothermal power development.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000.
In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to eligible entities (as determined by the Secretary) to develop all forms of ocean energy (including wave, current, tidal, and thermal energy).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000.
PLUG-IN HYBRID ELECTRIC-COMBUSTION ENGINE VEHICLES.
In General.--The Secretary shall make grants to eligible entities (as determined by the Secretary) to assist in the development of new technology (including storage batteries or other forms of technology) to assist automobile manufactures in the production of plug-in hybrid electric-combustion engine vehicles.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000.
TITLE II--FUEL EFFICIENCY STANDARDS SEC.
TRUTH IN TESTING OF CAFE STANDARDS.
Testing and Calculation Procedures.-- (1) In general.--Section 32904(c) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by striking ``However, except under section 32908 of this title, the Administrator shall use the same procedures for passenger automobiles the Administrator used for model year 1975 (weighted 55 percent urban cycle and 45 percent highway cycle),'' and insert ``In measuring fuel economy under this subsection, the Administrator shall use the procedures described in the final rule relating to fuel economy labeling published in the Federal Register on December 27, 2006 (71 Fed.
77,872; to be codified at 40 Code of Federal Regulations parts 86 and 600)''.
Effective date.--Paragraph (1) shall take effect on the date that is 5 years after the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to passenger automobiles manufactured after such date.
Study and Report.-- (1) Study.--The Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration shall conduct a study of the anticipated economic impacts and fuel saving benefits that would result from a requirement that all vehicles manufactured for sale in the United States with a gross vehicle weight of not less than 10,000 pounds meet specific average fuel economy standards.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit a report to Congress that includes-- (A) the results of the study conducted under paragraph (1); and (B) a recommendation on whether the vehicles described in paragraph (1) should be subject to average fuel economy standards.
Section 30123 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Low Rolling Resistance Tires.--Not later than 5 years after the date of the enactment of this subsection, all passenger automobile tires sold in the United States shall meet the low rolling resistance standards prescribed by the Administrator of the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.''.
In General.--The Secretary of Transportation may award grants to States to develop telecommuting and flexible work scheduling incentives that will reduce traffic congestion in urban areas.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2008 to carry out the grant program established under this section.
Any sums appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall remain available until expended.
TITLE III--TAX CREDITS SEC.
EXPANSION OF CREDIT FOR PRODUCTION OF ENERGY FROM CERTAIN RENEWABLE RESOURCES.
Expansion of Resources to Wave, Current, Tidal, and Ocean Thermal Energy.-- (1) In general.--Section 45(c)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining qualified energy resources) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(I) wave, current, tidal, and ocean thermal energy.''
Definition of resources.--Section 45(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(10) Wave, current, tidal, and ocean thermal energy.--The term `wave, current, tidal, and ocean thermal energy' means electricity produced from any of the following: ``(A) Free flowing ocean water derived from tidal currents, ocean currents, waves, or estuary currents.
Free flowing water in rivers, lakes, man made channels, or streams.''
Facilities.--Section 45(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) Wave, current, tidal, and ocean thermal facility.-- In the case of a facility using resources described in clause (i), (ii), or (iii) of subsection (c)(10)(A) to produce electricity, the term `qualified facility' means any facility owned by the taxpayer which is originally placed in service after the date of the enactment of this paragraph and before January 1, 2009, but such term shall not include a facility which includes impoundment structures or a small irrigation power facility.''
Expansion of Small Irrigation Power.--Paragraph (5) of section 45(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(5) Small irrigation power.--The term `small irrigation power' means power-- ``(A) generated without any dam or impoundment of water through-- ``(i) through an irrigation system canal or ditch, or ``(ii) utilizing lake taps, perched alpine lakes, or run-of-river with diversion, and ``(B) the nameplate capacity rating of which is less than 15 megawatts.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to electricity produced in taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXTENSION AND MODIFICATION OF NEW QUALIFIED HYBRID MOTOR VEHICLE CREDIT FOR PLUG-IN HYBRIDS.
Extension.-- (1) New qualified hybrid passenger automobiles and light trucks.--Paragraph (2) of section 30B(j) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``(December 31, 2012, in the case of a new qualified hybrid motor vehicle which is recharged by means of an off board device)'' after ``December 31, 2010''.
Other qualified hybrid motor vehicles.--Paragraph (3) of section 30B(j) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``(December 31, 2012, in the case of a new qualified hybrid motor vehicle which is recharged by means of an off board device)'' after ``December 31, 2009''.
Elimination of Limitation on Number of New Qualified Hybrid and Advanced Lean Burn Technology Vehicles Eligible for Full Alternative Motor Vehicle Tax Credit.-- (1) In general.--Section 30B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended-- (A) by striking subsection (f); and (B) by redesignating subsections (g) through (j), as amended by subsection (a), as subsections (f) through (i), respectively.
Conforming amendments.-- (A) Paragraphs (4) and (6) of section 30B(g) of such Code, as redesignated by paragraph (1)(B), are each amended by striking ``(determined without regard to subsection (g))'' and inserting ``(determined without regard to subsection (f))''.
Section 38(b)(25) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 30B(g)(1)'' and inserting ``section 30B(f)(1)''.
Section 55(c)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 30B(g)(2)'' and inserting ``section 30B(f)(2)''.
Section 1016(a)(36) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 30B(h)(4)'' and inserting ``section 30B(g)(4)''.
Section 6501(m) of such Code is amended by striking ``section 30B(h)(9)'' and inserting ``section 30B(g)(9)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2005, in taxable years ending after such date.