This Act may be cited as the ``Food Stamp Fraud Act of 1997''.
ELECTRONIC BENEFIT TRANSFER SYSTEMS.
Issuance and Use of Coupons.--Section 7(g) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2016(g)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(1)''; (2) by striking paragraph (2); and (3) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively.
Electronic Benefit Transfer Systems.--Section 7(i) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2016(i)) is amended-- (1) by amending paragraph (1) to read as follows: ``(1)(A)(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), each State agency shall implement before October 1, 2000, an electronic benefit transfer system in which all household benefits determined under section 8(a) are issued from and stored in a central databank.
Upon the request of a State agency, the Secretary may grant a waiver extending the deadline for compliance with clause (i) to a date not later than October 1, 2002, for a State agency that faces unusual barriers to implementing an electronic benefit transfer system.
Subject to paragraph (2), a State agency may procure and implement an electronic benefit transfer system under the terms, conditions, and design that the State agency considers appropriate.
An electronic benefit transfer system should take into account generally accepted standard operating rules based on-- ``(i) commercial electronic funds transfer technology; ``(ii) the need to permit interstate operation and law enforcement monitoring; and ``(iii) the need to permit monitoring and investigations by authorized law enforcement agencies.
''; and (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking subparagraph (A); and (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (B) through (I) as subparagraphs (A) through (H), respectively.
Redemption of Coupons.--The first sentence of section 10 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2019) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``unless such centers, organizations, institutions, shelters, group living arrangements, and establishment are equipped with point-of-sale devices for the purpose of participating in electronic benefit transfer delivery systems''.
USE OF PRODUCT BAR CODES AND OPTICAL SCANNER DEVICES.
Section 9 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following: ``(h) Approved retail food stores which use optical scanner device to read product bar codes in connection with sales, shall use such devices, in connection with electronic benefit transfer systems, to prevent the purchase of unauthorized food and nonfood items with benefits determined under section 8(a) and to maintain a record of purchases made with such benefits.
Such purchase records shall be made available for review under subsection (c).
Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a retail food store may not-- ``(1) be approved to accept or to redeem coupons; or ``(2) accept or redeem coupons accepted; after October 1, 2002, unless such store uses an optical scanner device to read product bar codes in connection with sales of food.''.
EXPANDED CIVIL AND CRIMINAL FORFEITURE FOR VIOLATIONS OF THE FOOD STAMP ACT.
Forfeiture of Certain Property.--Section 15(h) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2024(h)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Procedures.--(A) All food stamp benefits and any property subject to forfeiture under this subsection, any seizure and disposition thereof, and any proceeding relating thereto, shall be governed by section 413 of the Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control Act of 1970 (21 United States Code 853), excluding subsection (d) of such section, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection.
Restraining orders available under subsection (e) of such Act shall apply to assets otherwise subject to forfeiture under subsection (p) of such Act, as incorporated in this section.
The provisions of chapter 46 of title 18, United States Code, relating to civil forfeitures shall extend to a seizure or forfeiture under this subsection, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this subsection, except that such duties as are imposed upon the Secretary of the Treasury under such chapter 46 may also be performed with respect to seizures and forfeitures under this section by such officers, agents, or other persons as designated for that purpose by the Secretary.
Civil forfeitures imposed under this subsection shall be in addition to any criminal sanctions imposed against the owner of the forfeited property.
The proceeds from any sale of forfeited property and any monies forfeited under this subsection shall be used-- ``(i) first, to reimburse the Department of Justice for the costs incurred by the Department to initiate and complete the forfeiture proceeding; ``(ii) second, to reimburse the Department of Agriculture Office of Inspector General for any costs the Office incurred in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture; ``(iii) third, to reimburse any Federal or State law enforcement agency for any costs incurred in the law enforcement effort resulting in the forfeiture; and ``(iv) fourth, by the Secretary to carry out the approval, reauthorization, and compliance investigations of retail stores and wholesale food concerns under section 9.''.
PROVIDE AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH AUTHORIZATION PERIODS.
Section 9(a) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2018(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Such time period shall be determined based upon total food stamp redemptions expressed as a percentage of food stamp sales to total food sales.
(i) Except as provided in clause (ii), retailers with a ratio of food stamp sales to total food sales of 30 percent or more may be authorized for not more than one year, and retailers with a ratio of food stamp sales to total food sales of 5 percent or less may be authorized for up to 5 years.
Retailers with a ratio of food stamp sales to total food sales of more than 10 percent that do not use an optical scanner device to read product bar codes in connection with sales may be authorized for not more than one year.''.
Section 16(d) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2025(d)) is amended to read as follows: ``(d) States which fail to meet the national performance measure for the payment error rate set forth under subsection (c)(6) may be required by the Secretary to implement, in whole or in part, one or more of the following additional measures in furtherance of waste and fraud reduction: ``(1) Computerize and coordinate food stamp, aid to families with dependent children, and supplemental security income caseloads so that reported changes in any one program automatically adjusts allotments for the remaining program.
Require any employer, public or private, to report new hires and wage rates to the State department of revenue, or equivalent taxing authority.
Such reported information shall be made available to and used by the State agency to adjust accordingly any benefit allotments or payments received by the individual or households of which the individual is a member.
Require all financial institutions to report asset information to State agency caseworkers whenever such requests are made.
The financial institutions may be required to provide the requested information without compensation or at cost.''.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR THE PURCHASE OF OPTICAL SCANNERS.
Section 18 of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2017) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(g)(1) There is authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 1998, 1999, and 2000, in the aggregate, $50,000,000 to the Secretary to make grants, in the discretion of the Secretary, to separately owned retail food stores located in low-income areas (as determined by the Secretary) and approved under section 9, to enable such stores to purchase optical scanner devices to read product bar codes in connection with sales of food.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `low-income area' means an urban census tract, a nonmetropolitan county, a Native American Indian reservation, an Alaska Native village, or a migrant or seasonal farmworker community, in which not less than 30 percent of households have annual income that does not exceed 30 percent of the median income of the area involved.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE; APPLICATION OF AMENDMENTS.
Effective Date.--Except as provided in subsection (b), this Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect on January 1, 1998.
Application of Amendments--The amendments made by this Act shall not apply with respect to certification periods beginning before the effective date of this Act.