This Act may be cited as the ``National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Act of 2003''.
In this Act: (1) Administration.--The term ``Administration'' means the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Function.--The term ``function'' includes any duty, obligation, power, authority, responsibility, right, privilege, activity, or program.
Office.--The term ``office'' includes any office, institute, council, unit, organizational entity, or component thereof.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Commerce.
Under secretary.--The term ``Under Secretary'' means the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere appointed under section 102.
In General.--There shall be in the Department of Commerce an agency known as the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Primary Missions.--The primary missions of the Administration are the following: (1) The provision and certification of hydrographic and geodetic products and data.
The conservation and management of the Nation's coastal and marine resources.
The exploration of the oceans and the Great Lakes.
To further human understanding of-- (A) the oceans and the Great Lakes; (B) the earth's atmosphere; and (C) the functional relationship of the oceans and the atmosphere.
Forecasting the Nation's weather and climate.
Components.--The Secretary shall maintain within the Administration the following components: (1) The National Coast and Ocean Service.
The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Research Service.
The National Marine Fisheries Service.
The National Weather Service.
The National Environmental Satellite and Data Information Service.
The Office of Marine and Aviation Operations.
Such other components as the Secretary considers necessary.
Functions.--The Administration shall perform such functions as were vested in the Administration or any officer, employee, or office of the Administration immediately before the enactment of this Act, except as may be provided otherwise by law or by a redelegation of authority after that date by the President, the Secretary of Commerce, or any other officer of the United States who delegated such function to the Administration before that date or who is otherwise authorized to make such a redelegation.
UNDER SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE.
In General.--There shall be at the head of the Administration the Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.
The Under Secretary shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Under Secretary shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for level III of the Executive Schedule.
Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary, the Under Secretary shall perform such functions and exercise such powers with respect to the Administration as the Secretary may prescribe, including the following: (1) Serve as the Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.
Policy development and guidance.
Budget formulation, guidance, and execution, and other financial matters.
Resource requirements determination and allocation.
Program management and direction.
Environment, safety, and health operations.
Administration of contracts, real property, and facilities.
Personnel, including the selection, appointment, distribution, supervision, compensation, and separation of personnel.
Procurement of services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
External affairs, including legal, legislative, and public affairs, and serving as liaison with other elements of the Department of Commerce and with other Federal agencies, State, tribal, and local governments, and the public.
ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR OCEANS AND ATMOSPHERE.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration an Assistant Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.
The Assistant Secretary shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The Assistant Secretary shall be paid at the rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule.
Functions.--The Assistant Secretary-- (1) shall perform such functions and exercise such powers as the Secretary or Under Secretary may prescribe; and (2) shall act as Under Secretary during the absence or disability of the Under Secretary or in the event of a vacancy in the office of Under Secretary.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration a Deputy Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere.
The Deputy Under Secretary shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The position of Deputy Under Secretary shall be a Senior Executive Service general position as defined in section 3132(a)(9) of title 5, United States Code, (for purposes of subchapter II of chapter 31 of title 5, United States Code).
Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary and the Under Secretary, the Deputy Under Secretary-- (1) shall serve as an advisor to the Under Secretary and to the Assistant Secretary on all program and policy issues; (2) shall be responsible for ensuring the timely and effective implementation of the Administration policies and objectives; and (3) in the absence or disability of the Under Secretary or Assistant Secretary, or in the event of a vacancy in either such position, shall act in that position.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration a General Counsel.
The General Counsel shall be appointed by the Secretary.
The position of General Counsel shall be a Senior Executive Service general position as defined in section 3132(a)(9) of title 5, United States Code, (for purposes of subchapter II of chapter 31 of title 5, United States Code).
Functions.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary and the Under Secretary, the General Counsel-- (1) shall serve as the chief legal officer of the Administration for all legal matters that arise in connection with the conduct of the functions of the Administration; and (2) shall perform such other functions and exercise such powers as the Secretary or Under Secretary may prescribe.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration the following: (1) An Assistant Administrator for Coastal and Ocean Services.
An Assistant Administrator for Oceanic and Atmospheric Research.
An Assistant Administrator for Fisheries.
An Assistant Administrator for Weather.
An Assistant Administrator for Environmental Satellite Data and Information.
An Assistant Administrator for Program Planning and Integration.
A Director of Marine and Aviation Operations and the Commissioned Officer Corps.
Appointment.--Each Assistant Administrator and the Director referred to in subsection (a) shall be appointed by the Secretary.
Each Assistant Administrator position shall be a Senior Executive Service general position as defined in section 3132(a)(9) of title 5, United States Code (for purposes of subchapter II of chapter 31 of title 5, United States Code).
Qualifications.--Each Assistant Administrator and the Director referred to in subsection (a) shall be an individual who is qualified by reason of background and experience to direct the implementation and administration of the functions for which they are responsible.
Functions.--Each Assistant Administrator and the Director referred to in subsection (a), under the authority, direction, and control of the Under Secretary, shall perform such functions and exercise such powers as the Under Secretary may prescribe.
Any individual serving on the date of the enactment of this Act in a position provided for in this Act may continue to serve in that position until a successor is appointed under this Act.
In General.--There shall be in the Administration a Science Advisory Board, which shall report to the Under Secretary.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Science Advisory Board is to advise the Under Secretary on long-range and short-range strategies for research, education, and application of science to resource management and environmental assessment and prediction.
Members.-- (1) In general.--The Science Advisory Board shall consist of members appointed by the Under Secretary to assure a balanced representation among preeminent scientists, engineers, educators, industry, and science policy experts reflecting the full breadth of the Administration's areas of responsibility.
Criteria for selection.--The Under Secretary shall develop and apply standard criteria for the selection of members of the Science Advisory Board.
- (3) Terms.--(A) Members of the Science Advisory Board shall be appointed for a 3-year term, may be reappointed once, and shall serve at the discretion of the Under Secretary.
An individual serving a term as a member of the Science Advisory Board on the date of enactment of this section may complete that term, and may be reappointed once for another term of 3 years.
Compensation and expenses.--A member of the Science Advisory Board shall not be compensated for service on such board, but upon request by the member may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code.
Ethical standards.--Members of the Science Advisory Board shall be subject to the ethical standards applicable to special Government employees.
Chairperson.--The Under Secretary shall designate one of the members of the Science Advisory Board as the Chairperson of such board.
Meetings.--The Science Advisory Board shall meet at least twice each year, and at other times at the call of the Under Secretary or the Chairperson.
Administrative Support.--The Under Secretary shall provide administrative support to the Science Advisory Board.
Grants, Contracts, and Cooperative Agreements.--In carrying out the programs and activities authorized for the Administration, the Secretary-- (1) may enter into grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements with Federal agencies, States, local governments, regional agencies, interstate agencies, or other persons; and (2) through the Administration, may apply for, accept, and use grants or funds from such entities.
Resource Sharing Agreements.--The Secretary, in carrying out the functions of the Administration, and under terms and conditions established by the Secretary-- (1) may enter into resource sharing agreements with States, local governments, or Federal agencies to accept or provide for funds and the use of personnel, services, equipment, or facilities on a reimbursable, nonreimbursable, or shared basis; and (2) may enter into resource sharing agreements with other Federal agencies to accept, or provide, personnel, services, equipment, facilities, or funds, or participate in interagency financing with other Federal agencies, to the extent necessary to fulfill the objectives of programs or activities of the Administration.
Joint and Cooperative Institutes.--The Secretary may establish, by cooperative agreement, joint or cooperative institutes with qualified colleges, universities, and nonprofit research organizations for the purpose of collaborating on mutually agreed-upon, long-term research programs in the areas of oceanography, coastal ocean observing technology, climate change, atmosphere, meteorology, marine, coastal and estuarine environmental technology, fisheries, hydrography, and marine spill response.
The Secretary shall design such research programs to support the authorized functions of the Administration.
The Secretary may accept or provide facilities, personnel, equipment, other property, knowledge, and other scientific research resources and funds on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis, as determined by the Secretary, for such institutes.
Corporate Services.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to provide corporate services (including management, administrative support, and policy development) that support its program activities, $95,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Marine Operations and Maintenance.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out marine services activities (including ship operations, maintenance, support and planning) under the Act of 1947 and any other law involving those activities, $90,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Facilities.--In addition to amounts authorized under section 3 of Public Law 104-91, there are authorized to the Secretary of Commerce, to enable the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration to carry out activities related to maintenance, repair, safety, environmental compliance, and project planning and execution of facilities, $20,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
NOAA FLEET REPLACEMENT AND MODERNIZATION.
In General.--Section 603 of the NOAA Fleet Modernization Act (33 United States Code 891a) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
FLEET REPLACEMENT AND MODERNIZATION PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary may implement a program to replace and modernize the NOAA fleet in accordance with a plan submitted in accordance with section 604.
NOAA Vessel Construction.-- ``(1) Prohibition on foreign construction.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), no NOAA vessel, and no major component of the hull or superstructure of a NOAA vessel, may be constructed in a foreign shipyard.
Exceptions.--The President may authorize an exception to the prohibition in paragraph (1) if the President determines that it is in the national security interest of the United States to do so.
The President shall transmit notice to the Congress of any such determination.
No contract may be made pursuant to such an exception until the end of the 30-day period beginning on the date the notice of such determination is received by the Congress.''.
Fleet Modernization Plan.--Section 604 of the NOAA Fleet Modernization Act (33 United States Code 891b) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.--No later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Act of 2003, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Resources and the Committee on Science of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a modernization plan for the NOAA fleet covering fiscal years 2004 through 2008.
Plan Elements.--The Plan required under subsection (a) shall include the following: ``(1) The number of vessels proposed to be modernized or replaced, the schedule for their modernization or replacement, and anticipated funding requirements for such modernization and replacement.
The number of vessels proposed to be constructed, leased, or chartered.
The number of vessels, or days at sea, that can be obtained by using the vessels of the UNOLS.
The number of vessels that will be made available to NOAA by the Secretary of the Navy, or any other Federal official, and the terms and conditions for their availability.
The proposed acquisition of modern scientific instrumentation for the NOAA fleet, including-- ``(A) acoustic systems; ``(B) data transmission positioning and communications systems; ``(C) physical, chemical, and meteorological oceanographic systems; and ``(D) data acquisition and processing systems.''.
Use of UNOLS Vessels.--Section 605 of the NOAA Fleet Modernization Act (33 United States Code 891c) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``In carrying out the primary missions of NOAA under section 3(b) of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration Act of 2003, the Secretary-- ``(1) shall use excess capacity of UNOLS vessels where appropriate; and ``(2) may enter into memoranda of agreement with the operators of those vessels to carry out the requirement under paragraph (1).''.
Repeals.--Sections 607, 608, 609 and 610 of the NOAA Fleet Modernization Act (33 United States Code 891e-891h) are repealed.
CONFORMING AMENDMENTS AND REPEALS.
Pay Rate of Deputy Under Secretary.--Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Deputy Under Secretary of Commerce for Oceans and Atmosphere.''.
Reorganization Plan Number 4 of 1970.-- (1) Repeal.--Reorganization Plan Number 4 of 1970 (5 App.
United States Code) is repealed.
Relationship to administration functions.--Subparagraph (A) shall not affect the functions of the Administration under section 3(d) of this Act.
Notice of reprogramming.--Section 403 of Public Law 102-567 (106 United States Statutes at Large 4291) is amended by striking ``$250,000 or 5'' and inserting ``$500,000 or 10''.