This Act may be cited as the ``Women Veterans' Health Act of 1996''.
Women's Health Services.--Section 1701 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (6)(A)(i), by inserting ``women's health services,'' after ``preventive health services,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(10) The term `women's health services' means health care services provided to women.
Such term includes counseling and services relating to the following: ``(A) Papanicolaou tests (pap smear).
Breast examinations and mammography.
The management and prevention of sexually transmitted diseases.
Menopause, osteoporosis, and other conditions relating to aging.
Physical and psychological conditions arising out of acts of sexual violence.
Physical and psychological conditions that result from homelessness.''.
Contracts for Women's Health Services.--Section 1703(a) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(9) Women's health services for veterans on an ambulatory or outpatient basis.''.
Repeal of Superseded Authority.--Section 106 of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-585; 38 United States Code 1710 note) is amended-- (1) by striking out subsection (a); and (2) by striking out ``(b) Responsibilities of Directors of Facilities.--'' before ``The Secretary''.
COUNSELING AND TREATMENT FOR SEXUAL TRAUMA.
Counseling.--Subsection (a)(1) of section 1720D of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``During the period through December 31, 1998, the Secretary'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``The Secretary''.
Treatment.--Subsection (a)(2) of such section is amended by striking out ``During the period referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``The Secretary''.
Contract Counseling.--Subsection (a)(3) of such section is amended by striking out ``, during the period through December 31, 1998,''.
REPORT ON WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE AND RESEARCH.
In General.--Not later than January 1, 1999, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the provision of health care services and the conduct of research carried out by, or under the jurisdiction of, the Secretary relating to women veterans.
The report shall be prepared through the Center for Women Veterans established under section 318 of title 38, United States Code, which shall prepare the report in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans established under section 542 of that title.
Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the following information: (1) The number of women veterans who have received women's health services (as such term is defined in section 1701(10) of title 38, United States Code) in facilities under the jurisdiction of the Secretary (or the Secretary of Defense), shown by reference to the Department facility which provided (or, in the case of Department of Defense facilities, arranged for) those services.
A description of-- (A) the services provided at each such facility; (B) the type and amount of services provided by such personnel, including information on the numbers of inpatient stays and the number of outpatient visits through which such services were provided; and (C) the extent to which each such facility relies on contractual arrangements under section 1703 or 8153 of title 38, United States Code, to furnish care to women veterans in facilities which are not under the jurisdiction of the Secretary where the provision of such care is not furnished in a medical emergency.
The steps taken by each such facility to expand the provision of services at such facility (or under arrangements with the Department of Defense facility) to women veterans.
A description of the personnel of the Department who provided such services to women veterans, including the number of employees (including both the number of individual employees and the number of full-time employee equivalents) and the professional qualifications or specialty training of such employees and the Department facilities to which such personnel were assigned.
A description of any actions taken by the Secretary to ensure the retention of the personnel described in paragraph (4) and any actions undertaken to recruit such additional personnel or personnel to replace such personnel.
An assessment by the Secretary of any difficulties experienced by the Secretary in the furnishing of such services and the actions taken by the Secretary to resolve such difficulties.
A description (as of October 1 of the year preceding the year in which the report is submitted) of the status of any research relating to women veterans being carried out by or under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.
A description of the actions taken by the Secretary to foster and encourage the expansion of such research.
EXPANSION OF RESEARCH RELATING TO WOMEN VETERANS.
Inclusion of Women and Minorities in Health Research.--Section 7303(c) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking out ``that, whenever possible and appropriate--'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``that--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) The requirement in paragraph (1) regarding women and members of minority groups who are veterans may be waived by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs with respect to a project of clinical research if the Secretary determines that the inclusion, as subjects in the project, of women and members of minority groups, respectively-- ``(A) is inappropriate with respect to the health of the subjects; ``(B) is inappropriate with respect to the purpose of the research; or ``(C) is inappropriate under such other circumstances as the Secretary may designate.''.
Health Research Relating to Women.--Section 7303(d) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(3) The Secretary shall foster and encourage research under this section on the following matters as they relate to women: ``(A) Breast cancer.
Gynecological and reproductive health, including gynecological cancer, infertility, sexually-transmitted diseases, and pregnancy.
Human Immunodeficiency Virus and Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome.
Mental health, including post-traumatic stress disorder, depression, combat related stress, and trauma.
Diseases related to aging, including menopause, osteoporosis, and Alzheimer's disease.
Sexual violence and related trauma.
Exposure to toxic chemicals and other environmental hazards.
The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure that personnel of the Department of Veterans Affairs engaged in the research referred to in paragraph (1) include the following: ``(A) Personnel of the geriatric research, education, and clinical centers designated pursuant to section 7314 of this title.
Personnel of the National Center for Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder established pursuant to section 110(c) of the Veterans Health Care Act of 1984 (Public Law 98-528; 98 United States Statutes at Large 2692).
The Secretary shall ensure that personnel of the Department engaged in research relating to the health of women veterans are advised and informed of such research engaged in by other personnel of the Department.''.
Study.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, subject to subsection (f), shall conduct a study to determine the needs of veterans who are women for health-care services.
The study shall be carried out through the Center for Women Veterans.
Consultation.--Before carrying out the study, the Secretary shall request the advice of the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans on the conduct of the study.
Persons To Be Included in Sample of Veterans Studied.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), the study shall be based on-- (A) an appropriate sample of veterans who are women; and (B) an examination of the medical and demographic histories of the women comprising such sample.
The sample referred to in paragraph (1) shall constitute a representative sampling (as determined by the Secretary) of the ages, the ethnic, social and economic backgrounds, the enlisted and officer grades, and the branches of service of all veterans who are women.
The Secretary shall ensure that homeless Women Veterans are included in the sample.
In carrying out the examination referred to in paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary shall determine the number of women of the sample who have used medical facilities of the Department, nursing home facilities of or under the jurisdiction of the Department, and outpatient care facilities of or under the jurisdiction of the Department.
Reports.--The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives reports relating to the study as follows: (1) Not later than nine months after the date of the enactment of this Act, an interim report describing (A) the information and advice obtained by the Secretary from the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans, and (B) the status of the study.
Not later than December 31, 1999, a final report describing the results of the study.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the General Operating Expenses account of the Department of Veterans Affairs $2,000,000 to carry out the purposes of this section.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to this authorization of appropriations shall be available for obligation without fiscal year limitation.
Limitation.--No funds may be used to conduct the study described in subsection (a) unless expressly provided for in an appropriation Act.
OUTREACH SERVICES FOR HOMELESS WOMEN VETERANS.
Section 7722(e) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``In carrying out this subsection, the Secretary shall take such steps as may be necessary to ensure that homeless women veterans are included in such outreach programs and outreach services.''.
SAFE AND EFFECTIVE TREATMENT FOR WOMEN PSYCHIATRIC PATIENTS.
The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall ensure that women veterans who receive psychiatric treatment from the Secretary, particularly in the case of women who are sexually traumatized, receive such treatment (on both an inpatient and outpatient basis) in a safe and effective manner that recognizes the privacy needs of such women.
Applicability to Department of Veterans Affairs of Mammography Quality Standards Act of 1992.--Subsections (a) through (k) of section 354 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 263b) shall apply with respect to facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs without regard to the last sentence of subparagraph (A) of subsection (a)(3) of such section.
Extension of Deadlines.--Any deadline for the completion of any action prescribed under any provision referred to in subsection (a) shall be applied with respect to facilities of the Department of Veterans Affairs by extending such deadline so as to be two years after the date of the enactment of this Act or two years after the date which would otherwise be applicable under such provision, whichever is later.
Interagency Cooperation.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall take appropriate steps to cooperate with the Secretary of Health and Human Services in the implementation of this section.
CENTER FOR WOMEN VETERANS.
Section 318(e) of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(e)''; (2) by adding after the period the following: ``Such resources shall include (subject to the availability of appropriations) adequate clerical support (as determined by the Director) to enable the Director to carry out the functions of the Director under this section.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) There is in the Center an Associate Director, who shall be appointed from among individuals with appropriate education, experience, and training to assist the Director with the investigative, research, and reporting requirements under this section.