CHANGE IN COMPOSITION AND OPERATION OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS OF THE TENNESSEE VALLEY AUTHORITY.
In General.--The Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933 is amended by striking section 2 (16 United States Code 831a) and inserting the following: ``SEC.
Membership.-- ``(1) Appointment.--The Board of Directors of the Corporation (referred to in this Act as the `Board') shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 7 members, of whom-- ``(A) 1 member shall be a resident of Alabama; ``(B) 1 member shall be a resident of Georgia; ``(C) 1 member shall be a resident of Kentucky; ``(D) 1 member shall be a resident of Mississippi; ``(E) 1 member shall be a resident of North Carolina; ``(F) 1 member shall be a resident of Tennessee; and ``(G) 1 member shall be a resident of Virginia.
Qualifications.--To be eligible to be appointed as a member of the Board, an individual-- ``(A) shall be a citizen of the United States; ``(B) shall have no substantial direct financial interest in-- ``(i) any public-utility corporation engaged in the business of distributing and selling power to the public; or ``(ii) any business that may be adversely affected by the success of the Corporation as a producer of electric power; and ``(C) shall profess a belief in the feasibility and wisdom of this Act.
Chairperson.-- ``(A) In general.--The Board shall select a chairperson from among the members of the Board.
Duties.--The chairperson shall be the chief executive officer of the Corporation.
Terms.--Members of the Board shall be appointed for terms of 4 years, except that, of the members first appointed-- ``(A) 3 members shall be appointed for a term of 4 years; ``(B) 2 members shall be appointed for a term of 3 years; and ``(C) 2 members shall be appointed for a term of 2 years.
Vacancies.--A member appointed to fill a vacancy in the Board occurring before the expiration of the term for which the predecessor of the member was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder of that term.
Quorum.-- ``(1) In general.--Four members of the Board shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Minimum number of members.--A vacancy in the Board shall not impair the power of the Board to act, so long as there are 4 members in office.
Compensation of Members.-- ``(1) Non-federal employees.--Subject to paragraph (4), a member of the Board who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Board.
Federal employees.--A member of the Board who is an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall serve without compensation in addition to the compensation received for the services of the member as an officer or employee of the Federal Government.
Travel Expenses.--A member of the Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for an employee of an agency under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in the performance of the duties of the Board.
Compensation of chairperson.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the Board may fix the compensation of the chairperson without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates.
Maximum rate of pay.--The rate of pay for the chairperson may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.''.
Current Board Members.--A member of the Board of Directors of the Tennessee Valley Authority who was appointed before the date of enactment of this Act-- (1) may continue to serve as a member until the date on which the term of that member expires; and (2) may be reappointed if that member meets the residency requirements of section 2(a)(2) of the Tennessee Valley Authority Act of 1933 (as amended by subsection (a)).