This Act may be cited as the ``Campus Care and Counseling Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) In a recent report, a startling 85 percent of college counseling centers revealed an increase in the number of students they see with psychological problems.
Furthermore, the American College Health Association found that 61 percent of college students reported feeling hopeless, 45 percent said they felt so depressed they could barely function, and 9 percent felt suicidal.
There is clear evidence of an increased incidence of depression among college students.
According to a survey described in the Chronicle of Higher Education (February 1, 2002), depression among freshmen has nearly doubled (from 8.2 percent to 16.3 percent).
Without treatment, researchers recently noted that ``depressed adolescents are at risk for school failure, social isolation, promiscuity, self medication with drugs and alcohol, and suicide--now the third leading cause of death among 10-24 year olds.''
Researchers who conducted the study ``Changes in Counseling Center Client Problems Across 13 Years'' (1989-2001) at Kansas State University stated that ``students are experiencing more stress, more anxiety, more depression than they were a decade ago.''
(The Chronicle of Higher Education, February 14, 2003).
According to a 1999 UCLA study, more than 30 percent of college freshmen reported feeling overwhelmed a great deal of the time during the beginning of college and may benefit from psychological services.
According to the 2001 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, the highest prevalence of both binge and heavy drinking was found in young adults ages 18 to 25 (especially on college campuses).
In addition, the results of a Harvard School of Public Health College Alcohol Study Survey printed in the Journal of American Health show that 44.4 percent of college students describe themselves as binge drinkers.
The National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism in 2002 reported that 1400 college students die each year from alcohol-related injuries.
In addition, it is stated that college students who drink are more likely to assault, sexually abuse, and vandalize others.
Furthermore, it is reported that 25 percent of college students attribute academic problems to excessive drinking.
According to the 2001 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse, 20 percent of full-time undergraduate college students use illicit drugs.
The 2001 National Household Survey on Drug Abuse also reported that 18.4 percent of adults aged 18 to 24 are dependent on or abusing illicit drugs or alcohol.
In addition, the study found that ``serious mental illness is highly correlated with substance dependence or abuse.
Among adults with serious mental illness in 2001, 20.3 percent were dependent on or abused alcohol or illicit drugs, while the rate among adults without serious mental illness was only 6.3 percent.''
In 2001, there were 249,000 victims of rape in the United States, according to statistics from the Rape, Abuse and Incest National Network.
36 percent of victims of rape and sexual assault are between the ages of 18 and 30.
The National Victim's Center in 2001 reported that 13.3 percent of college women say they have been forced to have sex in a dating situation.
According to the National Eating Disorders Association, 5-10 million women and 1 million men struggle with eating disorders including anorexia, bulimia, binge eating disorder, or borderline conditions after puberty.
MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES ON CAMPUS.
Part B of title I of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after section 120 (20 United States Code 1011i) the following new section: ``SEC.
MENTAL AND BEHAVIORAL HEALTH SERVICES ON CAMPUS.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to increase access to, and enhance the range of, mental and behavioral health services for students at centers on campus that provide such services so as to ensure that college students have the support necessary to successfully complete their studies.
Program Authorized.--From the funds appropriated under subsection (g), the Secretary shall award competitive grants to centers on campus that provide mental and behavioral health services to students to provide such services and develop best practices for the delivery of such services.
Such grants shall, subject to the availability of such appropriations, be for a period of 3 years.
Eligible Entities.--Any mental health service center located on the campus of an institution of higher education that provides mental and behavioral health services to students is eligible to apply for a grant under this section.
Eligible entities may include entities such as college counseling centers; college and university psychological service centers; mental health units; and psychology training clinics.
Applications.--Each eligible entity seeking to obtain a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary.
Each such application shall include-- ``(1) an outline of program objectives and anticipated program outcomes; ``(2) outreach strategies (including ways in which the applicant proposes to reach students, promote access to services, and address the range of needs of university students); ``(3) a proposed plan for reaching those students most in need of the center's services; ``(4) a program evaluation plan to assess program outcomes; and ``(5) such additional information as is required by the Secretary.
Use of Funds.--Funds provided by a grant under this section may be used for one or more of the following activities: ``(1) Intervention program for developmental, transitional, and adjustment issues that affect students as they matriculate and graduate from college.
Addressing issues related to binge and heavy alcohol consumption and the associated behavioral health risks.
Providing services for students with mental and behavioral health problems that impede academic performance (such as test anxiety).
Self-management skills (for behavioral and emotional self regulation).
Management of chronic mental illness.
Assessment and intervention for depressive disorders, and suicidal and self-harm behaviors.
Assessment and treatment of anxiety disorders.
Prevention programs for depression, anxiety, suicide, and domestic violence.
Assessment, treatment, and education for eating disorders.
Treatment of sexual trauma.
Psychological education for parents of college students.
Hire appropriately trained staff.
Strengthen and expand psychology doctoral internship and postdoctoral residency programs and opportunities.
Supporting the use of evidence-based and emerging best practices and evaluate outcomes in centers on campus that provide mental and behavioral health services so as to provide information and training to other centers around the nation.
Additional Required Elements.--Each eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall-- ``(1) provide annual reports to the Secretary describing the use of funds, the program's objectives, and how the objectives were met (description of program outcomes); ``(2) perform such additional evaluation as the Secretary may require, which may include measures such as increase in range of services provided; increase in the quality of services provided; increase in access to services; college continuation rates; decrease in college dropout rates; increase in college graduation rates; and ``(3) shall coordinate its program under this section with other related efforts on campus by entities concerned with the mental, health, and behavioral health needs of students.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for grants under this section $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.