This Act may be cited as the ``Community Policing Assistance Act of 1993''.
COMMUNITY POLICING; COP ON THE BEAT.
In General.--Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part Q as part R; (2) by redesignating section 1701 as 1801; and (3) by inserting after part P the following new part: ``PART Q-COMMUNITY POLICING; COP ON THE BEAT ``SEC.
Grant Projects.--The Director of the Bureau of Justice assistance may make grants to units of local government and community groups in economically distressed central cities to establish or expand cooperative efforts between police and community for purposes of increasing police presence in the community, including-- ``(1) developing innovative neighborhood-oriented policing programs; ``(2) providing new technologies to reduce the amount of time officers spend processing cases instead of patrolling the community or problem solving in the community; ``(3) purchasing equipment to improve communications between officers and the community and to improve the collection, analysis, and use of information about crime- related community problems; ``(4) developing policies that reorient police emphasis from reacting to crime to preventing crime; ``(5) creating decentralized police substations throughout the community where officers can be permanently assigned to gain community confidence and support so as to encourage interaction and cooperation between the public and law enforcement personnel on the local level; ``(6) providing training in problem solving for community crime problems; ``(7) providing training in cultural differences for law enforcement officials; ``(8) developing community-based crime prevention programs, such as safety programs for senior citizens, community anticrime groups, and other anticrime awareness programs; ``(9) developing crime prevention programs in communities which have experienced a recent increase in gang-related violence; and ``(10) developing projects following the model under subsection (b).
Model Project.--The Director shall develop a written model that informs community members regarding-- ``(1) how to identify the existence of a drug or gang house; ``(2) what civil remedies, such as public nuisance violations and civil suits in small claims court, are available; and ``(3) what mediation techniques are available between community members and individuals who have established a drug or gang house in such community.
In General.--(1) To be eligible to receive a grant under this part, a chief executive of a unit of local government, a duly authorized representative of a combination of local governments within a geographic region, or a community group shall submit an application to the Director in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
In such application, one office or agency (public, private, or nonprofit) shall be designated as responsible for the coordination, implementation, administration, accounting, and evaluation of services described in the application.
General Contents.--Each application under subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) a request for funds available under this part for the purposes described in section 1701; ``(2) a description of the areas and populations to be served by the grant; and ``(3) an assurance that Federal funds received under this part shall be used to supplement, not supplant non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this part.
Comprehensive Plan.--Each application shall include a comprehensive plan which contains-- ``(1) a description of the crime problems within the areas targeted for assistance; ``(2) a description of the projects to be developed; ``(3) a description of the resources available in the community to implement the plan together with a description of the gaps in the plan that cannot be filled with existing resources; ``(4) an explanation of how the requested grant shall be used to fill those gaps; ``(5) a description of the system the applicant shall establish to prevent and reduce crime problems; and ``(6) an evaluation component, including performance standards and quantifiable goals the applicant shall use to determine project progress, and the data the applicant shall collect to measure progress toward meeting project goals.
Particular Applications.-- ``(1) Application of a law enforcement agency seeking a grant to establish a community policing program.--In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c), an application of a law enforcement agency seeking a grant to establish a community policing program shall-- ``(A) propose a project that has as its primary goal the establishment of a community-centered police patrol or beat through-- ``(i) the staffing of a neighborhood police substation where police officers are assigned for periods of at least 18 months; or ``(ii) the establishment of a community police patrol made up of a cadre of police officers assigned to a neighborhood for periods of at least 18 months; and ``(B)(i) demonstrate community support for a neighborhood community police patrol; or ``(ii) set forth in detail a plan for forming a community/police partnership to target crime.
Application of a law enforcement agency seeking a grant to expand a community policing program.--In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c), an application of a law enforcement agency seeking a grant to expand a community police program through development of a community centered project shall-- ``(A) provide evidence that there is community support for the project; and ``(B) describe how the project will promote the goals of the community policing program.
Application of a community group seeking a grant to expand or establish a community policing program.--In addition to meeting the requirements of subsections (a), (b), (c), an application of a community group seeking a grant to expand or establish a community policing program shall-- ``(A) describe how the community group intends to work with the police; and ``(B) demonstrate police support for the project.
ALLOCATION OF FUNDS; LIMITATIONS ON GRANTS.
Allocation.--The Director shall allocate not less than 75 percent of the funds available under this part to units of local government or combinations of such units and not more than 20 percent of the funds available under this part to community groups.
Administrative Cost Limitation.--The Director shall use not more than 5 percent of the funds available under this part for the purposes of administration, technical assistance, and evaluation.
Renewal of Grants.--A grant under this part may be renewed for up to 2 additional years after the first fiscal year during which the recipient receives its initial grant, subject to the availability of funds, if the director determines that the funds made available to the recipient during the previous year were used in a manner required under the approved application and if the recipient can demonstrate significant progress toward achieving the goals of the plan required under section 1702(c).
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant made under this part may not exceed 75 percent of the total cost of the projects described in the application submitted under section 1702 for the fiscal year for which the projects receive assistance under this part.
Selection of Recipients.--The Director shall consider the following factors in awarding grants to units of local government or combinations of such units under this part: ``(1) Need and ability.--Demonstrated need and evidence of the ability to provide the services described in the plan required under section 1702(c).
Community-wide response and support.--Evidence of community support for the project and evidence of the ability to coordinate community-wide response to crime.
Maintain program.--The ability to maintain a program to control and prevent crime after funding under this part is no longer available.
Geographic Distribution.--The Director shall attempt, to the extent practicable, to achieve an equitable geographic distribution of grant awards.
Report to Director.--Recipients who receive funds under this part shall submit to the Director not later than March 1 of each year a report that describes progress achieved in carrying out the plan required under section 1702(c).
Report to Congress.--The Director shall submit to the Congress a report by October 1 of each year that shall contain a detailed statement regarding grant awards, activities of grant recipients, and an evaluation of projects established under this part.
DETERMINATION OF NEED ADJUSTED PER CAPITA INCOME.
The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall determine the need adjusted per capita income for each city that meets the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 1707(3) under the following formula: (1) Determination of need index.-- (A) For purposes of this section, the term ``need index'' means the number equal to the quotient of-- (i) the term ``N'', as determined under subparagraph (B); divided by (ii) the term ``P'', as determined under subparagraph (C).
For purposes of subparagraph (A)(i), the term ``N'' means the percentage constituted by the ratio of-- (i) the amount of funds allotted to the city in the fiscal year in which the calendar year begins under section 106(a)(3) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5306(a)(3)); to (ii) the sum of the amount of finds received by all eligible cities in such fiscal year under section 106(a)(3) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5306(a)(3)).
For purposes of subparagraph (A)(ii), the term ``P'' means the percentage constituted by the ratio of-- (i) the amount equal to the total population of the city, as determined by the Secretary using the most recent data that is available from the Secretary of Commerce pursuant to the decennial census and pursuant to reasonable estimates by such Secretary of changes occurring in the data in the ensuing period, to (ii) the amount equal to the total population of all eligible cities in the current fiscal year.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term ``eligible cities'' means the cities which meet the requirements of paragraph (1) and (2) of subsection (b).
Determination of need adjusted per capita income factor.-- (A) For purposes of this section (and subject to subparagraph (D)), the term ``need adjusted per capita income factor'' means the amount equal to the percentage determined for the city in accordance with the following formula: I 1-.15 &lt;3-ln (&gt; ------- &lt;3-ln )&gt; Q (B) For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``I'' means the per capita income of the city for the most recent year for which data are available, as determined by the Secretary of Commerce.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``Q'' means the product of-- (i) the need index of the city, as determined under paragraph (1); and (ii) the amount equal to the per capita income of the United States for the most recent year for which data are available, as determined by the Secretary of Commerce.
In the case of a city for which the quotient of the term ``I'' (as determined under subparagraph (B)) divided by the term ``Q'' (as determined under subparagraph (C)) is less than 0.2, the quotient shall be deemed to be equal to 0.2 for that city for purposes of the formula under subparagraph (A).
``For purposes of this part-- ``(1) The term `community group' means a community-based nonprofit organization that has a primary purpose of crime prevention.
The term `Director' means the Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance.
The term `economically distressed central city' means a city that-- ``(A) is a metropolitan city (as defined in section 102(a)(4) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5302(a)(4)); ``(B) is eligible to receive an allocation of funds under section 106(a)(3) of the Housing and Community Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5306(a)(3) for the most recent fiscal year ending prior to the date of enactment of this Act; ``(C) has a population of at least 30,000; and ``(D) has a need adjusted per capita income less than 1.25 on the basis of the most recent data available.
The term `need adjusted per capita income' means the need adjusted per capita income of a city determined under section 1706.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et seq.)
is amended by striking the matter relating to part Q and inserting the following: ``Part Q--Community Policing; Cop on the Beat Grants ``Sec.
Allocation of funds; limitation on grants.
Determination of need adjusted per capita income.
``Part Q--Transition; Effective Date; Repealer ``Sec.
Continuation of rules, authorities, and proceedings.''.
Section 1001(a) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1986 (42 United States Code 3793) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (3) by striking ``and N'' and inserting ``N, O, P, and Q''; and (2) by adding after paragraph (10) the following new paragraph: ``(10)(A) There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out part Q $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1994.