SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Neighbors in Need Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION Sec.
Program extension for States experiencing high unemployment.
TITLE II--FEDERAL UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT SYSTEM REFORMS Sec.
Increase and decrease in earnings credited to State accounts when States meet or fail to meet funding goals.
Interest-free advances to State accounts in Unemployment Trust Fund restricted to States which meet funding goals.
TITLE III--AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986 Sec.
year suspension of tax on unemployment compensation.
State collection of Federal unemployment tax.
Required distribution of State-specific information packets.
TITLE I--TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION SEC.
PROGRAM EXTENSION FOR STATES EXPERIENCING HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT.
In General.--The Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (26 United States Code 3304 note) is amended by inserting after section 208 the following: ``Sec.
Program extension for States experiencing high unemployment ``(a) In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, an agreement under section 202(a) shall be considered to provide that, in the case of a State described in subsection (b), the State agency of such State will make payments of temporary extended unemployment compensation-- ``(1) to individuals described in subsection (d)(1); and ``(2) for any week of unemployment which begins in the individual's period of eligibility (as defined in subsection (e)).
State Eligibility Requirements.--A State described in this subsection is any State that, during the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this Act-- ``(1) is in an extended benefit period (as described in section 203 of the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970); or ``(2) would be in such a period (as so defined) if section 203(d) of such Act were applied-- ``(A) by disregarding subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1) thereof and any reference to such subparagraph; and ``(B) by substituting `3' for `5' each place it appears.
Terms and Conditions.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the preceding provisions of this title shall apply in the case of any individual qualifying for temporary extended unemployment compensation benefits by virtue of this section.
Amount in Account.--In determining the amount to be established in an account under section 203(a) for purposes of this section-- ``(1) section 203(b)(1) shall be applied-- ``(A) in the case of an individual who first satisfies the exhaustion requirements of this title (as set forth in section 202(b)(1)-(3)) during a week beginning after December 31, 2003, and before the first day of the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section, by substituting `33\1/3\' for `50' in section 203(b)(1)(A) and `8' for `13' in section 203(b)(1)(B); and ``(B) in the case of an individual who first satisfies such requirements during a week beginning on or after the first day of the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section and before the close of the 12th week following the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section, by applying subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 203(b)(1) in accordance with their terms; and ``(2) section 203(c) shall be disregarded.
Period of Eligibility.--An individual's period of eligibility consists of any week which begins on or after the first day of the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section and which (except as provided in subsection (f)) begins before the close of the 12th week following the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section.
Transition.--In the case of an individual who is receiving benefits under this section for any week beginning before the close of the 12th week following the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section, temporary extended unemployment compensation shall continue to be payable to such individual for any week thereafter for which the individual meets the eligibility requirements of this title.
No compensation shall be payable by virtue of the preceding sentence for any week beginning after the 25th week following the week in which occurs the date of the enactment of this section.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 208(a) of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 is amended in the matter before paragraph (1) by striking ``subsection (b),'' and inserting ``subsection (b) or section 208a,''.
The table of contents of Public Law 107-147 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 208 the following: ``208a.
Program extension for States experiencing high unemployment.''.
TITLE II--FEDERAL UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFIT SYSTEM REFORMS SEC.
INCREASE AND DECREASE IN EARNINGS CREDITED TO STATE ACCOUNTS WHEN STATES MEET OR FAIL TO MEET FUNDING GOALS.
In General.--Section 904 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1104) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Increase and Decrease in Amount of Earnings Allocated to State Accounts When States Meet or Fail to Meet Funding Goals ``(h)(1) If the average daily balance in a State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund for any calendar quarter exceeds the funding goal of such State, the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e) for such quarter shall be increased by the interest premium on such excess.
If the average daily balance in such a State account for any calendar quarter is less than the funding goal of such State, the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e) for such quarter shall be decreased by the interest penalty.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to any interest premium or interest penalty to the extent that such application would result in an increase or decrease of more than $2,500,000 in the amount creditable to any State account for any calendar quarter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `interest premium' means, for any calendar quarter-- ``(A) with respect to the State with the largest percentage value of excess of the average daily balance in the State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund over the funding goal of such State, one-half of one percent of the amount of such excess, and ``(B) with respect to each other State, the product of-- ``(i) the amount of the excess of the average daily balance in the State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund over the funding goal of such State, and ``(ii) the percentage which bears the same ratio to one-half of one percent as-- ``(I) the percentage value of such excess, bears to ``(II) the percentage value of the excess of the State referred to in subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall make appropriate adjustments in the interest premium for any calendar quarter if the aggregate interest premiums payable for such quarter exceed the aggregate interest penalties for such quarter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `interest penalty' means, for any calendar quarter-- ``(A) with respect to the State with the largest percentage value of excess of the funding goal of such State over the average daily balance in the State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund, one-half of one percent of the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e), and ``(B) with respect to each other State, the product of-- ``(i) the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e), and ``(ii) the percentage which bears the same ratio to one-half of one percent as-- ``(I) the percentage value of the excess of the funding goal of the State over such average daily balance of such State, bears to ``(II) the percentage value of such excess of the State referred to in subparagraph (A).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `funding goal' means, for any State for any calendar quarter, the average of the unemployment insurance benefits paid by such State during each of the 3 years, in the 20-year period ending with the calendar year containing such calendar quarter, during which the State paid the greatest amount of unemployment benefits.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `percentage value' means-- ``(A) with respect to any excess of the average daily balance in a State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund over the funding goal of such State, the percentage which such excess bears to such funding goal, and ``(B) with respect to any excess of such funding goal over such average daily balance, the percentage which such excess bears to such funding goal.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Amounts credited to state accounts.--Subsection (e) of section 904 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1104(e)) is amended in the first sentence by inserting ``(as modified by subsection (h))'' after ``a proportionate part''.
Interest rate on repayment of advances determined without regard to interest premiums or penalties on amounts credited to state accounts.--Subparagraph (A) of section 1202(b)(4) of such Act (42 United States Code 1322(b)(4)) is amended by inserting ``(determined without regard to section 904(h))'' after ``preceding calendar year''.
Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall submit to the Congress a report recommending sources of funding for the crediting of interest premiums under subsection (h) of section 904 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1104), as added by this section, in the event that the imposition of interest penalties under such subsection is insufficient to fund such premiums.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to calendar years beginning after December 31, 2007.
INTEREST-FREE ADVANCES TO STATE ACCOUNTS IN UNEMPLOYMENT TRUST FUND RESTRICTED TO STATES WHICH MEET FUNDING GOALS.
In General.--Subparagraph (C) of section 1202(b)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1322(b)(2)) is amended to read as follows: ``(C) the average daily balance in the account of such State in the Unemployment Trust Fund for each of 4 of the 5 calendar quarters preceding the calendar quarter in which such advances were made exceeds the funding goal of such State (as defined in section 904(h)).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to calendar years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE III--AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986 SECTION 301.
YEAR SUSPENSION OF TAX ON UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
In General.--Section 85 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to unemployment compensation) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Moratorium.--This section shall not apply to taxable years beginning in 2004 or 2005.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2003.
STATE COLLECTION OF FEDERAL UNEMPLOYMENT TAX.
In General.--Chapter 23 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Federal Unemployment Tax Act) is amended by redesignating section 3311 as section 3312 and by inserting after section 3310 the following new section: ``SEC.
STATE COLLECTION OF TAX.
In General.--At the election of any State which is certified as provided in section 3304, each employer who pays contributions, with respect to any wages, into an unemployment fund maintained under the unemployment compensation law of such State shall submit the tax imposed by this chapter with respect to such wages to such State rather than to the Secretary.
Coordination With Depositary Requirements.--Payment under subsection (a) of the tax imposed by this chapter with respect to any wages shall be treated as timely paid for purposes of this title if paid by the employer to the State at the same time as a timely paid payment, with respect to such wages, of contributions into an unemployment fund maintained under the unemployment compensation law of such State.
Exception for Payments Not Timely Paid.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any payment of the tax imposed by this chapter which is not paid by an employer on or before the last date on which such payment would be treated as timely paid under subsection (b).
Federal Tax Transferred to Secretary.--Each State making an election under subsection (a) shall transmit to the Secretary, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Secretary, the amount of the tax imposed by this chapter which is submitted to such State under subsection (a) and a copy of the State tax return of each employer making such a submission.
The Secretary may, after consultation with such organizations or other entities as the Secretary considers appropriate, prescribe regulations requiring that additional information be submitted by such State with respect to the amount of such tax payable by such employer.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 23 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 3311 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
State collection of tax.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to calendar years beginning after December 31, 2004.
REQUIRED DISTRIBUTION OF STATE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION PACKETS.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 3304 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to approval of State laws) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (18), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (19) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(20) the State will distribute to unemployed individuals State-specific information packets explaining unemployment insurance eligibility conditions.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to certifications of States for 2005, except that section 3304(a)(20) of such Code, as added by subsection (a), shall not be a requirement for the State law of any State prior to July 1, 2006, if the legislature of such State does not meet in a regular session which closes during the calendar year 2005.