This Act may be cited as the ``Civil Rights Procedures Protection Act of 1999''.
AMENDMENT TO TITLE VII OF THE CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1964.
Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXCLUSIVITY OF POWERS AND PROCEDURES.
``Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this title) that would otherwise modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim arising under this title, such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO THE AGE DISCRIMINATION IN EMPLOYMENT ACT OF 1967.
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 621 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) by redesignating sections 16 and 17 as sections 17 and 18, respectively; and (2) by inserting after section 15 the following new section 16: ``SEC.
EXCLUSIVITY OF POWERS AND PROCEDURES.
``Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this Act) that would otherwise modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim arising under this Act, such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO THE REHABILITATION ACT OF 1973.
Section 505 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 794a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this title) that would otherwise modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim arising under section 501, such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO THE AMERICANS WITH DISABILITIES ACT OF 1990.
Section 107 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12117) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this Act) that would otherwise modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim based on a violation described in subsection (a), such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO SECTION 1977 OF THE REVISED STATUTES.
Section 1977 of the Revised Statutes (42 United States Code 1981) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this section) that would otherwise modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim concerning making and enforcing a contract of employment under this section, such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO THE EQUAL PAY REQUIREMENT UNDER THE FAIR LABOR STANDARDS ACT OF 1938.
Section 6(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 206(d)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this Act) that would otherwise modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim arising under this subsection, such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO THE FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OF 1993.
Title IV of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 United States Code 2651 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 405 as section 406; and (2) by inserting after section 404 the following new section: ``SEC.
``Notwithstanding any Federal law (other than a Federal law that expressly refers to this Act or a provision of subchapter V of chapter 63 of title 5, United States Code) that would modify any of the powers and procedures expressly applicable to a right or claim arising under this Act or under such subchapter such powers and procedures shall be the exclusive powers and procedures applicable to such right or such claim unless after such right or such claim arises the claimant voluntarily enters into an agreement to enforce such right or resolve such claim through arbitration or another procedure.''.
AMENDMENT TO TITLE 9, UNITED STATES CODE.
Section 14 of title 9, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``This''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) This chapter shall not apply with respect to a claim of unlawful discrimination in employment if such claim arises from discrimination based on race, color, religion, sex, national origin, age, or disability.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to claims arising not later than the date of enactment of this Act.