This Act may be cited as the ``Upper Colorado River and San Juan River Endangered Fish Recovery Act of 1998''.
The purpose of the ``Upper Colorado River and the San Juan River Endangered Fish Recovery Act of 1998'' is to authorize and provide funding for the Secretary, acting through the Bureau of Reclamation and the Bureau of Indian Affairs, to continue implementation of the endangered fish recovery implementation programs for the Upper Colorado and San Juan River Basins in order to accomplish the objectives of these programs within a currently established time schedule.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``Recovery Implementation Programs'' means the intergovernmental programs established pursuant to the 1988 Cooperative Agreement to implement the Recovery Implementation Program for the Endangered Fish Species in the Upper Colorado River dated September 29, 1987, and the 1992 Cooperative Agreement to implement the San Juan River Recovery Implementation Program dated October 21, 1992, and as they may be amended by the parties thereto; (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; (3) the term ``Upper Division States'' means the States of Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming; (4) the term ``Endangered Species Act'' means the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes) and any Federal regulation implementing the Endangered Species Act; (5) the term ``Reclamation'' means the United States Reports Bureau of Reclamation; (6) the term ``Service'' means the United States Reports Fish and Wildlife Service; (7) the term ``Indian Affairs'' means the United States Reports Bureau of Indian Affairs; (8) the term ``Bureau'' means the United States Reports Bureau of Land Management; (9) the term ``capital projects'' means planning, design, permitting or other compliance, construction, construction management, and replacement of facilities, and the acquisition of interests in land or water, as necessary to carry out the Recovery Implementation Programs; (10) the term ``facilities'' includes facilities for the genetic conservation or propagation of the endangered fishes, those for the restoration of floodplain habitat or fish passage, those for regulation or supply of instream flows, and those for the removal or translocation of nonnative fishes; (11) the term ``interests in land and water'' includes long-term leases and easements, and long-term enforcement or other agreements protecting instream flows; (12) the term ``base funding'' means funding for operation and maintenance of capital projects, implementation of recovery actions other than capital projects, monitoring and research to evaluate the need for or effectiveness of any recovery action, and program management, as necessary to carry out the Recovery Implementation Programs.
Base funding also includes annual funding provided under the terms of the 1988 Cooperative Agreement and the 1992 Cooperative Agreement; and (13) the term ``recovery actions other than capital projects'' includes short-term leases and agreements for interests in land, water, and facilities; the reintroduction or augmentation of endangered fish stocks; and the removal, translocation, or other control of nonnative fishes.
AUTHORIZATION TO FUND RECOVERY PROGRAMS.
Cost of Capital Projects.--The costs of the capital projects undertaken for the Recovery Implementation Programs shall not exceed $100,000,000.
For the Recovery Implementation Program for Endangered Fish Species in the Upper Colorado River Basin through the year 2003, such costs shall not exceed $82,000,000.
For the San Juan River Recovery Implementation Program through the year 2007, such costs shall not exceed $18,000,000.
These costs will be adjusted for inflation.
Authorization for Appropriations for Federal Participation in Capital Projects.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, acting through Reclamation, $46,000,000 to undertake capital projects pursuant to this Act.
Such funds shall be considered a nonreimbursable Federal expenditure.
The authority of the Secretary to request appropriations to implement capital projects for the Recovery Implementation Program for Endangered Fish Species in the Upper Colorado River Basin shall expire in the year 2003 unless reauthorized by an Act of Congress.
The authority of the Secretary to request appropriations to implement the capital projects for the San Juan River Basin Recovery Implementation Program shall expire in the year 2007 unless reauthorized by an Act of Congress.
Non-Federal Contributions to Capital Projects.--(1) The Secretary, acting through Reclamation, may enter into agreements with the Upper Division States, political subdivisions or organizations within the Upper Division States which contribute to the payment of capital project costs.
Such non-Federal contributions shall not exceed $17,000,000.
In addition to the contribution described in 4(c)(1), the Secretary may utilize power revenues collected pursuant to the Colorado River Storage Project Act to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Such funds shall be treated as reimbursable costs assigned to power for repayment under section 5 of the Colorado River Storage Project Act.
This additional contribution shall not exceed $17,000,000.
Such funds shall be considered a non-Federal contribution for the purposes of this Act.
The additional funding provided pursuant to this provision may be provided through a loan or loans from the Colorado Water Conservation Board Construction Fund (37-60-121 C.R.S.)
to the Secretary of Energy to replace revenues which would otherwise be used for project repayments.
The Secretary is authorized to repay such loan or loans from power revenues, subject to an agreement between the Colorado Water Conservation Board and the Secretary of Energy.
The agreement shall include provisions designed to minimize future increases in electrical power rates and ensure that a lump-sum repayment, which includes principal and interest, is paid to the Colorado Water Conservation Board no later than October 31, 2057.
All contributions made pursuant to subsection (c)(1) and (c)(2) shall be in addition to the cost of replacement power purchased due to modifying the operation of the Colorado River Storage Project and the capital value of water from Wolford Mountain Reservoir in Colorado.
Such contributions shall not exceed $20,000,000.
Base Funding.--The Secretary may utilize power revenues collected pursuant to the Colorado River Storage Project Act for the annual base funding contributions to the Recovery Implementation Programs by Reclamation.
Such funding will be treated as being nonreimbursable and as having been repaid and returned to the general fund of the Treasury as costs assigned to power for repayment under section 5 of the Colorado River Storage Project Act.
For the Recovery Implementation Program for the Endangered Fish Species in the Upper Colorado River Basin, such contributions shall not exceed $4,000,000 per year.
For the San Juan River Recovery Implementation Program, such contributions shall not exceed $2,000,000 per year.
These limits on the annual contributions to base funding will be adjusted for inflation.
Any transfer of funds within these limits to the Service shall not be subject to transfer fees.
No later than December 31, 2010, the Secretary shall submit a report on the utilization of power revenues to the Subcommittee on Energy and Water Development for the Senate and House Committee on Appropriations.
The Secretary shall also make a recommendation regarding the need for additional funding that may be required to fulfill the goals of the Recovery Implementation Programs.
Nothing in this Act shall otherwise modify or amend existing agreements among participants regarding base funding and depletion fees for the Recovery Implementation Programs.
The Secretary of Energy and Reclamation shall maintain sufficient revenues in the Colorado River Basin Fund to meet their obligations to provide base funding in accordance with this provision.
Authority To Retain Appropriated Funds.--At the end of each fiscal year any unexpended appropriated funds for capital projects shall be retained for use in future fiscal years.
Unexpended funds which are carried over shall continue to be used to implement the capital projects needed for the Recovery Implementation Programs.
Additional Authority.--The Secretary may enter into agreements and contracts with Federal and non-Federal entities; acquire and transfer interests in land, water and facilities; and accept or give grants in order to carry out the purposes of this Act.
Indian Trust Assets.--As much of the potential water development in the San Juan River Basin is for the benefit of Indian tribes and most of the federally designated critical habitat for the endangered fish species in the basin is on Indian trust lands, nothing in this Act shall be construed to restrict the Secretary from funding activities or capital items in accordance with the Federal Government's Indian trust responsibility.
EFFECT ON RECLAMATION LAW.
Construction of facilities and acquisition of land and water interests as contemplated herein shall not render these facilities or land and water interests or associated processes and procedures subject to the Reclamation Act of 1902, as amended.