This Act may be cited as the ``EnergySmart Transport Corridors Act of 2009''.
ENERGYSMART TRANSPORT CORRIDORS PROGRAM.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Interstate system.--The term ``Interstate System'' has the meaning given the term in section 101(a) of title 23, United States Code.
Program.--The term ``Program'' means the EnergySmart Transport Corridor program established under subsection (b).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Establishment.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator, shall establish an EnergySmart Transport Corridor program in accordance with this section.
Requirements.--In carrying out the Program, the Secretary shall coordinate the planning and deployment of measures that will increase the energy efficiency of the Interstate System and reduce the emission of greenhouse gases and other environmental pollutants, including by-- (1) increasing the availability and standardization of anti-idling equipment; (2) increasing the availability of alternative, low-carbon transportation fuels; (3) coordinating and adjusting vehicle weight limits for both existing and future highways on the Interstate System; (4) coordinating and expanding intermodal shipment capabilities; (5) coordinating and adjusting time of service restrictions; and (6) planning and identifying future construction within the Interstate System.
Designation of Corridors.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Administrator and with the concurrence of the Governors of the States in which EnergySmart transport corridors are to be located, and in consultation with the appropriate advisory committees established under paragraph (3), shall designate EnergySmart transport corridors in accordance with the requirements described in subsection (c).
Intermodal facilities and other surface transportation modes.--In designating EnergySmart transport corridors, the Secretary may include-- (A) intermodal passenger and freight transfer facilities, particularly those that use measures to significantly increase the energy efficiency of the Interstate System and reduce greenhouse gas emissions and other environmental pollutants; and (B) other surface transportation modes.
Advisory committees.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Governors of the States in which EnergySmart transport corridors are to be located, may establish advisory committees to assist in the designation of individual EnergySmart transport corridors.
Membership.--The advisory committees established under this paragraph shall include representatives of interests affected by the designation of EnergySmart transport corridors, including-- (i) freight and trucking companies; (ii) vehicle and vehicle equipment manufacturers and retailers; (iii) independent owners and operators; (iv) conventional and alternative fuel providers; and (v) local transportation, planning, and energy agencies.
Priority.--In allocating funds for Federal highway programs, the Secretary shall give special consideration and priority to projects and programs that enable deployment and operation of EnergySmart transport corridors.
Grants.--In carrying out the Program, the Secretary may provide grants to States to assist in the planning, designation, development, and maintenance of EnergySmart transport corridors.
Annual Report.--Each fiscal year, the Secretary shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report describing activities carried out under the Program during the preceding fiscal year.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this section $25,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2010 through 2015.
REDUCTION OF ENGINE IDLING.
Section 756(b)(4)(B) of the Energy Policy Act of 2005 (42 United States Code 16104(b)(4)(B)) is amended by striking ``for fiscal year 2008'' each place it appears in clauses (i) and (ii) and inserting ``for each of fiscal years 2008 through 2015''.