SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR NEW QUALIFIED PLUG-IN HYBRID MOTOR VEHICLES.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 30B(d)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credit amount for passenger automobiles and light trucks) is amended to read as follows: ``(A) Credit amount for passenger automobiles and light trucks.-- ``(i) In general.--In the case of a new qualified hybrid motor vehicle (other than a new qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicle) which is a passenger automobile or light truck and which has a gross vehicle weight rating of not more than 8,500 pounds, the amount determined under this paragraph is the sum of the amounts determined under subclauses (I) and (II).
Fuel economy.--The amount determined under this subclause is the amount which would be determined under subsection (c)(2)(A) if such vehicle were a vehicle referred to in such subsection.
Conservation credit.--The amount determined under this subclause is the amount which would be determined under subsection (c)(2)(B) if such vehicle were a vehicle referred to in such subsection.
New qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicles.--In the case of a new qualified plug- in hybrid motor vehicle which is a passenger automobile or light truck and which has a gross vehicle weight rating of not more than 8,500 pounds, the amount determined under this paragraph is the sum of the amounts determined under subclauses (I), (II), and (III).
Base amount.--The amount determined under this subclause is $3,000.
Flexible fuel.--In the case of a vehicle which is warrantied by its manufacturer to operate on a fuel described in section 30C(c)(1)(A), the amount determined under this subclause is $150.
Power of traction battery.--In the case of vehicle which draws propulsion energy from a traction battery of not less than 5 kWh, the amount determined under this subclause is $500, plus $250 for each kWh that such battery exceeds 5 kWh.
The amount determined under this subclause shall not exceed $3,000.''.
New Qualified Plug-In Hybrid Motor Vehicle.--Subsection (d) of section 30B of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) New qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicle.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `new qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicle' means any new qualified hybrid motor vehicle which-- ``(A) meets or exceeds the Bin 5 Tier II emission standard established in regulations prescribed by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under section 202(i) of the Clean Air Act for that make and model year vehicle, ``(B) draws propulsion energy from a traction battery of not less than 4 kWh, and ``(C) is equipped with a means of recharging its rechargeable energy storage system from an external source of electricity.''.
Application of Limitation on Number of Hybrids Eligible for Credit.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (f) of section 30B of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Separate application to new qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicles.--In the case of a new qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicle, this subsection shall be applied-- ``(A) separately with respect to such vehicles by treating only new qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicles as qualified vehicles, ``(B) by substituting `100,000' for `60,000' in paragraph (2), and ``(C) by substituting `the date of the enactment of paragraph (6)' for `December 31, 2005' in paragraph (2).''.
Conforming amendment.--Paragraph (5) of section 30B(f) of such Code is amended by inserting ``other than a new qualified plug-in hybrid motor vehicle'' after ``subsection (d)(2)(A)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.