This Act may be cited as the ``Disabled American Financial Security Act of 2006''.
DISABLED AMERICAN FINANCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNTS.
In General.--Subchapter F of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to exempt organizations) is amended by inserting after part VIII the following new part: ``PART IX--SAVINGS FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES ``Sec.
Disabled American Financial Security Accounts.
DISABLED AMERICAN FINANCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNTS.
General Rule.--A Disabled American Financial Security Account shall be exempt from taxation under this subtitle.
Notwithstanding the preceding sentence, such account shall be subject to the taxes imposed by section 511 (relating to imposition of tax on unrelated business income of charitable organizations).
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Disabled american financial security account.--The term `Disabled American Financial Security Account' means a trust created or organized in the United States (and designated as a Disabled American Financial Security Account at the time created or organized) exclusively for the purpose of paying qualified disability expenses of an individual who is disabled and who is the designated beneficiary of the trust, but only if the written governing instrument creating the trust meets the following requirements: ``(A) No contribution will be accepted-- ``(i) unless it is in cash, and ``(ii) except in the case of rollover contributions described in subsection (c)(4), if such contribution would result in aggregate contributions for the taxable year and all preceding taxable years exceeding $500,000.
The trustee is a bank (as defined in section 408(n)) or another person who demonstrates to the satisfaction of the Secretary that the manner in which that person will administer the trust will be consistent with the requirements of this section.
No part of the trust assets will be invested in life insurance contracts.
The assets of the trust shall not be commingled with other property except in a common trust fund or common investment fund.
Qualified disability expenses.--The term `qualified disability expenses' means, with respect to an individual with a disability, amounts paid or incurred for-- ``(A) education, medical care, employment training, moving, daily subsistence, and assistive technology, and ``(B) after the designated beneficiary has attained the age of 18, housing and transportation.
Individual with a disability.-- ``(A) In general.--An individual is an individual with a disability if such individual has been certified by a physician as having a disability.
Disability.--The term `disability' means disabled (within the meaning of section 1614(a)(3) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1382c(a)(3)).
Physician.--The term `physician' has the meaning given to such term by section 1861(r)(1) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(r)(1)).
Tax Treatment of Distributions.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, any amount paid or distributed out of a Disabled American Financial Security Account shall be included in gross income by the payee or distributee, as the case may be, for the taxable year in which received in the manner as provided in section 72.
Distributions for benefit of designated beneficiary.-- ``(A) In general.--No amount shall be includible in gross income under paragraph (1) if the qualified disability expenses of the designated beneficiary during the taxable year are not less than the aggregate distributions during the taxable year.
Distributions in excess of expenses.--If such aggregate distributions exceed such expenses during the taxable year, the amount otherwise includible in gross income under paragraph (1) shall be reduced by the amount which bears the same ratio to the amount which would be includible in gross income under paragraph (1) (without regard to this subparagraph) as the qualified disability expenses bear to such aggregate distributions.
Disallowance of excluded amounts as deduction, credit, or exclusion.--No deduction, credit, or exclusion shall be allowed to the taxpayer under any other section of this chapter for any qualified disability expenses to the extent taken into account in determining the amount of the exclusion under this paragraph.
Additional tax for distributions not used for benefit of designated beneficiary.-- ``(A) In general.--The tax imposed by this chapter for any taxable year on any taxpayer who receives a payment or distribution from a Disabled American Financial Security Account shall be increased by 10 percent of the amount thereof which is includible in gross income under paragraph (1).
Exception.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if the payment or distribution is made to a beneficiary (or to the estate of the designated beneficiary) on or after the death of the designated beneficiary.
Contributions returned before certain date.-- Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to the distribution of any contribution made during a taxable year if-- ``(i) such distribution is made before the first day of the sixth month of the taxable year following the taxable year, and ``(ii) such distribution is accompanied by the amount of net income attributable to such excess contribution.
Any net income described in clause (ii) shall be included in gross income for the taxable year in which such excess contribution was made.
Rollovers.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed from a Disabled American Financial Security Account to the extent that the amount received is paid, not later than the 60th day after the date of such payment or distribution, into another Disabled American Financial Security Account for the benefit of the same beneficiary.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any payment or distribution if it applied to any prior payment or distribution during the 12-month period ending on the date of the payment or distribution.
Change in beneficiary.--Any change in the beneficiary of a Disabled American Financial Security Account shall not be treated as a distribution for purposes of paragraph (1) if the new beneficiary is disabled and is a member of the family (as defined in section 529(e)(2)) of the old beneficiary.
Tax Treatment of Accounts.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (4) of section 408(e) shall apply to any Disabled American Financial Security Account.
Community Property Laws.--This section shall be applied without regard to any community property laws.
Custodial Accounts.--For purposes of this section, a custodial account shall be treated as a trust if-- ``(1) the assets of such account are held by a bank (as defined in section 408(n) or another person who demonstrates, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, that the manner in which he will administer the account will be consistent with the requirements of this section, and ``(2) the custodial account would, except for the fact that it is not a trust, constitute an account described in subsection (c)(1).
For purposes of this title, in the case of a custodial account treated as a trust by reason of the preceding sentence, the custodian of such account shall be treated as the trustee thereof.
Reports.--The trustee of a Disabled American Financial Security Account shall make such reports regarding such account to the Secretary and to the beneficiary of the account with respect to contributions, distributions, and such other matters as the Secretary may require.
The reports required by this subsection shall be filed at such time and in such manner and furnished to such individuals at such time and in such manner as may be required.
Coordination With Means-Tested Programs.--Amounts held by, or paid or distributed from, a Disabled American Financial Security Account shall not be taken into account in determining eligibility for, or the amount or extent of, benefits provided by any program funded in whole or in part with Federal funds.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Penalty for failure to meet minimum distribution requirement.--Subsection (c) of section 4974 of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) any Disabled American Financial Security Account (as defined in section 530A(b)).''.
Tax on prohibited transactions.--Subsection (c) of section 4975 of such Code (relating to tax on prohibited transactions) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Special rule for disabled american financial security accounts.--An individual for whose benefit a Disabled American Financial Security Account is established and any contributor to such account shall be exempt from the tax imposed by this section with respect to any transaction concerning such account (which would otherwise be taxable under this section) if section 530A(d) applies with respect to such transaction.''.
Reports.--Paragraph (2) of section 6693(a) of such Code is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (D) and (E) as subparagraphs (E) and (F), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (C) the following new subparagraph: ``(D) section 530A(g) (relating to Disabled American Financial SecurityAccounts).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of parts for subchapter F of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to part VIII the following new item: ``Part IX.
Savings for Individuals With Disabilities.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2006.