This Act may be cited as the ``American Voting Standards and Technology Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF VOTING SYSTEMS STANDARDS PROGRAM.
In General.--Section 2(c) of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 272(c)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (21), by striking ``and'' at the end; (2) by redesignating paragraph (22) as paragraph (23); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (21) the following: ``(22) study automated voting systems used in the United States, including voter registration, vote casting, and vote counting; and''.
Developing Voting Systems Standards.--The National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 271 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
The Secretary, through the Director, shall-- ``(1) have the mission of developing standard practices, codes, specifications, and voluntary consensus standards needed to assure the accuracy, integrity, and security of voting systems used in the United States, including voter registration, vote casting, and vote counting; and ``(2) establish a program with the National Voluntary Laboratory Accreditation Program to accredit laboratories, in accordance with regulations for procedures under such program, to test vote casting and counting devices for conformance with standard practices, codes, specifications, and voluntary consensus standards developed under paragraph (1).
For purposes of subsection (a), the term `voting systems' shall include-- ``(1) every stage of the voting procedure beginning with voter registration through any necessary recount of votes; and ``(2) systems used in connection with an election for the office of President, Vice President, or a member of Congress.
For purposes of subsection (a), the Secretary is authorized to cooperate with other departments and agencies of the Federal Government, industry organizations, State and local governments, and private organizations.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 2002, 2003, 2004, and 2005 such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
STUDY OF VOTING ISSUES.
In General.--The Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall conduct a study of-- (1) the impact of income of a voter on effective participation in the election process; (2) the impact of minority status of a voter based on race, gender, or ethnicity on effective participation in the election process; (3) the effect of the use of differing voting apparatus and of substandard or malfunctioning voting machinery on effective participation in, and the integrity of, the election process; and (4) any future and emerging technologies for use in elections, such as Internet voting.
Study of Income.--The study conducted under subsection (a)(1) shall include the study of the impact of various factors on participation in elections by low-income voters, including voter registration requirements, educational status, type of voting apparatus available, voting outreach efforts, and any other factors the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology deems relevant.
Coordination.--In conducting studies under this section, the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall cooperate and coordinate with appropriate Federal, State, and local officials, including election officials and other interested groups and individuals.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the National Institute of Standards and Technology shall report the results of the study conducted under this section to Congress.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the studies and report under this section.
Matching Grant To Improve Voting Methods.-- (1) Authority.--The Secretary of Commerce (referred to in this section as the ``Secretary'') is authorized to make matching grants to the State agency responsible for administering elections in a State or the appropriate local agency responsible for administering elections in a unit of local government for the purpose of purchasing new or rehabilitated voting equipment that improves the ability of the public to cast a timely and accurate vote.
Voting equipment.--Voting equipment purchased with the proceeds of a grant under paragraph (1) shall meet the voting systems performance standards developed by the National Institute of Standards and Technology under section 32 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (as added by section 2(b)).
Application.--The Secretary shall publish a notice in the Federal Register to notify State and local agencies regarding the time and manner in which such State or local agency may apply and to prescribe criteria for approval of a State or local agency application.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this subsection, the Secretary shall give priority to applications which propose to use the funds to place voting equipment in election precincts that are most in need of updating and improvement of their voting system in order to meet voting system performance standards described in paragraph (2), particularly in areas experiencing the greatest need based on unemployment level, income levels, financial need, or other indicators of economic distress.
Matching requirement.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary may not make a grant to a State or local agency under this subsection unless that agency agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the agency in carrying out the purpose for which the grant was awarded, the agency will make available non-Federal contributions in an amount equal to 50 percent of the Federal funds provided under the grant.
Waiver.--The Secretary may waive the requirement under subparagraph (A) if the Secretary determines a State or local agency displays extreme need.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this subsection, including grant funds and administration costs.
Block Grant for Voter Education Campaigns.-- (1) Authority.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to the State agency responsible for administering elections in a State for the purpose of implementing voter education campaigns.
Implementation.--Each State agency receiving funds under paragraph (1) shall make such funds available to the appropriate State and local election officials to carry out voter education campaigns.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to make grants under this subsection.