SHORT TITLE; SUPPLEMENTAL AUTHORIZATIONS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Iran Missile Protection Act of 1997''.
Authorizations of Supplemental Appropriations.--All amounts authorized to be appropriated by this Act are authorizations of supplemental appropriations for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1998.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States has vital interests in the Middle East and Persian Gulf region.
The United States maintains a force of approximately 25,000 military personnel in the Middle East and Persian Gulf region.
The United States has many allies and friends in the Middle East and Persian Gulf region.
The policies of the current regime in Iran, including the export of terrorism and the pursuit of regional military hegemony, are inimical to the interests of the United States and its allies and friends.
Iran has been aggressively pursuing ballistic missile technology.
According to a statement by the Vice President in August 1997, ``It is obvious that there is a vigorous effort by Iran to obtain the technologies that it needs to build a ballistic missile and to build nuclear weapons.''
The President, in Executive Order 12938, issued on November 14, 1994 and reaffirmed in November 1995 and November 1996, declared a state of emergency, finding that ``the proliferation of nuclear, biological, and chemical weapons and of the means of delivering such weapons, constitutes an unusual and extraordinary threat to the national security, foreign policy, and economy of the United States .
Iran may achieve theater ballistic missile capabilities capable of striking United States forces, allies, and friends in the Middle East and Persian Gulf regions within one to two years.
Department of Defense officials report that Iran is acquiring missile systems and technology from abroad and is developing two ballistic missile systems.
The Assistant Secretary of State for Near Eastern Affairs recently testified that Iran could complete development of its Shahab-3 missile in 12 to 18 months.
This threat will grow over time as Iranian missile production capability matures and missile ranges increase.
The United States intelligence community confirms that Iran is achieving the capability described in paragraph (7) with substantial assistance from other nations, including Russia.
The Director of Central Intelligence reported that ``Russia supplied a variety of ballistic missile-related goods to foreign countries [in late 1996] .
Currently deployed missile defenses have been designed to meet shorter range, slower missile threats and are not adequate to meet the threat posed by new Iranian ballistic missiles under development.
The United States and its allies will be vulnerable to Iranian missiles after they become operational and until improved United States and allied missile defenses are deployed.
Current theater missile defense plans of the Department of Defense are inadequate to meet the state of emergency declared by the President.
The Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) and Navy Area Defense missile defense systems have limited capability against longer-range ballistic missiles.
The more capable Theater High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) system and Navy Theater-Wide system are not scheduled to be deployed until well after the time by which it is expected that the Iranian missile threat will have matured.
It is a matter of the highest national interest to minimize the vulnerability of United States forces, allies, and friends to this threat.
In light of the findings in section 2, an immediate national response to the emerging Iranian missile threat, consistent with the Presidential declaration of national emergency, is required and is in the highest national interest of the United States.
DETERMINATION OF EXTENT OF RUSSIAN COOPERATION WITH BALLISTIC MISSILE ACTIVITIES OF IRAN.
Discussion With Russia.--The Secretary of Defense shall enter into discussions with the Government of Russia for the purpose of obtaining information on-- (1) the extent and technical specifics of cooperation and assistance by Russia in the development by Iran of a ballistic missile capability; and (2) the technical nature of Iranian ballistic missile capabilities.
Limitation on Fiscal Year 1998 Cooperative Ballistic Missile Defense Projects.--(1) The amount described in paragraph (2) may not be obligated until the Secretary of Defense determines, and certifies to Congress, that the Russian government is providing full cooperation to the United States and its allies in the obtaining of the information described in subsection (a).
Such a certification shall be submitted not later than 30 days after the date of such a determination.
The Secretary shall include with the certification a description of the basis for the Secretary's determination.
The amount referred to in paragraph (1) is $3,000,000 of the funds appropriated for fiscal year 1998 for Russian cooperative ballistic missile defense projects as part of the amount appropriated for that fiscal year for missile defense programs of the Ballistic Missile Defense Organization.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE MEASURES TO COUNTER IRAN BALLISTIC MISSILE THREAT.
Acceleration of Navy Theater-Wide Missile Defense System.--(1) The amount for the Navy Theater-Wide missile defense system described in paragraph (2) is hereby authorized and may be used to accelerate the development of that system through additional testing and risk reduction.
The amount referred to in paragraph (1) is the amount of $65,000,000 appropriated for the Navy Theater-Wide missile defense system for fiscal year 1998 in the Department of Defense Appropriations Act, 1998, that is in excess of the amount authorized to be appropriated for that system for fiscal year 1998 in the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1998.
Other Ballistic Missile Defense Measures.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Defense for fiscal year 1998 for Defense-wide research, development, test, and evaluation $215,000,000, to be available as follows: (1) $20,000,000 for the Joint Composite Tracking Network.
$15,000,000 for theater battle management, command, control, and communications (BM/C&lt;SUP&gt;3&lt;/SUP&gt;) to validate the interoperability of the Army's Theater High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) ground-based radar and to accelerate the final phases of development leading to operational upgrade of the Aegis Spy-1 radar.
$5,000,000 for enhancement of integration activities associated with the capabilities for a reinforced theater missile defense family of system architectures oriented toward the threat in the Middle East and Persian Gulf region.
$35,000,000 for two Cobra Gemini radars to improve tracking and target discrimination.
$15,000,000 to accelerate the remote launch capability for the Patriot Advanced Capability (PAC-3) missile defense system, including use of an existing prototype Theater High- Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) ground-based radar, to enlarge the area defended by that system.
$25,000,000 to be available for production enhancements for the PAC-3 system to accelerate operational deployment of PAC-3 systems.
$100,000,000 to be available for additional Theater High-Altitude Area Defense (THAAD) User Operational Evaluation System (UOES) missiles, to provide greater capability to defend against longer-range Iranian ballistic missiles under development.
Study of Regional Infrastructure.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on improvements that could be made to the United States military infrastructure in the Persian Gulf, Middle East, and surrounding regions to improve the ability of United States Armed Forces to support attack operations in the Middle East and Persian Gulf.
The Secretary shall include in the report the cost of each improvement identified in the report.
Limitation.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization in subsection (b)(7) may be obligated only after a successful THAAD intercept.
ISRAELI ARROW MISSILE DEFENSE SYSTEM.
Additional United States Support.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for defense-wide research, development, test, and evaluation $110,000,000 to be available for support of the Israeli Arrow tactical ballistic missile defense system, of which-- (1) $20,000,000 is for production enhancements to accelerate deployment; and (2) $90,000,000 is for additional missiles in order to provide for more effective territorial coverage.
Congressional Intent Concerning Arrow System.--The authorization of appropriations for support of the Israeli Arrow missile defense system under subsection (a) is a one-time authorization for the purpose of protecting a United States ally and United States citizens in the Middle East region in imminent peril.
IMPLEMENTATION REPORT TO CONGRESS; FUNDING FLEXIBILITY.
Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report on the Iranian ballistic missile threat in the Middle East and Persian Gulf regions.
The report shall include a description of-- (1) the Secretary's plans for implementation of this Act, including the Secretary's plan for use of funds appropriated pursuant to the authorizations of appropriations in this Act; and (2) such additional steps as the Secretary considers appropriate to meet the Iranian ballistic missile threat, including an assessment of the funding implications of each of those additional steps.
Funding Flexibility.--If in the report under this section the Secretary of Defense proposes measures to counter the ballistic missile threat posed by Iran and proposes specific funding amounts for those measures as an alternative to the measures and funding authorized by this Act, the measures and funding proposed by the Secretary (within the total amount authorized to be appropriated by this Act) shall be considered to be authorized by law for purposes of section 114(a) of title 10, United States Code.