This Act may be cited as the ``Public Service Scholarship Act of 1993''.
PUBLIC SERVICE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM.
In General.--(1) Subpart B of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding after chapter 35 the following: ``CHAPTER 36--PUBLIC SERVICE SCHOLARSHIP PROGRAM ``Sec.
Definition ``For the purpose of this chapter, the term `agency' means an Executive agency.
Establishment ``The Office of Personnel Management shall establish a program, to be known as the Public Service Scholarship Program, under which scholarships may be awarded to outstanding students in accordance with this chapter.
Identification of candidates ``(a) The Office of Personnel Management may, without regard to any provision of law requiring competitive bidding, enter into a contract with 1 or more not-for-profit, non-government organizations to identify candidates for the Public Service Scholarship Program.
Candidates for the Public Service Scholarship Program-- ``(1) shall be identified on the basis of-- ``(A) academic excellence and a commitment to public service or to a field of endeavor useful to the Government; and ``(B) geographic diversity; ``(2) shall be identified without regard to race, color, religion, sex, national origin, marital status, age, disabling condition, or political party or affiliation; and ``(3) shall not be disqualified by reason of already being employed by the Government.
Each contract referred to in subsection (a) shall contain provisions under which the organization involved shall be required to permit the Office of Personnel Management and representatives of the General Accounting Office to examine such records of the organization as may be necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter.
Scholarship agreements ``(a) An agency may select, from among candidates identified under section 3603, individuals to receive scholarships under the Public Service Scholarship Program.
The agency and each individual so selected shall enter into a written agreement which shall include, subject to such requirements as the Office of Personnel Management may by regulation prescribe, provisions under which-- ``(1) the agency shall award the scholarship to help defray the costs incurred by such individual in pursuing a baccalaureate or post-baccalaureate degree, as a full-time student, in an academic program which is not less than 1 and not more than 4 academic years in duration, at an educational institution which is authorized to grant such degree; ``(2) the individual shall be required to maintain an acceptable academic standing (as defined in the agreement), and to provide to the agency such certifications from the educational institution as the agency may require relating to the individual's attendance and academic standing; ``(3) after successfully completing the requirements for the degree, the individual shall accept, if offered within such time as shall be specified in the agreement, an appointment to a full-time position that is commensurate with the individual's academic degree and experience, and that is-- ``(A) in the excepted service, if the individual has not previously acquired competitive status, with the right, after successful completion of 2 years of service and such other requirements as the Office may prescribe, to be appointed to a position in the competitive service, notwithstanding subchapter I of chapter 33; or ``(B) in the competitive service, if the individual has previously acquired competitive status; ``(4) if appointed under paragraph (3), the individual shall serve for 18 months for each complete academic year (as well as the pro rata equivalent for any semester or other portion of an academic year in excess of 1 or more complete academic years) for which a scholarship was provided; and ``(5) the individual agrees to repay to the agency the full amount in scholarships paid to or on behalf of such individual under this chapter if the individual-- ``(A) fails to maintain an acceptable academic standing or to satisfactorily complete the requirements for the degree involved; or ``(B) if offered a position in accordance with paragraph (3), fails to satisfy the requirement under paragraph (4), unless that failure is due to an involuntary separation other than for cause.
If, in the event of a failure described in paragraph (5)(A) or (B), the individual does not repay the amount required under the agreement, a sum equal to the amount outstanding shall be recoverable by the Government from the individual (or such individual's estate, if applicable) by-- ``(1) setoff against accrued pay, compensation, amount of retirement credit, or other amount due the employee from the Government; and ``(2) any other method provided by law for the recovery of amounts owing to the Government.
The head of the agency concerned may waive, in whole or in part, a right of recovery under this chapter if it is shown that recovery would be against equity and good conscience or against the public interest.
(1) An agency and an individual who have entered into an agreement under this section may, by mutual agreement, modify or terminate the agreement at any time.
Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to require an agency to offer a position to a scholarship recipient.
However, if the agency does not make such an offer within the time specified in the agreement, the agreement shall be considered terminated.
An agency may agree to allow the individual to complete all or part of the period of service required under subsection (b)(4) as an employee of another agency.
The agreement between the agencies may include provisions under which the receiving agency shall reimburse the other agency for an amount not to exceed the total amount in scholarships paid by such agency to or on behalf of the individual involved.
Scholarship payments ``(a) The Office of Personnel Management shall determine the maximum amount that may be paid as a scholarship under this chapter, on the basis of average costs at public and private educational institutions, covering tuition and fees, books, appropriate living expenses, and any estimated tax liability for such scholarship.
The amount may vary based on the level of the degree being sought.
The Office may revise the maximum amount from time to time, as the Office determines appropriate.
(1) Agencies may make scholarship payments from the appropriation, fund, or account that is available to pay salaries of employees of the activity in which it is expected that the recipient of the scholarship assistance will be employed.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Office such sums as may be necessary to permit the Office to reimburse agencies for scholarship payments under this chapter, or for portions of such payments, in order to encourage agencies to make use of the Public Service Scholarship Program.
Regulations ``The Office of Personnel Management may prescribe regulations for the administration of this chapter.
Reports ``The Office of Personnel Management shall prepare and submit to Congress each year a report on the operation of the Public Service Scholarship Program.''.
The table of chapters for part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding after the item relating to chapter 35 the following: ``36.
Public Service Scholarship Program.................... 3601''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall be effective as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
AMENDMENT RELATING TO STUDENT LOAN REPAYMENTS.
Section 5379 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(h) At the request of an agency head, the President may authorize the application of the preceding provisions of this section (excluding subsection (a)(2)) with respect to 1 or more categories of employees within such agency, described in subsection (a)(2), who would not otherwise be eligible for benefits under this section.