This Act may be cited as the ``Endangered Cultural Heritage Act of 1996''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the cultural heritage of mankind-- (A) is of the utmost importance to the United States and the world; (B) contains evidence of mankind's common human past; and (C) is part of the economic, social, and educational foundation of society; (2) with a growth of research concerning the vital quality of the cultural heritage of mankind has come the realization that many of the most significant cultural resources in the world are seriously endangered by a growing range of threats, including natural catastrophes, environmental deterioration, destructive acts of man, and the complex political and societal changes occurring in the world; (3) a timely response is critical to prevent the loss of cultural heritage that is imminently endangered; (4) sustained funding is needed to stabilize and strengthen the ability to protect cultural resources on a national and international scale, consistently and on a long-term basis; (5) funding will support a program through which professionals in the field of historic preservation can obtain support on a short-term basis to address situations of immediate peril affecting important works that are in danger of loss in order to gain time to plan for long-term conservation of the works; (6) the inauguration of the World Monuments Watch List of 100 Most Endangered Sites in 1996 has made apparent the great need for additional support and protection for threatened cultural heritage worldwide; (7) conservation work funded as a result of this Act will result in both direct and indirect benefits to many communities by creating jobs, offering opportunities for training in skilled trades, protecting resources that generate economic activity through tourism, and opening direct access to enriched educational experiences; (8) the American people share the responsibility of ensuring the survival of key cultural resources worldwide, since the resources, whether in the United States or abroad, represent a trust held in common by all peoples in all communities; and (9) participation in the preservation of cultural heritage, which is of common human concern, is an international act of good will.
In this Act: (1) Administrative agency.--The term ``administrative agency'' means the agency designated or established by the Secretary under section 6(a).
Endangered site.--The term ``endangered site'' refers to a structure, a group of buildings, a historic district, an archaeological zone, public art, or a cultural landscape that is in significant peril of being lost or seriously compromised as a result of irreversible human or natural destruction.
Fund.--The term ``Fund'' means the Endangered Cultural Heritage Trust fund established by section 4.
Institution of higher education.--The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1141(a)).
Matching basis.--The term ``matching basis'' means the condition to a grant award that the award be supplemented by the recipient with equivalent financial support from other sources prior to release of funds by the Secretary.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE ENDANGERED CULTURAL HERITAGE FUND.
There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the ``Endangered Cultural Heritage Fund'' that shall consist of-- (1) amounts appropriated pursuant to section 5; and (2) interest and proceeds credited pursuant to section 8(c).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
PAYMENTS FROM THE FUND AND USES OF PAYMENTS.
Designation of Administrative Agency.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Secretary of the Interior, shall designate or establish a Federal agency to administer the Fund.
Availability for Administrative Agency.--The interest on any obligations held in the Fund shall be available, as provided in advance by an appropriations Act, for payment to the administrative agency for use in accordance with this section.
Use by Administrative Agency.--The administrative agency shall administer funds provided under subsection (b) and direct the funds to the following to support activities carried out by qualified United States and international organizations that have as a common purpose the preservation and protection of cultural resources that are significantly at risk: (1) Endangered cultural resources in the united states.-- (A) In general.--The administrative agency shall provide funding awards, released incrementally and on a matching basis, to support stabilization and conservation measures for endangered cultural resources in the United States.
Qualifications for award.--An award under subparagraph (A) shall be made on a competitive basis to a governmental or nongovernmental entity that has demonstrated an ability to implement a conservation program in accordance with prescribed United States standards for conservation and rehabilitation, as specified by the Secretary of the Interior in accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes).
Qualified sites.--A site that has been listed as endangered by the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the United States National Park Service, or the World Monuments Fund shall be qualified to receive an award under subparagraph (A).
Endangered cultural resources outside the united states.-- (A) In general.--The administrative agency shall provide funding awards, released on a matching basis, to support stabilization and conservation measures for endangered cultural resources outside the United States.
Qualifications for award.--An award under subparagraph (A) shall be made on a competitive basis to a governmental or nongovernmental entity responsible for a site that has demonstrated an ability to implement a conservation program that will significantly advance the state of conservation of the endangered site.
Qualified sites.--A site that has been listed as endangered by the World Monuments Fund or the World Heritage Center shall be qualified to receive an award under subparagraph (A).
Grants and fellowships.--The administrative agency shall provide grants or fellowships that engage-- (A) United States professionals in historic preservation; and (B) United States and foreign graduate-level students in-- (i) onsite conservation programs supported under this Act; and (ii) the development of plans to protect endangered cultural resources.
Public education.--The administrative agency shall support programs to educate and engage the public, including citizens, students, and school children, in a concern for the preservation of endangered cultural resources.
Seminars and conferences.--The administrative agency shall provide grants to qualified organizations to conduct seminars, conferences, and other similar workshops designed to facilitate collaboration and cooperation between the United States and foreign institutions, private specialists, and site managers in the conservation of endangered cultural resources.
Other Expenditures.--Not more than 10 percent of the funds made available under subsection (b) for any fiscal year may be used by the administrative agency to-- (1) award contracts for projects chosen for support under subsection (c); (2) disseminate information about the Fund and solicit proposals (which shall include cost-sharing provisions) from site mangers, United States institutions of higher education, and other qualified entities and persons to participate in the conservation of qualifying sites and related programs; and (3) prepare documentation about projects supported under subsection (c) and disseminate the documentation through publications and electronic media.
Expert Advisors.--A project shall be selected for support under subsection (c) by a panel of expert advisors, including a representative of-- (1) the United States Committee of the International Council on Monuments and Sites; (2) the National Park Service; (3) the National Trust for Historic Preservation; (4) the College Art Association; and (5) the Advisory Council for Historic Preservation.
Payments.-- (1) Time.--The administrative agency shall make an award authorized under this section as soon as practicable after approval of an application, pending the acquisition of any matching funds by the recipient of the award.
Form.--The administrative agency may make an award authorized under this section in installments, in advance, or by way of reimbursement, and may make necessary adjustments on account of any overpayment or underpayment.
In General.--The administrative agency shall prepare and submit an application to the Secretary once each fiscal year that-- (1) provides a description of the purposes for which any grant award will be used; and (2) provides such fiscal control and such accounting procedures as are necessary-- (A) to ensure a proper accounting of grant awards paid to the applicant under this Act; and (B) to ensure the verification of the costs of the continuing education program furnished by the grant recipient.
Expeditious Approval.--The Secretary shall expeditiously approve any application that meets the requirements of this section.
MANAGEMENT OF THE FUND.
Investments.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall invest such portion of the Fund as is not, in the judgment of the Secretary, required to meet current withdrawals.
Types of investment.--Investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
Acquisition of investments.--Obligations may be acquired only-- (A) on original issue at the issue price; or (B) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
Special obligations.-- (A) In general.--Notwithstanding chapter 31 of title 31, United States Code, the Secretary may issue special obligations at par exclusively to the Fund.
Interest.--A special obligations shall bear interest at a rate equal to the average rate of interest, computed as of the end of the calendar month next preceding the date of the obligation, borne by all marketable interest-bearing obligations of the United States then forming a part of the public debt, except that if the average rate is not a multiple of \1/8\ percent, the rate of interest of the special obligation shall be the multiple of \1/8\ percent next lower than the average rate.
Public interest.--Special obligations shall be issued only if the Secretary determines that the purchase of other interest-bearing obligations of the United States, or of obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States on original issue or at the market price, is not in the public interest.
Sale and Redemption.-- (1) In general.--An obligation acquired by the Fund (except a special obligation issued under subsection (a)(4)) may be sold by the Secretary at market price.
Special obligations.--A special obligation issued under subsection (a)(4) may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest.
Proceeds and Interest.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligation held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
The administrative agency shall prepare and submit to the President and Congress at the end of every other fiscal year in which the administrative agency receives assistance under this Act a report on the activities of the administrative agency and such recommendations as the administrative agency considers advisable.