This Act may be cited as the ``Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act of 1999''.
DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND POLICY.
The Congress declares that the following is the policy of the United States: (1) Labor-management relationships and partnerships are based on trust, mutual respect, open communications, bilateral and consensual problem solving, and shared accountability.
Labor-management cooperation fully utilizes the strengths of both parties to best serve the interests of the public, operating as a team to carry out the public safety mission in a quality work environment.
In many public safety agencies it is the union that provides the institutional stability as elected leaders and appointees come and go.
The health and safety of the Nation and the best interest of public safety employers and employees can be best protected by the settlement of issues through the processes of collective bargaining.
The Federal Government needs to encourage conciliation, mediation, and voluntary arbitration to aid and encourage employers and the representatives of their employees to reach and maintain agreements concerning rates of pay, hours, and working conditions, and to make all reasonable efforts through negotiations to settle their differences by mutual agreement reached through collective bargaining or by such methods as may be provided for in any applicable agreement for the settlement of disputes.
The absence of adequate cooperation between public safety employers and employees has implications for the security of employees and can affect interstate and intrastate commerce.
Additionally, the lack of such labor-management cooperation detrimentally impacts the upgrading of police and fire services of local communities, the health and well-being of public safety officers, and the morale of the fire and police departments.
These factors could have significant commercial repercussions.
Moreover, providing minimal standards for collective bargaining negotiations in the public safety industry will prevent industrial strife between labor and management that interferes with the normal flow of commerce.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Authority'' means the Federal Labor Relations Authority.
The term ``public safety officer'' means an employee of a public safety agency who is a law enforcement officer, a firefighter, or emergency medical services personnel.
The term includes an individual who is temporarily transferred to a supervisory or administrative position, but does not include a permanent management or supervisory employee.
The term ``firefighter'' means an individual employed by a fire department who-- (A) primarily performs work directly related to the control and extinguishment of fires; (B) is responsible for the maintenance and use of firefighting apparatus and equipment, fire prevention and investigation, communications and dispatch; or (C) provides emergency medical care.
The term ``emergency medical services personnel'' means an individual who provides out-of-hospital emergency medical care, including an emergency medical technician, paramedic, or first responder.
The term ``law enforcement officer'' has the same meaning given such term in section 1204(5) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3796b(5)).
The term ``law enforcement agency'' means a State or local public agency that is charged by law with the duty to prevent or investigate crimes or apprehend or hold in custody persons charged with or convicted of crimes.
The term ``supervisory employee'' means an individual employed by a public safety employer who-- (A) has the authority in the interest of the employer to hire, direct, assign, promote, reward, transfer, furlough, layoff, recall, suspend, discipline, or remove public safety, officers, to adjust their grievances or to effectively recommend such action, if the exercise of the authority is not merely routine or clerical in nature but requires the consistent exercise of independent judgment; and (B) devotes a majority of time at work exercising such authority.
The term ``management employee'' means an individual employed by a public safety employer in a position that requires or authorizes the individual to formulate, determine, or influence the policies of the employer.
The terms ``employer'' and ``public safety employer'' mean any State, political subdivision of a State, the District of Columbia, or any territory or possession of the United States that employs public safety officers.
RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES; DETERMINATION.
Rights and Responsibilities.--In making a determination described in subsection (b), the Authority shall consider whether State law provides rights and responsibilities that include-- (1) granting public safety officers the right to form and join a labor organization that does not include management and supervisory employees and that is, or seeks to be, recognized as the exclusive bargaining agent of such employees; (2) requiring public safety employers to recognize the employees' labor organization (freely chosen by a majority of the employees), to agree to bargain with the labor organization, and to commit any agreements to writing in a contract or memorandum of understanding; (3) allowing bargaining over hours, wages, terms, and conditions of employment; (4) prohibiting bargaining over issues which are traditional and customary management functions; (5) protecting all existing collective bargaining agreements, memoranda of understanding, certifications, recognitions, and elections; (6) requiring fact finding in the event of an interest impasse; (7) allowing the parties voluntarily to agree to submit disagreements to arbitration; (8) requiring enforcement through State courts of all rights, responsibilities, and protections provided in this section and of any written contract or memorandum of understanding; and (9) prohibiting strikes and lockouts.
Determination.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Authority shall issue a determination as to whether a State substantially provides for the rights and responsibilities described in subsection (a).
Subsequent determinations.--A determination issued pursuant to paragraph (1) shall remain in effect until an employer or labor organization submits a written request to the Authority to issue a subsequent such determination.
The Director shall issue the determination not later than 30 days after receipt of such a request.
Failure To Meet Requirements.--A State that does not substantially provide for the rights and responsibilities described in subsection (a) shall be subject to the regulations and procedures described in section 5 until a subsequent determination is made.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Authority shall issue regulations in accordance with the rights and responsibilities described in section 4(a) establishing collective bargaining procedures for public safety employers and officers in States that do not substantially provide for the rights and responsibilities described in section 4(a).
Role of the Federal Labor Relations Authority.--The Authority shall, to the extent provided in this Act and in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Authority-- (1) determine the appropriateness of units for labor organization representation; (2) supervise or conduct elections to determine whether a labor organization has been selected as an exclusive representative by a majority of the employees in an appropriate unit; (3) resolve issues relating to the duty to bargain in good faith; (4) conduct hearings and resolve complaints of unfair labor practices; (5) resolve exceptions to arbitrator's awards; and (6) take such other actions as are necessary and appropriate to effectively administer the provisions of this Act.
Enforcement.--A public safety employer, officer, and labor organization each shall have the right to seek enforcement of this section through appropriate State courts.
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS PROHIBITED.
A public safety employer, officer, or labor organization may not engage in lockouts or strikes.
EXISTING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNITS AND AGREEMENTS.
A certification, recognition, election-held, collective bargaining agreement or memorandum of understanding which has been issued, approved, or ratified by any public employee relations board or commission or by any State or political subdivision or its agents (management officials) in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act shall not be invalidated by the enactment of this Act.
Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to invalidate or limit the remedies, rights, and procedures of any law of any State or political subdivision of any State or jurisdiction that provides greater or equal collective bargaining rights for public safety employees.
Compliance.--No State shall preempt laws or ordinances of any of its political subdivisions which provide greater or equal collective bargaining rights for public safety employees in order to comply with this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.