This Act may be cited as the ``Jerusalem Embassy Relocation Implementation Act of 1995''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Each sovereign nation, under international law and custom, may designate its own capital.
Since 1950, the city of Jerusalem has been the capital of the State of Israel.
The city of Jerusalem is the seat of Israel's President, Parliament, and Supreme Court, and the site of numerous government ministries and social and cultural institutions.
The city of Jerusalem is the spiritual center of Judaism, and is also considered a holy city by the members of other religious faiths.
From 1948-1967, Jerusalem was a divided city and Israeli citizens of all faiths as well as Jewish citizens of all states were denied access to holy sites in the area controlled by Jordan.
In 1967, the city of Jerusalem was reunited during the conflict known as the Six Day War.
Since 1967, Jerusalem has been a united city administered by Israel, and persons of all religious faiths have been guaranteed full access to holy sites within the city.
This year marks the 28th consecutive year that Jerusalem has been administered as a unified city in which the rights of all faiths have been respected and protected.
In 1992, the United States Senate and House of Representatives unanimously adopted Senate Concurrent Resolution 113 of the One Hundred Second Congress to commemorate the 25th anniversary of the reunification of Jerusalem, and reaffirming congressional sentiment that Jerusalem must remain an undivided city.
The September 13, 1993, Declaration of Principles on Interim Self-Government Arrangements lays out a timetable for the resolution of ``final status'' issues, including Jerusalem.
The Agreement on the Gaza Strip and the Jericho Area was signed May 4, 1994, beginning the five-year transitional period laid out in the Declaration of Principles.
In March of 1995, 93 members of the United States Senate signed a letter to Secretary of State Warren Christopher encouraging ``planning to begin now'' for relocation of the United States Embassy to the city of Jerusalem.
The United States maintains its embassy in the functioning capital of every country except in the case of our democratic friend and strategic ally, the State of Israel.
The United States conducts official meetings and other business in the city of Jerusalem in de facto recognition of its status as the capital of Israel.
In 1996, the State of Israel will celebrate the 3,000th anniversary of the Jewish presence in Jerusalem since King David's entry.
Statement of Policy.--It is the policy of the United States that-- (1) Jerusalem should be recognized as the capital of the State of Israel; (2) groundbreaking for construction of the United States Embassy in Jerusalem should begin no later than December 31, 1996; and (3) the United States Embassy should be officially open in Jerusalem no later than May 31, 1999.
Construction Determination.--Not more than 50 percent of the funds appropriated to the Department of State for fiscal year 1997 for ``Acquisition and Maintenance of Buildings Abroad'' may be obligated until the Secretary of State determines and reports to Congress that construction has begun on the site of the United States Embassy in Jerusalem.
Opening Determination.--Not more than 50 percent of the funds appropriated to the Department of State for fiscal year 1999 for ``Acquisition and Maintenance of Buildings Abroad'' may be obligated until the Secretary of State determines and reports to Congress that the United States Embassy in Jerusalem has officially opened.
FISCAL YEAR 1995 FUNDING.
Of the funds appropriated for fiscal year 1995 for the Department of State and related agencies, not less than $5,000,000 shall be made available until expended for costs associated with relocating the United States Embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, including but not limited to site identification, surveys, and land acquisition.
Such funds shall be made available in accordance with the procedures contained in section 34 of the State Department Basic Authorities Act (22 United States Code 2706).
FISCAL YEARS 1996 AND 1997 FUNDING.
Fiscal Year 1996.--Of the funds authorized to be appropriated for ``Acquisition and Maintenance of Buildings Abroad'' for the Department of State in fiscal year 1996, not less than $25,000,000 shall be made available until expended only for construction and other costs associated with the relocation of the United States Embassy in Israel to the capital of Jerusalem.
Fiscal Year 1997.--Of the funds authorized to be appropriated for ``Acquisition and Maintenance of Buildings Abroad'' for the Department of State in fiscal year 1997, not less than $75,000,000 shall be made available until expended only for construction and other costs associated with the relocation of the United States Embassy in Israel to the capital of Jerusalem.
Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate detailing the Department of State's plan to implement this Act.
Such report shall include-- (1) estimated dates of completion for each phase of the relocation of the United States Embassy, including site identification, land acquisition, architectural, engineering and construction surveys, site preparation, and construction; and (2) an estimate of the funding necessary to implement this Act, including all costs associated with relocating the United States Embassy to Jerusalem.
Beginning January 1, 1996, and every six months thereafter, the Secretary of State shall report to the Speaker of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate on the progress made toward opening the United States Embassy in Jerusalem.
As used in this Act, the term ``United States Embassy'' means the offices of the United States diplomatic mission and the residence of the United States chief of mission.