This Act may be cited as the ``Clean Energy Partnership with India Act of 2008''.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``renewable energy'' means an energy supply or end-use technology (including solar technology, wind technology, geothermal technology, hydroelectric technology, and carbon capture technology), that over its life cycle and compared to a similar technology already in commercial use-- (1) is reliable, affordable, economically viable, socially acceptable, and compatible with the needs and norms of-- (A) each country that has a generating plant that generates energy that is used in India or the United States; and (B) each country that uses energy or end-use technology that is generated or produced in India or the United States; (2) results in-- (A) reduced emissions of greenhouse gases; or (B) increased geological sequestration of greenhouse gases; and (3) may result in-- (A) substantially reduced emissions of air pollutants; or (B) the generation of substantially smaller or less hazardous quantities of solid or liquid waste.
TITLE I--CONGRESSIONAL COMMISSION ON RENEWABLE POWER TECHNOLOGY COMMERCE SEC.
There is established in the legislative branch a commission to be known as the Congressional Commission on Renewable Power Technology Commerce with India (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'').
The Commission shall study the methods of improving and promoting bilateral renewable energy cooperation between the United States and India.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission shall make recommendations to Congress and the President on methods and strategies to develop joint energy policy between the United States and India to provide reliable energy throughout India through the utilization of renewable, environmentally- friendly means of production.
The Commission shall submit to Congress and the President a report containing-- (1) a description of-- (A) general market conditions for energy in India and the potential for renewable technology solutions in particular; (B) key policy constraints that exist in the United States and India for the production and distribution of renewable energy in India; (C) best practices for public, private, and public- private partnerships that can spur investment in Indian energy production and distribution through renewable means in India; and (D) key constraints preventing renewable technology companies organized under the laws of the United States or any State from investing in India; and (2) its recommendations-- (A) to address the constraints described by the Commission under paragraph (1)(D); (B) regarding policy measures that the governments of India and the United States could take to help realize the full potential of its collaboration with the United States on energy policy; (C) for developing an optimal framework for joint research and development opportunities related to renewable energy between the United States and India in the private, educational, and public sectors; and (D) regarding the ideal role for energy-related end-user devices (such as energy-efficient devices used in residential and commercial buildings) in a policy emphasizing energy efficiency.
Number and Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members appointed as follows: (A) Five members appointed by the President, including at least two representatives of nongovernmental organizations.
Three members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives and two members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Three members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate and two members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Chairperson.--At the time of appointment, the President shall designate one of the members appointed in paragraph (1)(A) as the Chairperson of the Commission.
Qualifications.--To be eligible for appointment as a member of the Commission, an individual shall be of recognized standing and distinction in one or more of the following: (1) Renewable energy production.
The transmission and distribution of energy.
Academia and public policy.
Deadline for Appointment.--The members of the Commission shall be appointed before the end of the 60-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect the power of the remaining members to execute the duties of the Commission.
Any such vacancy shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Each member may be compensated at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for a position at level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which each such member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with applicable provisions of subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the home or regular place of business of the member in performance of the duties of the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraphs (1) and (2), any member of the Commission who is a full-time officer or employee of the United States or a Member of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason their of service on the Commission.
Meetings.-- (1) Frequency.-- (A) Quarterly meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least quarterly.
Additional meetings.--In addition to quarterly meetings, the Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Meeting by telephone or other appropriate technology.-- Members of the Commission may meet using telephones or other suitable telecommunications technologies if all members of the Commission are able to communicate with all other members simultaneously.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall have a director who shall be appointed by the chairperson of the Commission with the approval of a majority of the members of the Commission.
Qualifications.--To be eligible for appointment as the director, an individual shall be of recognized standing and distinction in one or more of the following: (A) International, national, or local public service.
Service-learning, as defined in section 101(23) of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12511(23)).
Salary.--The director shall be paid at a rate determined by the chairperson with the approval of the Commission, except that the rate of pay may not exceed the maximum rate of basic pay for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff.--With the approval of the chairperson, the director may appoint and fix the pay of additional qualified personnel as the director considers appropriate, except that the rate of pay may not exceed the maximum rate of basic pay for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Experts and Consultants.--With the approval of the Commission, the director may procure temporary and intermittent services in the same manner as an agency under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates for individuals not to exceed the daily equivalent of the maximum annual rate of basic pay for GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any department or agency of the United States may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this title.
Hearings and Sessions.--For the purpose of carrying out this title, the Commission may hold public hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--If authorized by the Commission, any member or agent of the Commission may take any action that the Commission is authorized to take by this title.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out its duties under this title.
Upon request of the chairperson, the head of the department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Physical Facilities and Equipment.--The Architect of the Capitol shall provide, on a nonreimbursable basis, suitable facilities and equipment for the operation of the Commission.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Architect of the Capitol and the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this title.
Contract Authority.--To the extent provided in advance in appropriations Acts, the Commission may contract with and compensate Government and private agencies or persons for services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this title.
Interim Report.--Not later than the last day of the 12-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this title, the Commission shall submit to Congress an interim report on its activities.
Final Report.--Not later than the last day of the 120-day period beginning on the date of submission of the interim report required under subsection (a), the Commission shall submit to Congress a final report containing a detailed statement of the findings of the Commission, together with its recommendations for proposed legislation.
The Commission shall terminate not later than 30 days after submitting its final report under section 106(b).
TITLE II--DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING REPORT SEC.
DEVELOPMENT AND CAPACITY BUILDING REPORT.
Not later than the last day of the one-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State, in consultation with the Secretary of Energy and the Secretary of Commerce, shall submit to Congress a report that-- (1) details the extent to which energy is reliably available in India and what portion of such energy is produced through renewable means; (2) estimates the investment, export, and job creation potential if United States industry plays a central role in the production and distribution of renewable energy in India; (3) estimates the economic benefits and poverty reduction that would result if India's energy needs were substantially met through the use of renewable energy; (4) estimates the level of greenhouse gasses that India would produce in the coming years if India did not pursue renewable means of energy production; (5) contains recommendations for the Federal Government and the private sector regarding the provision of technical assistance to assist in the investment, production, and distribution of renewable energy in India.
TITLE III--RENEWABLE ENERGY COUNCIL SEC.
Establishment.--Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall seek to establish a permanent joint renewable energy council between the United States and India.
Purpose.--The purpose of the council referred to in subsection (a) shall be to provide advice to the President of the United States and the Prime Minister of India concerning the promotion of environmentally sustainable economic growth in India and the United States through public policy related to the pursuit and facilitation of investment, production, and distribution of renewable energy in India.
Membership.--The membership of the council shall consist of-- (1) representatives from the legislative and executive branches of-- (A) the Government of the United States; and (B) the Government of India; and (2) representatives from the private sector in-- (A) the United States; and (B) India.