This Act may be cited as the ``National Highway Borders and Trade Act of 2003''.
COORDINATED BORDER INFRASTRUCTURE PROGRAM.
Subchapter I of chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Coordinated border infrastructure program ``(a) Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Border region.--The term `border region' means the portion of a border State that is located within 100 kilometers of a land border crossing with Canada or Mexico.
Border state.--The term `border State' means any State that has a boundary in common with Canada or Mexico.
Commercial vehicle.--The term `commercial vehicle' means a vehicle that is used for the primary purpose of transporting cargo in international or interstate commercial trade.
Passenger vehicle.--The term `passenger vehicle' means a vehicle that is used for the primary purpose of transporting individuals.
Program.--The Secretary shall establish and implement a coordinated border infrastructure program under which the Secretary shall make allocations to border States for projects within a border region to improve the efficient and safe movement of people and goods at or across the border between the United States and Canada and the border between the United States and Mexico.
Eligible Uses.--Allocations to States under this section may only be used in a border region for-- ``(1) improvements to transportation and supporting infrastructure that facilitate cross-border vehicle and cargo movements; ``(2) construction of highways and related safety and safety enforcement facilities that will facilitate vehicle and cargo movements relating to international trade, including cargo inspection facilities and equipment; ``(3) operational improvements, including improvements relating to electronic data interchange and use of telecommunications, to expedite cross-border vehicle and cargo movement; ``(4) international coordination of planning, programming, and border operation with Canada and Mexico relating to expediting cross-border vehicle and cargo movements; ``(5) projects in Canada or Mexico proposed by 1 or more border States that directly and predominantly facilitate cross- border vehicle and commercial cargo movements at the international gateways or ports of entry into a border region; and ``(6) planning and environmental studies.
Mandatory Program.-- ``(1) In general.--For each fiscal year, the Secretary shall allocate among border States, in accordance with the formula described in paragraph (2), funds to be used in accordance with subsection (c).
Formula.--Subject to paragraph (3), the amount allocated to a border State under this subsection shall be determined by the Secretary, as follows: ``(A) 25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(i) the average annual weight of all cargo entering the border State by commercial vehicle across the international border with Canada or Mexico, as the case may be; bears to ``(ii) the average annual weight of all cargo entering all border States by commercial vehicle across the international borders with Canada and Mexico.
25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(i) the average trade value of all cargo imported into the border State and all cargo exported from the border State by commercial vehicle across the international border with Canada or Mexico, as the case may be; bears to ``(ii) the average trade value of all cargo imported into all border States and all cargo exported from all border States by commercial vehicle across the international borders with Canada and Mexico.
25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(i) the number of commercial vehicles annually entering the border State across the international border with Canada or Mexico, as the case may be; bears to ``(ii) the number of all commercial vehicles annually entering all border States across the international borders with Canada and Mexico.
25 percent in the ratio that-- ``(i) the number of passenger vehicles annually entering the border State across the international border with Canada or Mexico, as the case may be; bears to ``(ii) the number of all commercial vehicles annually entering all border States across the international borders with Canada and Mexico.
Data source.-- ``(A) In general.--The data used by the Secretary in making allocations under this subsection shall be based on the Bureau of Transportation Statistics Transborder Surface Freight Dataset (or other similar database).
Basis of calculation.--All formula calculations shall be made using the average values for the most recent 5-year period for which data are available.
Minimum allocation.--Notwithstanding subparagraph (B), for each fiscal year, each border State shall receive at least \1/2\ of 1 percent of the funds made available for allocation under this subsection for the fiscal year.
Cost Sharing.--The Federal share of the cost of a project carried out using funds allocated under this section shall not exceed 80 percent.
Transfer of Funds to the Administrator of General Services.-- ``(1) In general.--At the request of a State, funds allocated to the State under this section shall be transferred to the Administrator of General Services for the purpose of funding a project under the administrative jurisdiction of the Administrator in a border State if the Secretary determines, after consultation with the State transportation department, as appropriate, that-- ``(A) the Administrator should carry out the project; and ``(B) the Administrator agrees to use the funds to carry out the project.
No augmentation of appropriations.--Funds transferred under paragraph (1) shall not be deemed to be an augmentation of the amount of appropriations made to the General Services Administration.
Administration.--Funds transferred under paragraph (1) shall be administered in accordance with the procedures applicable to the General Services Administration, except that the funds shall be available for obligation in the same manner as other funds apportioned under this chapter.
Transfer of obligation authority.--Obligation authority shall be transferred to the Administrator of General Services in the same manner and amount as funds are transferred for a project under paragraph (1).
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) to carry out this section $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.
Obligation authority.--Funds made available to carry out this section shall be available for obligation as if the funds were apportioned in accordance with section 104.
Exclusion from calculation of minimum guarantee.--The Secretary shall calculate the amounts to be allocated among the States under section 105 without regard to amounts made available to the States under this subsection.''.
NATIONAL TRADE CORRIDOR PROGRAM.
Subchapter I of chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
National trade corridor program ``(a) Definition of Intermodal Road Connector.--In this section, the term `intermodal road connector' means a connector highway that provides motor vehicle access between a route on the National Highway System and 1 or more major intermodal water port facilities at least 1 of which accepts at least 50,000 20-foot equivalent units of container traffic (or 200,000 tons of container or noncontainer traffic) per year of international trade or trade between Alaska or Hawaii and the 48 contiguous States.
Program.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall carry out a program to allocate funds to States to be used for coordinated planning, design, and construction of corridors of national significance.
Applications.--A State that seeks to receive an allocation under this section shall submit to the Secretary an application in such form, and containing such information, as the Secretary may request.
Eligibility of Corridors.--The Secretary may make allocations under this section with respect to-- ``(1) a high priority corridor in a State-- ``(A) that is identified in section 1105(c) of the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (105 United States Statutes at Large 2031); and ``(B) any part of which is located in a border region (as defined in section 165(a)); and ``(2) an intermodal road connector.
Eligible Uses of Funds.--A State may use an allocation under this section to carry out, for an eligible corridor described in subsection (c)-- ``(1) a feasibility study; ``(2) a comprehensive corridor planning and design activity; ``(3) a location and routing study; ``(4) multistate and intrastate coordination for each corridor; ``(5) environmental review; and ``(6) construction.
Allocation Formula.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary shall allocate funds among States under this section in accordance with a formula determined by the Secretary after taking into consideration, with respect to the applicable corridor in the State-- ``(A) the average annual weight of freight transported on the corridor; ``(B) the percentage by which freight traffic increased, during the most recent 5-year period for which data are available, on the corridor; and ``(C) the annual average number of tractor-trailer trucks that use the corridor to access other States.
Maximum allocation.--Not more than 10 percent of the funds made available for a fiscal year for allocation under this section may be allocated to any State for the fiscal year.
Coordination of Planning.--Planning with respect to a corridor for which an allocation is made under this section shall be coordinated with-- ``(1) transportation planning being carried out by the States and metropolitan planning organizations along the corridor; and ``(2) to the extent appropriate, transportation planning being carried out by-- ``(A) Federal land management agencies; ``(B) tribal governments; and ``(C) government agencies in Mexico or Canada.
Cost Sharing.--The Federal share of the cost of a project carried out using funds allocated under this section shall not exceed 80 percent.
Funding.-- ``(1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated from the Highway Trust Fund (other than the Mass Transit Account) to carry out this section $200,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.
Obligation authority.--Funds made available to carry out this section shall be available for obligation as if the funds were apportioned in accordance with section 104.''.
Section 1101(a) of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (112 United States Statutes at Large 111) is amended by striking paragraph (9) and inserting the following: ``(9) Coordinated border infrastructure program and national trade corridor program.--For the coordinated border infrastructure program and national trade corridor program under sections 165 and 166, respectively, of title 23, United States Code, $400,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2009.''.
Sections 1118 and 1119 of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century (112 United States Statutes at Large 161) are repealed.
The analysis for subchapter I of chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 164 the following: ``165.
Coordinated border infrastructure program.
National trade corridor program.