It is the policy of the United States to end the needless maiming and suffering inflicted upon animals through the use of leghold traps by prohibiting the import or export of, and the shipment in interstate commerce of, such traps and of articles of fur from animals that were trapped in such traps.
In this Act: (1) Article of fur.--The term ``article of fur'' means-- (A) any furskin, whether raw or tanned or dressed; or (B) any article, however produced, that consists in whole or part of any furskin.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), the terms ``furskin'', ``raw'', and ``tanned or dressed'' have the same respective meanings as those terms have under headnote 1 of chapter 43 of the Harmonized Tariff Schedule of the United States.
Customs laws of the united states.--The term ``customs laws of the United States'' means any law enforced or administered by the Customs Service of the United States.
Interstate commerce.--The term ``interstate commerce'' has the same meaning given such term in section 10 of title 18, United States Code.
Import.--The term ``import'' means to land on, bring into, or introduce into, any place subject to the jurisdiction of the United States, whether or not such landing, bringing, or introduction constitutes an entry into the customs territory of the United States.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes any individual, partnership, association, corporation, trust, or any officer, employee, agent, department, or instrumentality of the Federal Government or of any State or political subdivision thereof, or any other entity subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Conventional steel-jawed leghold trap.--The term ``conventional steel-jawed leghold trap'' means any spring- powered pan- or sear-activated device with two opposing steel- jaws, whether the jaws are smooth, toothed, padded, or offset, designed to capture an animal by snapping closed upon the animal's limb or part thereof.
PROHIBITED ACTS AND PENALTIES.
Offenses.--It is unlawful for any person knowingly-- (1) to import, export, ship, or receive in interstate commerce an article of fur if any part of the article of fur is derived from an animal that was trapped in a conventional steel-jawed leghold trap; (2) to import, export, deliver, carry, transport, or ship, by any means whatever, in interstate commerce, any conventional steel-jawed leghold trap; or (3) to sell, receive, acquire, or purchase any conventional steel-jawed leghold trap that was delivered, carried, transported, or shipped in violation of paragraph (2).
Penalties.--A person who violates subsection (a), in addition to any other penalty that may be imposed-- (1) for the first such violation, shall be guilty of an infraction punishable under title 18, United States Code; and (2) for each subsequent violation, shall be imprisoned not more than 2 years, fined under title 18, United States Code, or both.
The Secretary shall pay, to any person who furnishes information which leads to a conviction of a violation of any provision of this Act or any regulation issued thereunder, an amount equal to one-half of the fine paid pursuant to the conviction.
Any officer or employee of the United States or of any State or local government who furnishes information or renders service in the performance of his or her official duties is not eligible for payment under this section.
In General.--Except with respect to violations of this Act to which subsection (b) applies, the provisions of this Act and any regulations issued pursuant thereto shall be enforced by the Secretary, who may use by agreement, with or without reimbursement, the personnel, services, and facilities of any other Federal agency or of any State agency for purposes of enforcing this Act.
Export and Import Violations.-- (1) Import violations.--The importation of articles in violation of section 3 shall be treated as a violation of the customs laws of the United States, and the provisions of law relating to violations of the customs laws shall apply thereto.
Export violations.--The provisions of the Export Administration Act of 1979 (including the penalty provisions) (50 United States Code App.
2401 et sequentes) shall apply for purposes of enforcing the prohibition relating to the export of articles described in section 3.
Judicial Process.--The district courts of the United States may, within their respective jurisdictions, upon proper oath or affirmation showing probable cause, issue such warrants or other process as may be required for enforcement of this Act and any regulation issued thereunder.
Enforcement Authorities.--Any individual having authority to enforce this Act (except with respect to violations to which subsection (b) applies), may, in exercising such authority-- (1) detain for inspection, search, and seizure any package, crate, or other container, including its contents, and all accompanying documents, if such individual has reasonable cause to suspect that in such package, crate, or other container are articles with respect to which a violation of this Act (except with respect to violations to which subsection (b) applies) has occurred, is occurring, or is about to occur; (2) make arrests without a warrant for any violation of this Act (except with respect to violations to which subsection (b) applies) committed in the individual's presence or view or if the individual has probable cause to believe that the person to be arrested has committed or is committing such a violation; and (3) execute and serve any arrest warrant, search warrant, or other warrant or criminal process issued by any judge or magistrate of any court of competent jurisdiction for enforcement of this Act (except with respect to violations to which subsection (b) applies).
Forfeiture.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), any article of fur or conventional steel-jawed leghold trap taken, possessed, sold, purchased, offered for sale or purchase, transported, delivered, received, carried, or shipped in violation of this Act shall be subject to forfeiture to the United States.
Applicable law.--The provisions of law relating to-- (A) the seizure, summary and judicial forfeiture, and condemnation of property for violations of the customs laws, (B) the disposition of such property or the proceeds from the sale thereof, (C) the remission or mitigation of such forfeitures, and (D) the compromise of claims, shall apply to seizures and forfeitures under this subsection, except that the duties performed by a customs officer or any other person with respect to the seizure and forfeiture of property under the customs laws of the United States may be performed with respect to seizures and forfeitures of property under this subsection by the Secretary or such officers and employees as the Secretary may designate.
Exception.--The provisions of the Export Administration Act of 1979 shall apply with respect to the seizure and forfeiture of any article of fur or conventional steel-jawed leghold trap exported in violation of this Act, and the customs laws of the United States shall apply with respect to the seizure and forfeiture of any such article or trap imported in violation of this Act.
Injunctions.--The Attorney General of the United States may seek to enjoin any person who is alleged to be in violation of any provision of this Act.
Cooperation.--The Secretary of Commerce, the Secretary of the Treasury, and the head of any other department or agency with enforcement responsibilities under this Act shall cooperate with the Secretary in ensuring that this Act is enforced in the most effective and efficient manner.
The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
This Act shall take effect on the date that is 1 year after the date of enactment.