on the Budget.--Section 301(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by redesignating paragraphs (6) and (7) as paragraphs (7) and (8), respectively, and by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) the receipts, outlays, and surplus or deficit in the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund, combined, established by title II of the Social Security Act;''.
Super Majority Requirement.--(1) Section 904(c)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by inserting ``312(g),'' after ``310(d)(2),''.
Section 904(d)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by inserting ``312(g),'' after ``310(d)(2),''.
PROTECTION OF MEDICARE SURPLUSES.
Points of Order To Protect Medicare Surpluses.--Section 312 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by section 3) is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Points of Order To Protect Medicare Surpluses.-- ``(1) Concurrent resolutions on the budget.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any concurrent resolution on the budget, or conference report thereon or amendment thereto, that would set forth an on-budget surplus for any fiscal year that is less than the projected surplus of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund for that fiscal year (as assumed in that resolution).
Subsequent legislation.--Except as provided by paragraph (3), it shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report if-- ``(A) the enactment of that bill or resolution as reported; ``(B) the adoption and enactment of that amendment; or ``(C) the enactment of that bill or resolution in the form recommended in that conference report, would cause the on-budget surplus for any fiscal year to be less than the projected surplus of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund (as assumed in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget) for that fiscal year or increase the amount by which the on-budget surplus for any fiscal year would be less than such trust fund surplus for that fiscal year.
Exception.--Paragraph (2) shall not apply to medicare reform legislation as defined by section 7(2) of the Social Security and Medicare Lock-box Act of 2000.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `on-budget surplus', when applied to a fiscal year, means the surplus in the budget as set forth in the most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget pursuant to section 301(a)(3) for that fiscal year.''.
Super Majority Requirement.-- (1) Point of order.--Section 904(c)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by section 3) is further amended by inserting ``312(h),'' after ``312(g),''.
Waiver.--Section 904(d)(2) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by section 3) is further amended by inserting ``312(h),'' after ``312(g),''.
REMOVING SOCIAL SECURITY FROM BUDGET PRONOUNCEMENTS.
In General.--Any official statement issued by the Office of Management and Budget, the Congressional Budget Office, or any other agency or instrumentality of the Federal Government of surplus or deficit totals of the budget of the United States Government as submitted by the President or of the surplus or deficit totals of the congressional budget, and any description of, or reference to, such totals in any official publication or material issued by either of such Offices or any other such agency or instrumentality, shall exclude the outlays and receipts of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program under title II of the Social Security Act (including the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund and the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund) and the related provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Separate Social Security Budget Documents.--The excluded outlays and receipts of the old-age, survivors, and disability insurance program under title II of the Social Security Act shall be submitted in separate Social Security budget documents.
PROTECTION OF SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE SURPLUSES.
Social Security.--(1) Chapter 11 of subtitle II of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding before section 1101 the following: ``Sec.
Protection of social security surpluses ``The budget of the United States Government submitted by the President under this chapter shall not recommend an on-budget deficit for any fiscal year covered by that budget unless it includes proposed legislative language for social security reform legislation as defined by section 7(1) of the Social Security and Medicare Lock-box Act of 2000.''.
The chapter analysis for chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting before the item relating to section 1101 the following: ``1100.
Protection of Social Security Surpluses.''.
Medicare.--(1) Chapter 11 of subtitle II of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding after section 1100 the following: ``Sec.
Protection of medicare surpluses ``The budget of the United States Government submitted by the President under this chapter shall not recommend an on-budget surplus for any fiscal year that is less than the projected surplus of the Federal Hospital Insurance Trust Fund for that fiscal year unless it includes proposed legislative language for medicare reform legislation as defined by section 7(2) of the Social Security and Medicare Lock-box Act of 2000 or social security reform legislation as defined by section 7(1) of that Act.''.
Chapter Analysis.--The chapter analysis for chapter 11 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1100 the following: ``1100A.
Protection of Medicare Surpluses.''.
As used in this Act: (1) Social security reform legislation.--The term ``social security reform legislation'' means a bill or a joint resolution to save social security and includes a provision stating the following: ``For purposes of the Social Security and Medicare Lock-box Act of 2000, this Act constitutes social security reform legislation to save social security.''.
Medicare reform legislation.--The term ``medicare reform legislation'' means a bill or a joint resolution to save Medicare and includes a provision stating the following: ``For purposes of the Social Security and Medicare Lock-box Act of 2000, this Act constitutes medicare reform legislation to save medicare.''.
In General.--This Act shall take effect upon the date of its enactment and the amendments made by this Act shall apply to fiscal year 2001 and subsequent fiscal years.
Expiration.--(1) Sections 301(a)(6) and 312(g) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 shall expire upon the enactment of social security reform legislation.
Section 312(h) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 shall expire upon the enactment of medicare reform legislation.
Passed the House of Representatives June 20, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.
By Martha C. Morrison, Deputy Clerk.