This Act may be cited as the ``Latin American Arms Control Act of 1997''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) It has been United States policy since the Presidential directive of May 19, 1977, to refrain from making sales or other transfers to governments of Latin American countries of highly advanced weapons systems that could undermine regional military balances or stimulate an arms race.
There has only been one exception to that policy, the sale of F-16 fighter aircraft to Venezuela in 1982, in response to a perceived Cuban military buildup, including the acquisition by Cuba of Soviet-made MIG-23 fighters.
While United States defense companies have not been able to sell highly advanced weapons to Latin America, they are a major supplier of military equipment to the region and hold the largest share of that market.
From fiscal year 1993 through fiscal year 1996 the United States Government sold $789,000,000 in arms to Latin America.
In August 1996, Secretary of State Warren Christopher stated that his ``strong conviction is that we should be very careful about raising the level of competition between countries with respect to arms sales''.
There are historic hostilities and mistrust in Latin America that can flare into serious conflict, as evidenced most recently by the 1995 border war between Peru and Ecuador that required international efforts to resolve.
For the first time in modern history, all but one country in the Western Hemisphere is governed by democratically elected leaders.
Latin America has just recovered from a decade of negative growth, as measured on a real per capita basis, and 18 of the countries in the Western Hemisphere currently have per capita income levels below those achieved by them ten years ago.
Poverty and insufficient educational opportunities continue to be a major challenge to democratic governments in the Western Hemisphere, with less than one-half of the children entering first grade remaining in school until grade five, and with more than 100,000 street children in cities throughout Latin American countries.
At the meeting of the Council of Freely Elected Heads of Government on April 29, 1997, representatives of Latin American governments on the Council discussed the issue of arms sales to Latin American countries, pledged to accept a two-year moratorium on the purchase of highly advanced weapons, called upon countries in the Western Hemisphere to explore ideas to restrain future purchases, and called upon the United States and other governments that sell arms to affirm their support for such a moratorium.
SENSE OF THE SENATE.
It is the sense of the Senate that the President should respect the request of Latin American heads of government for a two-year moratorium on the sale or other transfer of highly advanced weapons to Latin American countries while proposals for regional arms restraint are studied.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, under the Arms Export Control Act or any other Act-- (1) no sale or other transfer may be made of any highly advanced weapon to any Latin American country, (2) no license may be issued for the export of any highly advanced weapon to any Latin American country, and (3) no financing may be extended with respect to a sale or export of any highly advanced weapon to a Latin American country, unless the requirements of subsection (b) are satisfied and except as provided in subsection (c).
Requirements.--The requirements of this subsection are satisfied if-- (1) the President determines and certifies to Congress in advance that the sale, transfer, or financing, as the case may be, is necessary to further the national security interests of the United States; and (2) Congress has enacted a joint resolution approving the Presidential determination.
Exception.--Subsection (a) does not apply to any sale, sales, financing, or license permitted by an international agreement that provides for restraint-- (1) in the purchase of highly advanced weapons by countries in Latin America; or (2) in the sale or other transfer of highly advanced weapons to countries in Latin America.
DEFINITION OF HIGHLY ADVANCED WEAPONS.
In this Act, the term ``highly advanced weapons'' includes advanced combat fighter aircraft and attack helicopters but does not include transport helicopters.