This Act may be cited as the ``Border Health Security Act of 2003''.
In this Act: (1) Border area.--The term ``border area'' has the meaning given the term ``United States-Mexico Border Area'' in section 8 of the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission Act (22 United States Code 290n-6).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Eligible Entity Defined.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a State, public institution of higher education, local government, tribal government, nonprofit health organization, or community health center receiving assistance under section 330 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254b), that is located in the border area.
Authorization.--From funds appropriated under subsection (f), the Secretary, acting through the United States members of the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission, shall award grants to eligible entities to address priorities and recommendations to improve the health of border area residents that are established by-- (1) the United States members of the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission; (2) the State border health offices; and (3) the Secretary.
Application.--An eligible entity that desires a grant under subsection (b) shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (b) shall use the grant funds for-- (1) programs relating to-- (A) maternal and child health; (B) primary care and preventative health; (C) public health and public health infrastructure; (D) health promotion; (E) oral health; (F) behavioral and mental health; (G) substance abuse; (H) health conditions that have a high prevalence in the border area; (I) medical and health services research; (J) workforce training and development; (K) community health workers or promotoras; (L) health care infrastructure problems in the border area (including planning and construction grants); (M) health disparities in the border area; (N) environmental health; (O) health education; and (P) outreach and enrollment services with respect to Federal programs (including programs authorized under titles XIX and XXI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 and 1397aa)); and (2) other programs determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Supplement, Not Supplant.--Amounts provided to an eligible entity awarded a grant under subsection (b) shall be used to supplement and not supplant other funds available to the eligible entity to carry out the activities described in subsection (d).
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2004, and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year.
BORDER BIOTERRORISM PREPAREDNESS GRANTS.
Eligible Entity Defined.--In this section, the term ``eligible entity'' means a State, local government, tribal government, or public health entity.
Authorization.--From funds appropriated under subsection (e), the Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities for bioterrorism preparedness in the border area.
Application.--An eligible entity that desires a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Uses of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under subsection (b) shall use the grant funds to-- (1) develop and implement bioterror preparedness plans and readiness assessments and purchase items necessary for such plans; (2) coordinate bioterrorism and emergency preparedness planning in the region; (3) improve infrastructure, including syndrome surveillance and laboratory capacity; (4) create a health alert network, including risk communication and information dissemination; (5) educate and train clinicians, epidemiologists, laboratories, and emergency personnel; and (6) carry out such other activities identified by the Secretary, the United States-Mexico Border Health Commission, State and local public health offices, and border health offices.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2004 and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year.
UNITED STATES-MEXICO BORDER HEALTH COMMISSION ACT AMENDMENTS.
The United States-Mexico Border Health Commission Act (22 United States Code 290n et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $10,000,000 for fiscal year 2004 and such sums as may be necessary for each succeeding fiscal year.''.
COORDINATION OF HEALTH SERVICES AND SURVEILLANCE.
The Secretary may coordinate with the Secretary of Homeland Security in establishing a health alert system that-- (1) alerts clinicians and public health officials of emerging disease clusters and syndromes along the border area; and (2) is alerted to signs of health threats or bioterrorism along the border area.