This Act may be cited as the ``Tom Lantos Pulmonary Hypertension Research and Education Act of 2008''.
The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--RESEARCH ON PULMONARY HYPERTENSION Sec.
Expansion and intensification of activities.
TITLE II--INCREASING AWARENESS OF PULMONARY HYPERTENSION Sec.
Promoting awareness among health care professionals.
TITLE I--RESEARCH ON PULMONARY HYPERTENSION SEC.
EXPANSION AND INTENSIFICATION OF ACTIVITIES.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary''), acting through the Director of the National Institutes of Health and the Director of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (in this title referred to as the ``Institute''), should continue aggressive work on pulmonary hypertension; (2) as part of such work, the Director of the Institute should continue research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and to find a cure for, pulmonary hypertension; and (3) activities under paragraph (1) may include conducting and supporting-- (A) basic research concerning the etiology and causes of pulmonary hypertension; (B) basic research on the relationship between scleroderma, sickle cell anemia (and other conditions identified by the Director of the Institute that can lead to a secondary diagnosis of pulmonary hypertension), and pulmonary hypertension; (C) clinical research for the development and evaluation of new treatments for pulmonary hypertension, including the establishment of a ``Pulmonary Hypertension Clinical Research Network''; (D) support for the training of new clinicians and investigators with expertise in the pulmonary hypertension; and (E) information and education programs for the general public.
Biennial Reports.--As part of the biennial report made under section 403 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 283), the Secretary shall include information on the status of pulmonary hypertension research at the National Institutes of Health.
TITLE II--INCREASING AWARENESS OF PULMONARY HYPERTENSION SEC.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry out an educational campaign to increase public awareness of pulmonary hypertension.
Print, video, and Web-based materials distributed under this program may include-- (1) basic information on pulmonary hypertension and its symptoms; and (2) information on-- (A) the incidence and prevalence of pulmonary hypertension; (B) diseases and conditions that can lead to pulmonary hypertension as a secondary diagnosis; (C) the importance of early diagnosis; and (D) the availability, as medically appropriate, of a range of treatment options and pulmonary hypertension.
Dissemination of Information.--The Secretary is encouraged to disseminate information under subsection (a) through a cooperative agreement with a national nonprofit entity with expertise in pulmonary hypertension.
Report to Congress.--Not later than September 30, 2009, the Secretary shall report to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate on the status of activities under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2009, 2010, and 2011.
PROMOTING AWARENESS AMONG HEALTH CARE PROFESSIONALS.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration and the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall carry out an educational campaign to increase awareness of pulmonary hypertension among health care providers.
Print, video, and Web-based materials distributed under this program may include information on-- (1) the symptoms of pulmonary hypertension; (2) the importance of early diagnosis; (3) current diagnostic criteria; and (4) Food and Drug Administration-approved therapies for the disease.
Targeted Health Care Providers.--Health care providers targeted through the campaign under subsection (a) shall include, but not be limited to, cardiologists, pulmonologists, rheumatologists, primary care physicians, pediatricians, and nurse practitioners (c) Dissemination of Information.--The Secretary is encouraged to disseminate information under subsection (a) through a cooperative agreement with a national nonprofit entity with expertise in pulmonary hypertension.
Report to Congress.--Not later than September 30, 2009, the Secretary shall report to the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate on the status of activities under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there is authorized to be appropriated $2,500,000 for each of fiscal years 2009, 2010, and 2011.
Passed the House of Representatives September 25, 2008.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.