This Act may be cited as the ``James Peak Wilderness Act of 1999''.
DESIGNATION OF JAMES PEAK WILDERNESS, COLORADO.
Inclusion With Other Colorado Wilderness Areas.--Section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993 (Public Law 103-77; 107 United States Statutes at Large 756) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(20) Certain lands in the Arapaho National Forest which comprise approximately 22,000 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled `Proposed James Peak Wilderness', dated June 1999 and which shall be known as the James Peak Wilderness.''.
Map and Boundary Descriptions.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall file with the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a map and a boundary description of the James Peak Wilderness.
The map and boundary description shall have the same force and effect as if included in the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and boundary descriptions.
The map and boundary description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service, Department of Agriculture.
INHOLDINGS IN JAMES PEAK WILDERNESS.
State Land Board Lands.--If the Colorado State Land Board informs the Secretary of Agriculture that the Board is willing to transfer to the United States some or all of the lands owned by the Board located within the James Peak Wilderness in the Arapaho National Forest, Colorado, the Secretary shall promptly seek to reach agreement with the Board regarding terms and conditions for acquisition of the lands by the United States by purchase or exchange.
Jim Creek Inholding.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall enter into negotiations with the owner of lands located within the portion of the Jim Creek drainage within the James Peak Wilderness for the purpose of acquiring the lands by purchase or exchange.
Report.--Upon conclusion of an agreement for acquisition by the United States of lands referred to in subsection (a) or (b), or one year after the date of enactment of this Act, whichever occurs first, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report concerning any such agreement or the status of negotiations pursuant to such subsections.
The report shall indicate to what extent funds are available to the Secretary as of the date of the report for the acquisition of the lands and whether additional funds need to be appropriated or otherwise made available to the Secretary for such purpose.
ALICE TOWNSHIP AND ST. MARY'S GLACIER, COLORADO.
Services and Facilities.--Following the consultation required by subsection (c), the Forest Supervisor of the Arapaho and Roosevelt National Forests in the State of Colorado (in this section referred to as the ``Forest Supervisor'') shall establish a trailhead and corresponding facilities and services to regulate use of National Forest System lands adjacent to Alice Township and St. Mary's Glacier in the State of Colorado.
The facilities and services shall include, but are not limited to, the following: (1) Trailhead parking.
Trailhead and trail maintenance.
Personnel.--The Forest Supervisor shall assign Forest Service personnel to provide appropriate management and oversight of the area described in subsection (a).
Consultation.--The Forest Supervisor shall consult with the Clear Creek County Commissioners and residents in the immediate vicinity of Alice Township and St. Mary's Glacier regarding the appropriate location of facilities and services in the area described in subsection (a).
This consultation should include any other appropriate measures that may be needed in this area to provide access by emergency or law enforcement vehicles or that is necessary for public health or that impede access by local residents.
Report.--After the consultation required by subsection (b), the Forest Supervisor shall submit to the Committee on Resources and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate a report regarding the amount of any additional funding required to implement appropriate measures to provide the facilities and services specified in subsections (a), (b), and (c).
Definition.--In this section, the term ``potential wilderness lands'' means lands that are identified as ``potential wilderness'' on the map referred to in paragraph (20) of section 2(a) of the Colorado Wilderness Act of 1993, as added by section 2(a) of this Act, designating the James Peak Wilderness in the Arapaho National Forest, Colorado.
Management.--Potential wilderness lands shall be managed as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System upon publication in the Federal Register of a notice by the Secretary of Agriculture that all structures on the lands have been removed and all uses of the lands inconsistent with the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes) have ceased.
Removal of Radio Tower.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall remove the abandoned radio tower and associated structures located on Mount Eva on the potential wilderness lands.