SECTION 1. CREDIT FOR QUALIFIED EXPENDITURES FOR MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business tax credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR EXPENDITURES FOR MEDICAL PROFESSIONAL MALPRACTICE INSURANCE.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, in the case of a taxpayer which is an eligible person, the medical malpractice insurance expenditure tax credit determined under this section for a covered year shall equal the applicable percentage of the qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditures incurred by an eligible person during the covered year.
Applicable Percentage.--For purposes of subsection (a), the applicable percentage is-- ``(1) in the case of an eligible person described in subsection (c)(2)(A), 20 percent, ``(2) in the case of an eligible person described in subsection (c)(2)(B), 10 percent, and ``(3) in the case of an eligible person described in subsection (c)(2)(C), 15 percent.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Covered year.--The term `covered year' means taxable years beginning in 2003 and 2004.
Eligible person.--The term `eligible person' means-- ``(A) any physician (as defined in section 213(d)(4)) who practices in any surgical specialty or subspecialty, emergency medicine, obstetrics, anesthesiology or who does intervention work which is reflected in medical malpractice insurance expenditures, ``(B) any physician (as so defined) who practices in general medicine, allergy, dermatology, or pathology, and ``(C) any hospital or clinic, which meets applicable legal requirements to provide the health care services involved.
Qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditure.--The term `qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditure' means so much of any professional insurance premium, surcharge, payment or other cost or expense required as a condition of State licensure which is incurred by an eligible person in a covered year for the sole purpose of providing or furnishing general medical malpractice liability insurance for such eligible person as does not exceed twice the Statewide average of such costs for similarly situated eligible persons.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the credit determined under this section shall be claimed by the eligible person incurring the qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditure.
Certification.--Each State, through its board of medical licensure and State board (or agency) regulating insurance, annually shall provide such information to the Secretary of Health and Human Services as is necessary to permit the Secretary to calculate average costs for purposes of subsection (c)(3) and to certify such average costs (rounded to the nearest whole dollar) to the Secretary of the Treasury on or before the 15th day of November of each year.
Effective Date.--This section shall apply to qualified medical malpractice expenditures incurred after December 31, 2002.''.
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Section 38(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to current year business credit) is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (14), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (15) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) the medical malpractice insurance expenditure tax credit determined under section 45G(a).''.
Limitation on Carryback.--Section 39(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to transition rules) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) No carryback of medical malpractice insurance expenditure tax credit before effective date.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit determined under section 45G may be carried back to any taxable year beginning before 2003.''.
Denial of Double Benefit.--Section 280C of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to certain expenses for which credits are allowable) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Credit for Medical Malpractice Liability Insurance Premiums.-- ``(1) In general.--No deduction shall be allowed for that portion of the qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditures otherwise allowable as a deduction for the taxable year which is equal to the amount of the credit allowable for the taxable year under section 45G (determined without regard to section 38(c)).
Controlled groups.--In the case of a corporation which is a member of a controlled group of corporations (within the meaning of section 41(f)(5)) or a trade or business which is treated as being under common control with other trades or business (within the meaning of section 41(f)(1)(B)), this subsection shall be applied under rules prescribed by the Secretary similar to the rules applicable under subparagraphs (A) and (B) of section 41(f)(1).''.
Grants to Non-Profit Hospitals and Clinics.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award grants to eligible non-profit hospitals and clinics to assist such hospitals and clinics in defraying qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditures.
Eligible non-profit hospital or clinic.--To be eligible to receive a grant under paragraph (1) an entity shall-- (A) be a non-profit hospital or clinic; (B) be unable to claim the tax credit described in section 45G of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for the year for which an application is submitted under subparagraph (C); and (C) prepare and submit to the Secretary of Health and Human Services an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Amount of grant.--The amount of a grant to a non-profit hospital or clinic under paragraph (1) shall equal 15 percent of the amount of the qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditures of the hospital or clinic for the year involved.
Qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditure.-- In this subsection, the term ``qualified medical malpractice insurance expenditure'' means so much of any professional insurance premium, surcharge, payment or other cost or expense required as a condition of State licensure which is incurred by a non-profit hospital or clinic in a year for the sole purpose of providing or furnishing general medical malpractice liability insurance for such hospital or clinic as does not exceed twice the Statewide average of such costs for similarly situated hospitals or clinics.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subsection, such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 and 2005.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit for expenditures for medical professional malpractice insurance.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenditures incurred after December 31, 2002.