This Act may be cited as the ``Secure Embassy Construction and Counterterrorism Act of 1999''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) On August 17, 1998, two United States embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and in Dar Es Salaam, Tanzania, were destroyed by simultaneously exploding bombs.
The resulting explosions killed 220 persons and injured more than 4,000 others.
Twelve Americans and 40 Kenyan and Tanzanian employees of the United States Foreign Service were killed in the attack.
The United States personnel in both Dar Es Salaam and Nairobi showed leadership and personal courage in their response to the attacks.
Despite the havoc wrecked upon the embassies, staff in both embassies provided rapid response in locating and rescuing victims, providing emergency assistance, and quickly restoring embassy operations during a crisis.
The bombs are believed to have been set by individuals associated with Osama bin Laden, leader of a known transnational terrorist organization.
In February of 1998 Bin Laden issued a directive to his followers that called for attacks against American interests anywhere in the world.
Following the bombings, additional threats have been made against United States diplomatic facilities.
A review board was convened following the bombings, as required by Public Law 99-399.
The panel was chaired by Admiral William J. Crowe, United States Navy (Ret).
The conclusions of the Crowe panel are strikingly similar to those stated by the Inman Commission, which issued an extensive embassy security report more than 14 years ago.
Admiral Crowe's panel issued a report setting out the following two striking problems: (A) The United States has devoted inadequate resources towards security against terrorist attacks.
The United States Government places too low a priority on security concerns.
The result has been a failure to take adequate steps to prevent tragedies such as the bombings in Kenya and Tanzania.
The Crowe panel found that there was an institutional failure on the part of the Department of State and embassies under its direction, to recognize threats posed by transnational terrorism and vehicular bombs.
Responsibility for obtaining adequate resources for security programs is widely shared throughout the United States Government, including Congress.
Unless the vulnerabilities identified in the Crowe report are addressed in a sustained and financially realistic manner, the lives and safety of United States employees in diplomatic facilities will continue to be at risk from further terrorist attacks.
Although service in the Foreign Service or other Government positions in foreign countries can never be completely without risk, the United States must ensure that the risks are kept to a minimum.
UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC FACILITY DEFINED.
In this Act, the term ``United States diplomatic facility'' means any embassy, chancery, legation, consulate or other office building or structure used by a United States diplomatic mission or consular post or by any agency of the United States.
Authority.--The Secretary of State may use funds available under the account established in subsection (b) for the purposes of constructing, or providing security upgrades to, United States diplomatic facilities in order to meet the security requirements set forth in section 6.
Establishment of Account.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury of the United States an appropriations account for the Department of State which shall be known as the ``Embassy Construction and Security'' account.
Certification.--Prior to obligation of any amount from the Embassy Construction and Security account, the Secretary of State shall certify to Congress, in classified form, that construction or upgrading of the United States diplomatic facility is necessary to bring the United States into compliance with all applicable security requirements, including those requirements set forth in section 6.
Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of State under ``Embassy Construction and Security''-- (A) for fiscal year 2000, $600,000,000; (B) for fiscal year 2001, $600,000,000; (C) for fiscal year 2002, $600,000,000; (D) for fiscal year 2003, $600,000,000; and (E) for fiscal year 2004, $600,000,000.
Availability of funds.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to paragraph (1) are authorized to remain available until expended.
Report.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit a classified report to Congress containing an identification of those United States diplomatic facilities that are most vulnerable to terrorist attack and setting out, in tiers of 20, those facilities from the most to the least vulnerable to such an attack.
Priority of Rebuilding Efforts.--Funds in the Embassy Construction and Security account allocated for construction of new embassies shall be used to rebuild only those embassies in the top three tiers, as designated by the Secretary of State.
Advanced Congressional Notifications.--Prior to obligation of funds in the Embassy Construction and Security account, or the reprogramming of funds out of that account, the Secretary of State shall notify the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives in accordance with section 34(a) of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 United States Code 2706(a)), of the Secretary's intent to obligate or reprogram the funds, as the case may be.
SECURITY REQUIREMENTS FOR UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC FACILITIES.
Description of Requirements.--The following security requirements shall apply with respect to United States diplomatic facilities: (1) Threat assessments.-- (A) The Emergency Action Plan (EAP) of each United States mission shall address threats from large vehicular bombs and transnational terrorism.
The ``Composite Threat List'' shall contain a section that addresses acts of international terrorism against United States diplomatic facilities based on criteria for identifying threats that emphasize the threat of transnational terrorism and includes such other criteria as the physical security environment, host government support, and cultural realities.
Site selection.-- (A) In selecting sites for new United States diplomatic facilities abroad, all United States Government agencies (except military installations) shall be located on the same compound.
The Secretary of State and the relevant agency head may waive subparagraph (A) if the Secretary and the agency head jointly certify to Congress that security requirements so permit.
Any waiver under this paragraph shall be exercised only in accordance with the procedures applicable to reprogramming notifications under section 34 of the State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 (22 United States Code 2706).
Perimeter distance.--Each newly constructed or acquired United States diplomatic facility shall be sited not less than 100 feet from the perimeter of the property on which the facility is situated.
Crisis management training.-- (A) The appropriate personnel of the Department of State shall undertake crisis management training for mass casualty and mass destruction incidents relating to diplomatic facilities which are designed to bring about a rapid response to such incidents from Department of State headquarters in Washington, D.C. (B) A program of appropriate instruction in crisis management shall be provided to personnel at United States diplomatic facilities abroad.
Foreign emergency support team.--The Foreign Emergency Support Team (FEST) of the Department of State shall receive sufficient support from the Department, including-- (A) conducting routine training exercises through the FEST; (B) providing personnel identified to serve on the FEST as a collateral duty; (C) providing personnel to assist in medical relief, public affairs, engineering, and building safety; and (D) providing such additional support as may be necessary to enable the FEST to provide support in a post-crisis environment involving mass casualties and physical damage.
Rapid response procedures.--The Secretary of State shall enter into a memorandum of understanding with the Secretary of Defense setting out rapid response procedures for mobilization of personnel and equipment of their respective departments to provide more effective assistance in times of emergency with respect to United States diplomatic facilities.
Storage of emergency equipment and records.--All United States diplomatic missions shall have emergency equipment and records stored at a secure off-site facility.
Review and Revision by the Secretary of State.--The Secretary of State shall review and revise security requirements in effect for United States diplomatic facilities as of the date of enactment of this Act to ensure their compliance with the security requirements described in subsection (a).
CLOSURE OF VULNERABLE POSTS.
Review.--The Secretary of State shall review the findings of the Overseas Presence Advisory Panel.
Report.-- (1) In general.--Not later than January 1, 2000, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to Congress in classified form setting forth the results of the review conducted under subsection (a).
Elements of the report.--The report shall-- (A) specify whether any United States diplomatic facility should be closed because-- (i) the facility is high vulnerability and subject to threat of terrorist attack; and (ii) adequate security enhancements cannot be provided to the facility; and (B) identify plans to provide secure premises for permanent use by the United States diplomatic mission, whether in country or in a regional United States diplomatic facility, or for temporary occupancy pending construction of new buildings.
CURRENT AND PROJECTED ROLE AND FUNCTION OF EACH UNITED STATES DIPLOMATIC FACILITY.
Not later than January 1, 2000, the Secretary of State shall submit a report to Congress, in classified and unclassified form, on the role and function of each United States diplomatic facility through 2010.
The report shall describe-- (1) the potential for reduction or transfer of personnel and equipment if technology is adequately exploited for maximum efficiencies; (2) the balance between the cost of maintaining a secure United States diplomatic facility and the benefit of a United States presence; (3) the potential for relying on regional United States diplomatic facilities in certain parts of the world; and (4) necessary upgrades, in order of importance, for such facilities.
The State Department Basic Authorities Act of 1956 is amended by inserting after section 36 (22 United States Code 2708) the following new section: ``SEC.
THE OVERSEAS SERVICE STAR.
Authority.--The President, upon the recommendation of the Secretary, may award an overseas service star to any member of the Foreign Service or any other civilian employee of the Government of the United States who, after August 1, 1998, while employed at, or assigned permanently or temporarily to, an official mission overseas or while traveling abroad on official business, incurred a wound or other injury or an illness (whether or not the wound, other injury, or illness resulted in death)-- ``(1) as the person was performing official duties; ``(2) as the person was on the premises of a United States mission abroad; or ``(3) by reason of the person's status as a United States Government employee.
Cases Resulting From Unlawful Conduct.--Cases covered by subsection (a) include cases of wounds or other injuries incurred as a result of terrorist or military action, civil unrest, or criminal activities directed at any facility of the Government of the United States.
Selection Criteria.--The Secretary shall prescribe the procedures for identifying and considering persons eligible for award of an overseas service star and for selecting the persons to be recommended for the award.
Award in the Event of Death.--If a person selected for award of an overseas service star dies before being presented the award, the award may be made and the star presented to the person's family or to the person's representative, as designated by the President.
Form of Award.--The Secretary shall prescribe the design of the overseas service star.
The award may not include a stipend or any other cash payment.
Funding.-- ``(1) Any expenses incurred for awarding a person an overseas service star may be paid out of appropriations available at the time of the award for personnel of the department or agency of the United States Government in which the person was employed when the person incurred the wound, injury, or illness upon which the award is based.
Limitation.--No funds may be made available under this section for cash payments to recipients.