This Act may be cited as the ``Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Act of 1994''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The world's rhinoceros population is declining at an alarming rate, a 90 percent decline since 1970.
All rhinoceros species have been listed on Appendix I of CITES since 1977.
All rhinoceros species, except the southern subspecies of white rhinoceros, are listed as endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (16 United States Code 1531 et sequentes).
In 1987, the parties to CITES adopted a resolution that urged all parties to establish a moratorium on the sale and trade in rhinoceros products (other than legally taken trophies), to destroy government stockpiles of rhinoceros horn, and to exert pressure on countries continuing to allow trade in rhinoceros products.
On September 7, 1993, under section 8 of the Fishermen's Protective Act of 1967 (22 United States Code 1978) the Secretary certified that the People's Republic of China and Taiwan were engaged in trade of rhinoceros parts and tiger parts that diminished the effectiveness of an international conservation program for that endangered species.
On September 9, 1993, the Standing Committee of CITES, in debating the continuing problem of trade in rhinoceros horn, adopted a resolution urging parties to CITES to implement stricter domestic measures, up to and including an immediate prohibition in trade in wildlife species.
The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To assist in the conservation of rhinoceros and tigers by supporting the conservation programs of nations whose activities affect rhinoceros and tiger populations, and the CITES Secretariat.
To provide financial resources for those programs.
In this Act-- (1) ``CITES'' means the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, signed on March 3, 1973, and its appendices; (2) ``conservation'' means the use of all methods and procedures necessary to bring rhinoceros and tigers to the point at which there are sufficient populations to ensure that those species do not become extinct, including all activities associated with scientific resource management, such as research, census, law enforcement, habitat acquisition and maintenance, propagation, live trapping, and transportation; (3) ``fish products'' means any aquatic species (including marine mammals and plants) exported from a country and all products and parts thereof, whether taken by fishing vessels of that country, or packed, processed, or otherwise prepared for export in that country or within its jurisdiction; (4) ``Fund'' means the Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Fund established under section 6(a); (5) ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; and (6) ``wildlife products'' means any wild animal (other than an aquatic species which is a fish product) taken within a country and all products and parts thereof (including eggs), whether packed, processed, or otherwise prepared for export in that country or within its jurisdiction.
This term does not include any wild animal or fish if brought or imported into the United States for scientific research or any legally taken sport-hunted trophies.
RHINOCEROS AND TIGER CONSERVATION ASSISTANCE.
In General.--The Secretary, subject to the availability of appropriations, shall use amounts in the Fund to provide financial assistance for projects for the conservation of rhinoceros and tigers.
Project Proposal.--A country whose activities affect rhinoceros or tiger populations, the CITES Secretariat, or any other person may submit to the Secretary a project proposal under this section.
Each proposal shall-- (1) name the individual responsible for conducting the project; (2) state the purposes of the project succinctly; (3) describe the qualifications of the individuals who will conduct the project; (4) estimate the funds and time required to complete the project; (5) provide evidence of support of the project by appropriate governmental entities of countries in which the project will be conducted, if the Secretary determines that the support is required for the success of the project; and (6) provide any other information the Secretary considers to be necessary for evaluating the eligibility of the project for funding under this Act.
Project Review and Approval.--The Secretary shall review each project proposal to determine if it meets the criterion set forth in subsection (d).
Not later than 6 months after receiving a project proposal, and subject to the availability of funds, the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the proposal and provide written notification to the person who submitted the proposal and to each country within which the project is to be conducted.
Criterion for Approval.--The Secretary may approve a project under this section if the project will enhance programs or activities for the conservation of rhinoceros or tigers.
Project Reporting.--Each person that receives assistance under this section for a project shall provide periodic reports to the Secretary as the Secretary considers necessary.
Each report shall include all information requested by the Secretary for evaluating the progress and success of the project.
RHINOCEROS AND TIGER CONSERVATION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the general fund of the Treasury a separate account to be known as the ``Rhinoceros and Tiger Conservation Fund'', which shall consist of amounts deposited into the Fund by the Secretary of the Treasury under subsection (b).
Deposits Into the Fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall deposit into the Fund-- (1) all amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations under subsection (d); and (2) other amounts appropriated to the Fund.
Use.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may use amounts in the Fund without further appropriation to provide assistance under section 5.
Administration.--Of amounts in the Fund available for each fiscal year, the Secretary may use not more than 6 percent to administer the Fund.
Acceptance and Use of Donations.--The Secretary may accept and use donations to provide assistance under section 5.
Amounts received by the Secretary in the form of donations shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the Fund.
SANCTIONS AGAINST FOREIGN COUNTRIES.
Initial Review and Certification.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) review all foreign countries whose activities affect rhinoceros or tiger populations; and (2) if the Secretary finds that any citizen of a foreign country, directly or indirectly, is engaging in trade in products made from rhinoceros or tigers, or in another activity that adversely affects rhinoceros or tiger conservation, certify that fact to the President.
Consultation.--Not later than 30 days after the date of a certification under subsection (a)(2) with respect to a foreign country, the President shall enter into consultations with the government of the country that the certification has been made.
Moratorium on Importation.-- (1) Direction to establish.--Not later than 60 days after the date of a certification under subsection (a)(2) with respect to a foreign country, if consultations under subsection (b) are not satisfactorily concluded with the country the President shall direct the Secretary of the Treasury to establish a moratorium on the importation of all fish products and wildlife products from the country.
Implementation.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall establish and implement a moratorium pursuant to the direction of the President under paragraph (1), by not later than 45 days after the date the President directs the Secretary of the Treasury to establish the moratorium.
Public notice.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall provide public notice of a moratorium under this subsection before implementing the moratorium.
Subsequent review.--The Secretary shall periodically review the activities of citizens of a foreign country with respect to which a certification is made under subsection (a)(2) to determine if the reasons for making the certification no longer exist.
Termination of moratorium.--If, after notice and public comment, the Secretary determines that the reasons for making a certification under subsection (a)(2) with respect to a foreign country no longer exist the Secretary of the Treasury shall terminate a moratorium established for the country under this subsection.
Additional Economic Sanctions.-- (1) Determination of effectiveness of moratorium.--Not later than 6 months after the date of a certification under subsection (a)(2) with respect to a foreign country, the Secretary shall determine whether a moratorium under subsection (c) is insufficient to cause the foreign country to improve its efforts for the conservation of rhinoceros or tigers, as appropriate.
Certification.--The Secretary shall certify to the President each affirmative determination under paragraph (1) with respect to a foreign country.
Effect of certification.--Certification by the Secretary under paragraph (2) is deemed to be a certification under section 8(a) of the Fishermen's Protective Act of 1967 (22 United States Code 1978(a)).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1995, 1996, 1997, 1998, and 1999 to carry out this Act, to remain available until expended.