This Act may be cited as the ``Rim of the Valley Corridor Study Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The greater Southern California metropolitan region is the second largest urban concentration in the United States, with almost one-tenth of the total population of the country, yet it has one of the lowest ratios of park-and-recreation- lands-per-thousand-population of any urban area in the country.
Unless action is taken soon, this situation will only become worse as the region continues to be subjected to intense growth.
The lack of park, recreation, natural open space, and habitat protection in close proximity to the greater Southern California metropolitan region deprives the individuals who reside there of-- (A) the health and spiritual welfare benefits of proximity to nature; and (B) the quantifiable benefits of reduced crime, lower social tension, and increased educational opportunities that are associated with the provision of open space in geographic proximity to and accessible to urban populations.
The Rim of the Valley Corridor encircling the San Fernando and La Crescenta valleys provides important scenic, environmental, recreational, educational, scientific, and economic assets to the greater Southern California metropolitan region.
These assets are deserving of increased protection so that they can continue to provide public benefit in the 21st century and beyond.
The Rim of the Valley Corridor, consisting of parts of the Santa Monica Mountains, Santa Susanna Mountains, San Gabriel Mountains, Verdugo Mountains, San Rafael Hills, and adjacent connector areas to the Los Padres and San Bernardino National Forests, contains significant examples of-- (A) the world's most endangered habitat area, the Mediterranean chaparral ecosystem; and (B) significant examples of separate ecotones indigenous to the area.
A key element of the Rim of the Valley Corridor is the escarpment of the San Gabriel Mountains that is largely contained within the Angeles National Forest.
That national forest is primarily managed for watershed, recreational, and habitat values and not for commercial exploitation of forest resources.
Privately owned lands within the Rim of the Valley Corridor are critical to providing additional scenic, environmental, recreational, and open space values.
These lands should be brought within public protection through the use of voluntary incentives, respecting at all times the legitimate private property values of existing property owners.
The State of California has adopted the Rim of the Valley Master Plan, and local governments within the Rim of the Valley Corridor have made significant progress toward protecting the unique natural and recreational resources of the area.
However, these efforts have been hampered by a lack of financial resources, technical assistance, and resource management expertise that can be provided by the Federal Government.
STUDY OF RIM OF THE VALLEY CORRIDOR FOR ESTABLISHMENT AS UNIT OF THE SANTA MONICA MOUNTAINS NATIONAL RECREATION AREA.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior shall conduct a special resource study of the lands, waters, and interests of the area comprising the Rim of the Valley Corridor in Southern California, as depicted on the maps on file on June 15, 2001, in the office of the Secretary of the State of California pursuant to Division 23 of the California Public Resources Code (section 33000 et sequentes).
Study Topics.--The study shall evaluate the national significance of the area and the suitability and feasibility of establishing it as a unit of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area of the National Park System.
Criteria.--In conducting the study authorized by this section, the Secretary shall use the criteria for the study of areas for potential inclusion in the National Park System contained in section 8 of Public Law 91-383 (16 United States Code 1a-5).
Consultation.--In conducting the study authorized by this section, the Secretary shall regularly consult with the Rim of the Valley Corridor and Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area Advisory Committee established by section 4.
ESTABLISHMENT OF ADVISORY COMMITTEE.
Establishment.--There is established the Rim of the Valley Corridor and Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area Advisory Committee (in this section referred to as the ``Committee'').
Recommendation of Boundaries for Expanded Recreation Area.-- (1) In general.--The Committee shall-- (A) advise the Secretary of the Interior regarding the conduct of the study under section 3; and (B) recommend to the Secretary of the Interior boundaries for a Santa Monica Mountains and Rim of the Valley National Recreation Area.
Boundary requirements.--The boundaries recommended by the Committee shall-- (A) reflect the boundaries of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) generally include the lands, waters, and interests comprising the Rim of the Valley Corridor as depicted on the maps as on file on June 15, 2001, in the office of the Secretary of the State of California pursuant to Division 23 of the California Public Resources Code (section 33000 et sequentes).
Submission.--The Committee shall-- (A) submit a recommendation to the Secretary of the Interior under this subsection within 365 days after the first meeting of the Committee; and (B) include in the recommendation maps depicting the boundaries proposed for a Santa Monica Mountains and Rim of the Valley National Recreation Area.
Public participation.--The Committee shall provide opportunities for public participation in and comment on the recommendation of boundaries under this subsection.
Membership.--The Committee consists of 24 members appointed by the Secretary of the Interior, as follows: (1) 17 representatives of local governments having jurisdiction over areas in the vicinity of the recreation area, of whom one shall be nominated by each of-- (A) the mayor of the city of Los Angeles; (B) the board of supervisors of the county of Los Angeles; (C) the board of supervisors of the county of Ventura; (D) the city council of the city of Thousand Oaks; (E) the city council of the city of Agoura Hills; (F) the city council of the city of Westlake Village; (G) the city council of the city of Malibu; (H) the city council of the city of Calabasas; (I) the city council of the city of Burbank; (J) the city council of the city of Glendale; (K) the city council of the city of La Canada- Flintridge; (L) the city council of the city of Pasadena; (M) the city council of the city of Sierra Madre; (N) the city council of the city of South Pasadena; (O) the city council of the city of Santa Clarita; (P) the city council of the city of Moorpark; and (Q) the board of supervisors of Los Angeles county to represent the unincorporated communities within the jurisdiction of the East Rim of the Valley Trail Corridor, after consultation with the Town Council of Altadena and the Crescenta Valley Town Council.
The Superintendent of the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area, or a designee of such Superintendent.
The Supervisor of the Angeles National Forest, or a designee of such Supervisor.
The Superintendent of the Angeles District of the State of California Department of Parks and Recreation, or a designee of such Superintendent.
The Director of the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, or a designee of such Director.
One representative of the Rancho Simi Recreation and Park District, nominated by the Board of Directors of such district.
One representative of the Conejo Recreation and Park District, nominated by the Board of Directors of such district.
One representative of the Pleasant Valley Recreation and Park District, nominated by the Board of Directors of such district.
Chairperson and Vice Chairperson.--The Committee shall select from among its members a chairperson and a vice chairperson.
Compensation and Expenses.--The members of the Committee shall serve without compensation, but shall be reimbursed by the Secretary of the Interior for necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties.
Quorum.--13 members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of any business.
Termination.--The Committee shall terminate upon the submittal by the Secretary of the special resources study under section 3 to the Congress.