This Act may be cited as the ``National Park Scenic Overflight Concessions Act of 1994''.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to require all commercial air tour operators to hold a concessions permit with the Park Unit, and to provide Park Service authority to determine the appropriate level of commercial scenic tour overflight activity.
Findings.--The Congress finds that: (1) The National Park Service administers Federal parks, monuments, and reservations, to conserve the scenery; natural, cultural and historic values; wilderness values, including natural quiet; and wildlife resources while providing for the enjoyment of the same in such manner and by such means as will leave them unimpaired for the enjoyment of future generations.
In recognition of these values, many park units are recognized as internationally significant International Biosphere Reserves and World Heritage Sites.
In order to manage National Park System units to achieve the purposes for which they were established by Congress, there is a need for National Park Service authority to regulate commercial scenic overflight enterprises operating over units of the National Park system.
It is the function of the Federal Aviation Administration to manage the safe and efficient use of the navigable airspace of the United States, as provided for in the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 (49 United States Code App.
1391, et sequentes); and to protect the environment from adverse impacts in accord with sections 307(c) and 611 of the foregoing Act and section 4(f) of the Department of Transportation Act (49 United States Code 1653(f)).
The auditory and visual intrusion of aircraft flying at low altitudes can be incompatible with the preservation and management of natural or cultural resources, the natural quiet, scenery, and/or the public's enjoyment of the resources on lands managed by the public land management agencies, notably such sensitive areas as parks, wildlife refuges, and wilderness areas.
It is the joint responsibility of these agencies to resolve these incompatible situations or mitigate them to the fullest extent possible in order to maintain these public lands for the purposes for which they were established while recognizing the public's and the Government's need to transit navigable airspace.
In recognition of the values for which National Park Service lands are managed, the Federal Aviation Administration and the National Park Service shall act cooperatively to reduce the incidence of low-flying aircraft impacts from commercial scenic tour overflights by helicopters, fixed-wing aircraft, blimps, and balloons over sensitive lands administered by the National Park Service and to make these overflights compatible with park preservation objectives.
The Act of October 9, 1965 (16 United States Code 20-20g) commonly known as the National Park Service Concessions Policy Act is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
COMMERCIAL AIR TOURS OVER NPS UNITS.
Issuance of Permits for Commercial Air Tours.--No person may fly an individual for compensation over any unit of the National Park System for the purpose of viewing any portion of such unit unless such person has in effect a valid commercial air tour permit issued by the Secretary.
The Secretary may issue or deny such permits upon application of any person.
Such permits may be issued subject to such conditions and restrictions as the Secretary deems necessary to protect the resources of such unit and to protect and enhance visitor enjoyment.
Issuance or denial of a permit shall be consistent with the legislation establishing such unit, the guidelines under subsection (b), any applicable provisions of any general management plan in effect for such unit, and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the national park system, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461-467).
Any person who flies an individual for compensation over any unit of the National Park System for the purpose of viewing any portion of such unit shall be treated as entering such unit and providing a service within such unit for purposes of this Act.
This subsection shall take effect on the date one year after the enactment of the National Park Scenic Overflight Concessions Act of 1994 and shall apply to all flights described in this subsection made after such effective date.
Guidelines and Planning.--Not later than 12 months after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall publish guidelines applicable to commercial air tour flights over national park system units providing for such flights where appropriate and restricting or prohibiting such flights where necessary in accordance with the provisions of law referred to in subsection (a).
Each permit under subsection (a) for flights at any unit of the National Park System shall be based on such guidelines.
Any such guidelines proposed by the Secretary shall be submitted to the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration for review prior to adoption.
Within 60 days after his receipt of such proposed guidelines, the Administrator shall provide comments and recommendations to the Secretary regarding any effects such guidelines may have on aircraft safety.
The Secretary shall incorporate the Administrator's recommendations regarding aircraft safety in the final guidelines.
General Management Plans.--The Secretary may amend the general management plan for any national park system unit to establish air concessions requirements applicable to flights subject to the permit requirements of subsection (a).
Such amendments shall be consistent with the provisions of law referred to in subsection (a) and the guidelines published under subsection (b).
The amendments shall-- ``(1) document the degree to which commercial scenic overflights may affect the natural resources of the park unit concerned; ``(2) document the effects of such overflights on the park visitor's experience; and ``(3) propose measures necessary to protect park resources and the visitor's experience from the adverse effects of commercial scenic overflights.
Each permit issued under subsection (a) for flights over any national park system unit after the effective date of general management plan amendments adopted under this subsection shall be consistent with such amendments.
Penalty.--Any person who knowingly or willfully violates any requirement of this section or of any rule or regulation promulgated by the Secretary under this section shall be fined not more than $5,000 or imprisoned for not more than 5 years or both.''.
FEDERAL AVIATION ADMINISTRATION (a) Reporting and Training.--The Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Administrator''), in cooperation with the Secretary of the Interior, shall-- (1) develop standardized reporting systems for the documentation of low flying aircraft incidents in air space over national park system units; and (2) develop training programs and instructional materials for national park service personnel to enable them to recognize and report instance of low flying aircraft incidents in air space over national park system units.
Aircraft Noise.--The Administrator shall amend the regulations of the Federal Aviation Administration to treat aircraft noise abatement at national park system units as in the public interest.
Reports.--The Administrator and the Secretary of the Interior shall submit a joint report to the Congress within 3 years after the enactment of this Act containing a description of the progress made under this Act and other authority of law in mitigating the adverse effects of commercial scenic overflights at national park system units.