This Act may be cited as the ``Social Security Right to Know Act''.
EXPANSION OF SOCIAL SECURITY ACCOUNT STATEMENT.
In General.--Section 1143(a)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320b-13(a)(2)) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (C), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (D) and inserting a semicolon, and by adding at the end the following: ``(E) a statement providing information that-- ``(i) while the old age, survivors, and disability insurance program currently collects more in employer, employee, and self-employment contributions than such program pays out in retirement, disability, survivor, and auxiliary benefits each year, such program will begin to run cash flow deficits in 2015, thereafter necessitating the allocation of general tax revenues in order to finance promised benefits; and ``(ii) the trust funds for such program contain claims on future Government resources sufficient to cover the deficit through 2037, but after that date, the trust funds would collect sufficient revenues to pay 72 percent of benefits; and ``(F) a statement explaining the nature of the Federal old age, survivors, and disability insurance trust funds, including the following: `Social Security Trust Fund balances are available to finance future benefit payments and other Trust Fund responsibilities only in a bookkeeping sense.
They do not consist of real economic assets that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits.
Instead, such balances are claims on the United States Treasury that, when redeemed, will have to be financed by raising taxes, borrowing from the public, or reducing benefits or other expenditures.
The existence of large Social Security Trust Fund balances, therefore, does not, by itself, have any impact on the Federal Government's ability to pay benefits.'.
For purposes of subparagraph (E), the dates and percentages described in such subparagraph shall be adjusted annually based on the Alternative II (Intermediate) findings of the Office of the Chief Actuary contained in the most recent report of the Board of Trustees.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to statements provided after the date of enactment of this Act.
EXPANSION OF ANNUAL REPORT OF THE TRUSTEES OF THE SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUNDS.
In General.--Section 201(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401(c)) is amended by inserting before the penultimate sentence the following: ``Based on the Alternative II (Intermediate) findings of the Office of the Chief Actuary, such report, including the report's summary and any items that accompany the release of such report, shall include in a clear and simple manner the information described in subsection (n)(1).
Additional Contents of Report.--Section 201 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 401) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n)(1) For purposes of subsection (c), the information described in this subsection is the following: ``(A) An estimate of the year in which annual outlays from the Trust Funds is first projected, using the Trustees' intermediate estimates, to exceed the annual cash income of the Trust Funds.
For purposes of this paragraph, annual cash income of the Trust Funds shall be determined by including payroll and benefit tax revenues, but not intragovernmental transfers or interest income.
The annual excess of such projected annual outlays from the Trust Funds over the annual cash income of the Trust Funds in each year, beginning with the first year identified in subparagraph (A) and extending through the year of projected program insolvency.
The aggregate amount of the annual excesses identified in subparagraph (B) for the 75-year projection period included in the report and the change in such amount from the previous year's report.
The amount of deficit or surplus that the old-age, survivor, and disability insurance program will run in the last year in the 75-year projection period included in the report and the aggregate assets and unfunded obligations contained in the Trust Funds in that final projected year.
The amount that payroll taxes would have to be raised or benefits be reduced (both in percentage terms) in order to keep the old-age, survivor, and disability insurance program in annual financial balance after any cumulative balances in the Trust Funds are exhausted.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, such program shall be considered to be in annual financial balance when the annual cash income of the Trust Funds and annual outlays from the Trust Funds are approximately equal for each year throughout the 75-year projection period included in the report.
How the annual amounts identified in subparagraph (B) would change if either raising payroll taxes or reducing benefits to keep the program in financial balance is delayed for 5, 10, 25, and 50 years.
A provision explaining the nature of the Trust Funds, including the following statement: `Social Security Trust Fund balances are available to finance future benefit payments and other Trust Fund responsibilities only in a bookkeeping sense.
They do not consist of real economic assets that can be drawn down in the future to fund benefits.
Instead, such balances are claims on the United States Treasury that, when redeemed, will have to be financed by raising taxes, borrowing from the public, or reducing benefits or other expenditures.
The existence of large Social Security Trust Fund balances, therefore, does not, by itself, have any impact on the Federal Government's ability to pay benefits.'.
The information described in subparagraphs (B), (C), and (D) of paragraph (1) shall be presented in terms of nominal dollars, inflation-adjusted dollars, and present discounted value in the report under subsection (c)(2), and in terms of inflation-adjusted dollars in the summary of such report.
The Board of Trustees shall publish the economic model and all relevant data that are used to make the financial projections included in the report under subsection (c)(2) and to make it available on the Social Security Administration Internet web site.
Annually, the Board of Trustees shall also include in such report any changes made to the model and data in the preceding 12 months.
The information described in paragraph (1) shall also be included in a separate report to Congress to be submitted not later than the first day of April of each year (beginning with 2000).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to reports made after the date of enactment of this Act.