This Act may be cited as the ``Pinnacles National Park Act''.
In this Act: (1) Map.--The term ``Map'' means the map entitled ``Proposed Wilderness Additions to the Proposed Pinnacles National Park'', numbered 114/106,106, and dated November 2010.
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the Pinnacles National Park established by section 3(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of California.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PINNACLES NATIONAL PARK.
Establishment.--There is established in the State the Pinnacles National Park.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Park are-- (1) to preserve and interpret for the benefit of future generations-- (A) the chaparral, grasslands, blue oak woodlands, and majestic valley oak savanna ecosystems of the area; (B) the geomorphology, riparian watersheds, and unique flora and fauna of the area; and (C) the ancestral and cultural history of Native Americans, settlers, and explorers; and (2) to interpret the recovery program for the California Condor, including the international significance of the program.
Boundaries.--The boundaries of the Park shall consist of the areas generally depicted on the Map.
Availability of Map.--The Map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
Abolishment of Current Pinnacles National Monument.-- (1) In general.--The Pinnacles National Monument is abolished.
Incorporation of land.--The land and any interests in the land that comprise the Pinnacles National Monument are incorporated in, and shall be considered to be part of, the Park.
Availability of funds.--Any funds available for the Pinnacles National Monument shall be available for the Park.
References.--Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to ``Pinnacles National Monument'' shall be considered to be a reference to ``Pinnacles National Park''.
Administration.--The Secretary shall administer the Park in accordance with-- (1) this Act; and (2) the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the National Park Service Organic Act (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes).
Land Acquisition.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may acquire land or interests in land within the boundaries of the Park by purchase from a willing seller with donated or appropriated funds, donation, or exchange.
Acquisition of rock springs ranch.-- (A) Acquisition authorized.--The Secretary may acquire, by purchase from a willing seller, donation, or exchange, the approximately 18,200 acres of land in San Benito County, California, known as the ``Rock Springs Ranch Tract''.
Inclusion within national park.--On acquisition of the land described in subparagraph (A), the Secretary shall modify the boundaries of the Park to include the acquired land.
Map.--Not later than 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall file a map depicting the land described in subparagraph (A) with-- (i) the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives; and (ii) the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
REDESIGNATION OF PINNACLES WILDERNESS AS HAIN WILDERNESS AND EXPANSION OF WILDERNESS.
Redesignation.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (i) of the first section of Public Law 94-567 (16 United States Code 1132 note) is amended by striking ``Pinnacles Wilderness'' and inserting ``Hain Wilderness.''
References.--Any reference in a law, map, regulation, document, paper, or other record of the United States to the ``Pinnacles Wilderness'' shall be considered to be a reference to the ``Hain Wilderness''.
Expansion.--Certain land comprising approximately 2,715 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Proposed Wilderness Additions to the Proposed Pinnacles National Park'', numbered 114/ 106,106, and dated November 2010, is-- (1) designated as wilderness and a component of the National Wilderness Preservation System; and (2) incorporated in, and considered to be a part of, the Hain Wilderness.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.