This Act may be cited as the ``Assessment and Remediation of Contaminated Sediments Reauthorization Act''.
ASSESSMENT AND REMEDIATION OF CONTAMINATED SEDIMENTS.
Section 118(c)(7) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1268(c)(7)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) Demonstration projects.-- ``(i) In general.--The Administrator, acting through the Program Office, in consultation and cooperation with the Assistant Secretary of the Army having responsibility for civil works, shall conduct at least 3 demonstration projects involving promising technologies and practices to remedy contaminated sediments (including at least 1 full-scale demonstration of a remediation technology) at sites in the Great Lakes System, as the Administrator determines appropriate.
Selection of sites.--In selecting sites for the demonstration projects, the Administrator shall give priority consideration to-- ``(I) the Ashtabula River in Ohio; ``(II) the Buffalo River in New York; ``(III) Duluth and Superior Harbor in Minnesota; ``(IV) the Fox River in Wisconsin; ``(V) the Grand Calumet River in Indiana; and ``(VI) Saginaw Bay in Michigan.
Deadlines.--In carrying out this subparagraph, the Administrator shall-- ``(I) not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this subparagraph, identify at least 3 sites and the technologies and practices to be demonstrated at the sites (including at least 1 full-scale demonstration of a remediation technology); and ``(II) not later than 5 years after the date of enactment, complete at least 3 demonstration projects (including at least 1 full-scale demonstration of a remediation technology).
Additional projects.--The Administrator, acting through the Program Office, in consultation and cooperation with the Assistant Secretary of the Army having responsibility for civil works, may conduct additional pilot- and full-scale demonstration projects involving promising technologies and practices at sites in the Great Lakes System other than the sites selected under clause (i).
Execution of projects.--The Administrator may cooperate with the Assistant Secretary of the Army having responsibility for civil works to plan, engineer, design, and execute demonstration projects under this subparagraph.
Non-federal contributions.--The Administrator may accept non-Federal contributions to carry out demonstration projects under this subparagraph.
Authorization of appropriations.-- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subparagraph $3,500,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2001.
Technical information and assistance.-- ``(i) In general.--The Administrator, acting through the Program Office, may provide technical information and assistance involving technologies and practices for remediation of contaminated sediments to persons that request the information or assistance.
Technical assistance priorities.--In providing technical assistance under this subparagraph, the Administrator, acting through the Program Office, shall give special priority to requests for integrated assessments of, and recommendations regarding, remediation technologies and practices for contaminated sediments at Great Lakes areas of concern.
Coordination with other demonstrations.--The Administrator shall-- ``(I) coordinate technology demonstrations conducted under this subparagraph with other federally assisted demonstrations of contaminated sediment remediation technologies; and ``(II) share information from the demonstrations conducted under this subparagraph with the other demonstrations.
Other sediment remediation activities.--Nothing in this subparagraph limits the authority of the Administrator to carry out sediment remediation activities under other laws.
Authorization of appropriations.-- There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subparagraph $1,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2001.
EXTENSION OF AUTHORIZATION OF GREAT LAKES APPROPRIATIONS.
Section 118(h) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1268(h)) is amended by striking ``for fiscal year 1991.
Of the'' and all that follows through the period at the end and inserting ``for each of fiscal years 1991 through 2001.