This Act may be cited as the ``Specialty Crop and Value-Added Agriculture Promotion Act''.
ANNUAL GRANTS TO STATES TO SUPPORT SPECIALTY CROP PRODUCERS.
Availability and Purpose of Grants.--Subject to the appropriation of funds to carry out this section, the Secretary of Agriculture shall make a grant each fiscal year under this section to each State that submits an application requesting the grant for that fiscal year.
The grant funds shall be used by the State department of agriculture solely to enhance the competitiveness of specialty crops produced in that State.
The application for a fiscal year shall be submitted at such time and in such form as the Secretary prescribes.
Grants Based on Value of Production.--The amount of the grant for a fiscal year to a State under this section shall bear the same ratio to the total amount appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in subsection (e) for that fiscal year as the value of specialty crop production in the State during the preceding calendar year bears to the value of specialty crop production during that calendar year in all States submitting applications for a grant for that fiscal year.
Grant Funds as Supplement to State Expenditures.--Grant funds provided under this section shall supplement the expenditure of State funds in support of specialty crops and specialty crop producers, and shall not replace State funds.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``specialty crop'' means all agricultural crops, except wheat, feed grains, oilseeds, cotton, rice, peanuts, sugar, and tobacco.
The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
The term ``State department of agriculture'' means the agency, commission, or department of a State government responsible for protecting and promoting agriculture within the State.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $500,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 and each fiscal year thereafter to make grants under this section.
BLOCK GRANTS TO STATES FOR VALUE-ADDED AGRICULTURAL PRODUCT MARKET DEVELOPMENT.
In General.--Section 231(b) of the Agricultural Risk Protection Act of 2000 (7 United States Code 1621 note) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Grant Program.-- ``(1) Block grants to states.-- ``(A) In general.--From amounts made available under paragraph (6) for each fiscal year, the Secretary shall provide to each State, subject to subparagraph (B), a sum equal to-- ``(i) the amount so made available; multiplied by ``(ii)(I) the total value of the agricultural commodities and products made in the State during the preceding fiscal year; divided by ``(II) the total value of the agricultural commodities and products made in all of the States during the preceding fiscal year.
Limitation.--The total amount that may be provided to a State for a fiscal year under subparagraph (A) shall not exceed $3,000,000.
Grants by states.--A State to which funds are provided under paragraph (1) shall use the money to award competitive grants-- ``(A) to an eligible independent producer (as determined by the State) of a value-added agricultural product to assist the producer-- ``(i) in developing a business plan for viable marketing opportunities for the value- added agricultural product; or ``(ii) in developing strategies that are intended to create marketing opportunities for the producer; and ``(B) to an eligible agricultural producer group, farmer or rancher cooperative, or majority-controlled producer-based business venture (as determined by the State) to assist the entity-- ``(i) in developing a business plan for viable marketing opportunities in emerging markets for a value-added agricultural product; or ``(ii) in developing strategies that are intended to create marketing opportunities in emerging markets for the value-added agricultural product.
Amount of grant.-- ``(A) In general.--The total amount provided under paragraph (2) to a grant recipient shall not exceed $500,000.
Majority-controlled producer-based business ventures.--The amount of grants provided by a State to majority-controlled producer-based business ventures under paragraph (2)(B) for a fiscal year may not exceed 10 percent of the amount of funds that are used by the State to make grants for the fiscal year under paragraph (2).
Grantee strategies.--A grantee under paragraph (2) shall use the grant-- ``(A) to develop a business plan or perform a feasibility study to establish a viable marketing opportunity for a value-added agricultural product; or ``(B) to provide capital to establish alliances or business ventures that allow the producer of the value- added agricultural product to better compete in domestic or international markets.
Reports.--Within 90 days after the end of a fiscal year for which funds are provided to a State under paragraph (1), the State shall submit to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate a report describing how the funds were used.
Funding.--On October 1 of each fiscal year, of the funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation, the Secretary shall make available to carry out this subsection $100,000,000, to remain available until expended.
State defined.--In this subsection, the term `State' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on October 1, 2004.
REIMBURSEMENT OF CERTIFICATION COSTS.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a quality standardization program for certification of farmers and processors under quality assurance systems.
The program-- (1) shall set standards for types of certifications that qualify under the program; (2) may provide for certification under programs such as Good Agricultural Practices, Good Handling Practices, and Good Manufacturing Practices programs; (3) shall establish what certification-related expenses shall qualify for reimbursement under the program; and (4) shall provide that farmers and processors shall be reimbursed for 50 percent of qualified expenses related to accepted certifications.
NATIONWIDE EXPANSION OF RISK MANAGEMENT AGENCY ADJUSTED GROSS REVENUE INSURANCE PROGRAM.
Expansion.--Section 523(e) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1523(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Permanent nationwide operation.--Effective beginning with the 2005 reinsurance year, the Corporation shall carry out the adjusted gross revenue insurance pilot program as a permanent program under this Act and may expand the program to cover any county in which crops are produced.
To facilitate the expansion of the program nationwide, the Corporation may grant temporary premium subsidies for the purchase of a policy under the program to producers whose farm operations are located in a county that has a high level of specialty crop production and has not had a high-level of participation in the purchase of crop insurance coverage.''.
Comptroller General Study.--The Comptroller General shall conduct a study of the Federal crop insurance program to determine how well the program serves specialty crop producers and to recommend such changes as the Comptroller General considers appropriate to improve the program for specialty crop producers.
EXPANSION OF FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROGRAM IN SCHOOL LUNCH PROGRAMS.
The Richard B. Russell National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) in section 18, by striking subsection (g); and (2) by inserting after section 18 the following new section: ``SEC.
FRUIT AND VEGETABLE PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary shall make available to students in not more than 100 schools in each State, and in elementary and secondary schools on 1 Indian reservation, free fresh and dried fruits and vegetables throughout the school day in 1 or more areas designated by the school.
Priority in Allocation.--In selecting States to participate in the program, the Secretary shall give priority to States that produce large quantities of specialty crops.
Publicity.--A school participating in the program authorized by this section shall publicize within the school the availability of free fruits and vegetables under the program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for fiscal years 2005 and 2006, $20,000,000 to carry out this section.