This Act may be cited as the ``Early Learning and Opportunity Act of 1997''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The first 3 years of life are a critical period of brain development, intellectual growth, and emotional, social, affective, and moral development, that help determine the health and productivity of a child in later life.
Scientific research shows that how individuals function from preschool through adolescence and adulthood hinges to a significant extent on the experiences children have in their first 3 years of life.
One in 3 victims of physical abuse is a baby less than 1 year of age.
In 1993 the National Educational Goals Panel reported that nearly half of infants in the United States do not have what they need to grow and thrive.
High-quality care from a parent or other adult is necessary to facilitate growth and development.
More than 50 percent of mothers with children less than 1 year of age are working outside the home.
More than 50 percent of working women are not covered by the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993, an Act that provides a 12-week, unpaid parental leave.
The United States is the only industrialized country in the world which does not provide paid maternity leave.
Thirty developing countries provide paid maternity leave.
Five million children under age 3 are in the care of other adults while their parents work outside the home.
Parents of very young children have few child care service options.
Many cannot afford to stay home with their children, or to pay for safe, high-quality developmental child care services.
Statewide and multistate studies have found that less than 20 percent of child care services for very young children is of good quality; nearly 50 percent is of such substandard quality that it adversely affects such children's development and may put their health and safety at risk.
Families with children less than 3 years of age are the single largest group living in poverty.
Twenty-five percent of such children, 3,000,000 children, are living below the poverty line, are at greater risk for malnutrition, poor health, and maltreatment, and are less likely to receive the care they need from parents or other child care service providers to grow and develop normally.
The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to improve the quality, and to increase the availability, of child care services for children less than 3 years of age, (2) to improve the affordability of child care services available to such children, (3) to improve the quality, and to increase the availability, of services to assist families to nurture such children, and (4) to improve the coordination and effectiveness of existing programs that provide such services to such children and their families.
TITLE I--EARLY LEARNING AND OPPORTUNITY GRANTS SEC.
Authority To Make Grants.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services may make grants, on a competitive basis, to eligible States to improve the quality, and to increase the availability, of child care services for very young children and of support services for the families of such children.
Priority.--For the purpose of making grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to eligible States to the extent that such State, as demonstrated in the application for a grant under such subsection-- (1) will minimize the administrative costs to be incurred to carry out the plan contained in such application, (2) has coordinated the activities described in the plan contained in such application, with providers of child care services for children between 3 and 6 years of age, and with providers of family support services for families of such children, located in the State, (3) has taken substantial legislative or executive action to reduce the duplication of, and barriers to providing, such services, and (4) during the fiscal year for which such grant is received, will reimburse such providers for such services at rates that reflect-- (A) the higher costs incurred by such providers who are accredited by national association that provides accreditation for providers of the respective types of such services and that is recognized by the Secretary, and (B) the higher costs incurred by such providers to provide child care services to children who are very young children.
To be eligible to receive a grant under section 101, a State shall submit to the Secretary an application that satisfies the following requirements: (1) Such application is prepared by the State after consultation with providers of child care services for very young children, and with providers of family support services for families of such children, located in the State.
Such application contains a plan that describes how the State will expend such grant to do 1 or more of the following: (A) To improve quality of child care services.
To improve licensing standards applicable to providers of child care services for very young children in the State by specifying matters that apply to providing child care services, such as child-to- staff ratios, group size, staff preparation and qualifications, ongoing staff training, health and safety, and linkages to parents and community services.
To improve enforcement of licensing standards applicable to providers of child care services for care for very young children in the State.
To improve salaries for caregivers of such child care services.
To support ongoing and more advanced training for such caregivers (including training to provide child care services for children with special needs) and to create incentives for individuals to obtain, and child care centers to employ individuals who have obtained, more advanced training in providing child care services.
To improve accessibility to child care services for very young children, including improving the quality of, and expanding the availability of, resource and referral services and transportation services for families with very young children.
To improve affordability of child care services for very young children.
To improve and expand support services to families with very young children.
To improve coordination of existing Federal and State programs that provide support services for families with very young children.
Such application shall contain assurances that-- (i) not more than 70 percent of the cost of carrying out the plan contained in such application will be paid with such grant together with any other available Federal funds, (ii) such grant will be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds otherwise available to provide child care services for very young children and support services for the families of such children, (iii) the State will expend in cash or in kind, from State resources (including private contributions and excluding resources available to local governmental entities) an amount not less than 30 percent of the amount of such grant, and (iv) such grant will be administered by the lead agency that is designated by the State under section 658D of the Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858b).
Such application shall contain such other information and assurances as the Secretary may require by rule.
MODEL TRAINING PROGRAM FOR EMPLOYEES OF CHILD CARE PROVIDERS.
The Secretary shall-- (1) by adapting the requirements in effect under section 1792(a) of title 10, United States Code, develop a voluntary model training program applicable to individuals who are employed as caregivers by providers of child care services, (2) make available to Head Start agencies and providers of child care services the model training code developed under paragraph (1), and (3) provide to such agencies and such providers technical assistance to implement such program.
For purposes of this title: (1) Caregiver.--The term ``caregiver'' means an individual who provides a service directly to a child on a person-to- person basis.
Family support services.--The term ``family support services'' means community-based activities designed to promote parental competencies and behaviors that will increase the ability of families to successfully nurture their children.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Very young children.--The term ``very young children'' means children who are less than 3 years of age.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $360,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1998, 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002.
TITLE II--AMENDMENT TO INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986 SEC.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
TAXATION OF INCOME OF CONTROLLED FOREIGN CORPORATIONS ATTRIBUTABLE TO IMPORTED PROPERTY.
General Rule.--Subsection (a) of section 954 (defining foreign base company income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) imported property income for the taxable year (determined under subsection (h) and reduced as provided in subsection (b)(5)).''
Definition of Imported Property Income.--Section 954 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Imported Property Income.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a)(6), the term `imported property income' means income (whether in the form of profits, commissions, fees, or otherwise) derived in connection with-- ``(A) manufacturing, producing, growing, or extracting imported property, ``(B) the sale, exchange, or other disposition of imported property, or ``(C) the lease, rental, or licensing of imported property.
Such term shall not include any foreign oil and gas extraction income (within the meaning of section 907(c)) or any foreign oil related income (within the meaning of section 907(c)).
Imported property.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the term `imported property' means property which is imported into the United States by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person.
Imported property includes certain property imported by unrelated persons.--The term `imported property' includes any property imported into the United States by an unrelated person if, when such property was sold to the unrelated person by the controlled foreign corporation (or a related person), it was reasonable to expect that-- ``(i) such property would be imported into the United States, or ``(ii) such property would be used as a component in other property which would be imported into the United States.
Exception for property subsequently exported.--The term `imported property' does not include any property which is imported into the United States and which-- ``(i) before substantial use in the United States, is sold, leased, or rented by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person for direct use, consumption, or disposition outside the United States, or ``(ii) is used by the controlled foreign corporation or a related person as a component in other property which is so sold, leased, or rented.
Definitions and special rules.-- ``(A) Import.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `import' means entering, or withdrawal from warehouse, for consumption or use.
Such term includes any grant of the right to use an intangible (as defined in section 936(b)(3)(B)) in the United States.
Unrelated person.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `unrelated person' means any person who is not a related person with respect to the controlled foreign corporation.
Coordination with foreign base company sales income.--For purposes of this section, the term `foreign base company sales income' shall not include any imported property income.''
Separate Application of Limitations on Foreign Tax Credit for Imported Property Income.-- (1) In general.--Paragraph (1) of section 904(d) (relating to separate application of section with respect to certain categories of income) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (H), by redesignating subparagraph (I) as subparagraph (J), and by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph: ``(I) imported property income, and''.
Imported property income defined.--Paragraph (2) of section 904(d) is amended by redesignating subparagraphs (H) and (I) as subparagraphs (I) and (J), respectively, and by inserting after subparagraph (G) the following new subparagraph: ``(H) Imported property income.--The term `imported property income' means any income received or accrued by any person which is of a kind which would be imported property income (as defined in section 954(h)).''
Look-through rules to apply.--Subparagraph (F) of section 904(d)(3) is amended by striking ``or (E)'' and inserting ``(E), or (H)''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Clause (iii) of section 952(c)(1)(B) (relating to certain prior year deficits may be taken into account) is amended by inserting the following subclause after subclause (II) (and by redesignating the following subclauses accordingly): ``(III) imported property income,''.
Paragraph (5) of section 954(b) (relating to deductions to be taken into account) is amended by striking ``and the foreign base company oil related income'' and inserting ``the foreign base company oil related income, and the imported property income''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1996, and to taxable years of United States shareholders within which or with which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.
Subsection (c).--The amendments made by subsection (c) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.
TITLE III--AMENDMENT TO FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE ACT OF 1993 SEC.
Paragraphs (2)(B)(ii) and (4)(A)(i) of section 101 of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993(29 United States Code 2611 (2)(B)(ii) and (4)(A)(i)) are each amended by striking ``50'' each place it appears and inserting ``20''.
This title shall take effect 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TITLE IV--AMENDMENTS TO THE HEAD START ACT SEC.
Section 639(a) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9834(a)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``, $4,900,000,000 for fiscal year 1999, $5,500,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, $6,100,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, and $6,700,000,000 for fiscal year 2002''.
Training and Technical Assistance.--Section 640(a)(2)(C) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9835(a)(2)(C)) is amended by striking ``2 percent'' and inserting ``3 percent''.
Programs for Families With Infants and Toddlers.--Section 640(a)(6) of the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9835(a)(6)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``1997, and'' and inserting ``1997,'', and (2) by inserting after ``1998,'' the following: ``, 6 percent for fiscal year 1999, 7 percent for fiscal year 2000, 8 percent for fiscal year 2001, and 9 percent for fiscal year 2002''.
This title and the amendments made by this title shall take effect on October 1, 1997.