This Act may be cited as the ``SAFE-ID Act'' or the ``SAFE-ID Act''.
As used in this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Business enterprise.--The term ``business enterprise'' means any organization, association, or venture established to make a profit.
Country with adequate privacy protection.--The term ``country with adequate privacy protection'' means a country that has been certified by the Federal Trade Commission as having a legal system that provides adequate privacy protection for personally identifiable information.
Health care business.--The term ``health care business'' means any business enterprise or private, nonprofit organization that collects or retains personally identifiable information about consumers in relation to medical care, including-- (A) hospitals; (B) health maintenance organizations; (C) medical partnerships; (D) emergency medical transportation companies; (E) medical transcription companies; (F) banks that collect or process medical billing information; and (G) subcontractors, or potential subcontractors, of the entities described in subparagraphs (A) through (F).
Personally identifiable information.--The term ``personally identifiable information'' includes, but is not limited to, information such as-- (A) name; (B) postal address; (C) financial information; (D) medical records; (E) date of birth; (F) phone number; (G) e-mail address; (H) social security number; (I) mother's maiden name; (J) password; (K) state identification information; and (L) driver's license number.
In General.--A business enterprise may transmit personally identifiable information regarding a citizen of the United States to any foreign affiliate or subcontractor located in a country that is a country with adequate privacy protection.
Consent Required.--A business enterprise may not transmit personally identifiable information regarding a citizen of the United States to any foreign affiliate or subcontractor located in a country that is a country without adequate privacy protection unless-- (1) the business enterprise discloses to the citizen that the country to which the information will be transmitted does not have adequate privacy protection; (2) the business enterprise obtains consent from the citizen, before a consumer relationship is established or before the effective date of this Act, to transmit such information to such foreign affiliate or subcontractor; and (3) the consent referred to in paragraph (2) is renewed by the citizen within 1 year before such information is transmitted.
Liability.--A business enterprise shall be liable for any damages arising from the improper storage, duplication, sharing, or other misuse of personally identifiable information by the business enterprise or by any of its foreign affiliates or subcontractors that received such information from the business enterprise.
Rulemaking.--The Chairman of the Federal Trade Commission shall promulgate regulations through which the Chairman may enforce the provisions of this section and impose a fine for a violation of this section.
In General.--A health care business shall be liable for any damages arising from the improper storage, duplication, sharing, or other misuse of personally identifiable information by the business enterprise or by any of its foreign affiliates or subcontractors that received such information from the business enterprise.
No Opt Out Provision.--A health care business may not terminate an existing relationship with a consumer of health care services to avoid the consent requirement under section 3(b).
Rulemaking.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall promulgate regulations through which the Secretary may enforce the provisions of this section and impose a fine for the violation of this section.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall-- (1) certify those countries that have legal systems that provide adequate privacy protection for personally identifiable information; and (2) make the list of countries certified under paragraph (1) available to the general public.
Certification Criteria.--In determining whether a country should be certified under this section, the Federal Trade Commission shall consider the adequacy of the country's infrastructure for detecting, evaluating, and responding to privacy violations.
European Union Data Protection Directive.--A country that has comprehensive privacy laws that meet the requirements of the European Union Data Protection Directive shall be certified under this section unless the Federal Trade Commission determines that such laws are not commonly enforced within such country.
This Act shall take effect on the expiration of the date which is 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act.