TITLE I--INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION SEC.
PARTICIPATION IN THE THIRTEENTH REPLENISHMENT OF THE RESOURCES OF THE INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT ASSOCIATION.
The International Development Association Act (22 United States Code 284-284s) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Association may contribute on behalf of the United States an amount equal to the amount appropriated under subsection (b), pursuant to the resolution of the Association entitled `Additions to IDA Resources: Thirteenth Replenishment'.
Subject to appropriations.--Any commitment to make the contribution authorized by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury, without fiscal year limitation.''.
Title XV of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262o--262o-2) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Achievement of Certain Policy Goals.--The Secretary of Treasury should instruct the United States Executive Director at each multilateral development institution to inform the institution of the following United States policy goals, and to work toward achieving the goals at the institution before June 30, 2005: ``(1) No later than 60 calendar days after the Board of Directors of the institution approves the minutes of a Board meeting, the institution shall post on its website an electronic version of the minutes, with material deemed too sensitive for public distribution redacted.
The institution shall keep a written transcript or electronic recording of each meeting of its Board of Directors and preserve the transcript or recording for at least 10 years after the meeting.
All public sector loan documents, country assistance strategies, sector strategies, and sector policies prepared by the institution and presented for endorsement or approval by its Board of Directors, with materials deemed too sensitive for public distribution redacted or withheld, shall be made available to the public 15 calendar days before consideration by the Board or, if not then available, when the documents are distributed to the Board.
The institution shall post on its website an annual report containing statistical summaries and case studies of the fraud and corruption cases pursued by its investigations unit.
The institution shall require that any health, education, or poverty-focused loan, credit, grant, document, policy, or strategy prepared by the institution includes specific outcome and output indicators to measure results, and that the indicators and results be published periodically during the execution, and at the completion, of the project or program.
Publication of Written Statements Regarding Inspection Mechanism Cases.--No later than 60 calendar days after a meeting of the Board of Directors of a multilateral development institution, the Secretary of the Treasury should provide for publication on the website of the Department of the Treasury of any written statement presented at the meeting by the United States Executive Director at the institution concerning-- ``(1) a project on which a claim has been made to the inspection mechanism of the institution; or ``(2) a pending inspection mechanism case.
Congressional Briefings.--At the request of the Committee on Financial Services of the House of Representatives or the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate, the Secretary of the Treasury or the designee of the Secretary should brief the requesting committee on the steps that have been taken by the United States Executive Director at any multilateral development institution, and by any such institution, to implement the measures described in this section.
Publication of `No' Votes and Abstentions by the United States.--Each month, the Secretary of the Treasury should provide for posting on the website of the Department of the Treasury of a record of all `no' votes and abstentions made by the United States Executive Director at any multilateral development institution on any matter before the Board of Directors of the institution.
Multilateral Development Institution Defined.--In this section, the term `multilateral development institution' shall have the meaning given in section 1701(c)(3).''.
TITLE II--ASIAN DEVELOPMENT FUND SEC.
PARTICIPATION IN THE SEVENTH REPLENISHMENT OF THE RESOURCES OF THE ASIAN DEVELOPMENT FUND.
The Asian Development Bank Act (22 United States Code 285-285aa) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTION TO SPECIAL FUNDS.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Bank may contribute on behalf of the United States an amount equal to the amount appropriated under subsection (b), pursuant to the resolution of the Bank entitled `Seventh Replenishment of the Asian Development Fund'.
Subject to appropriations.--Any commitment to make the contribution authorized by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury, without fiscal year limitation.''.
TITLE III--AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND SEC.
PARTICIPATION IN THE NINTH REPLENISHMENT OF THE RESOURCES OF THE AFRICAN DEVELOPMENT FUND.
The African Development Fund Act (22 United States Code 290g--290g-15) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
Contribution Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The United States Governor of the Fund may contribute on behalf of the United States an amount equal to the amount appropriated under subsection (b), pursuant to the resolution of the Fund entitled `The Ninth General Replenishment of Resources of the African Development Fund'.
Subject to appropriations.--Any commitment to make the contribution authorized by paragraph (1) shall be effective only to such extent or in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriations Acts.
Limitations on Authorization of Appropriations.--For the contribution authorized by subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for payment by the Secretary of the Treasury, without fiscal year limitation.