This Act may be cited as the ``Steel and National Security Act''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Domestic steel capacity is an essential part of the domestic industrial and technological base, as described in Executive Order Numbered 12919.
Executive Order Numbered 12919-- (A) designates the Nation's domestic industrial and technological base as the foundation for national defense preparedness; and (B) directs that authority provided under the Defense Production Act of 1950 be used to strengthen the domestic industrial and technological base to ensure that such base is capable of responding to all threats to the national security of the United States.
The influx of cheap imported steel illegally dumped on the United States has brought about a crisis in the United States' steel industry that threatens the viability of domestic steel production.
PRODUCTIVE CAPACITY AND SUPPLY.
Authorization of Appropriation.--Section 711(b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 United States Code App.
2161(b)) is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Title III Authorization.-- ``(1) In general.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2002, 2003, and 2004 not to exceed $1,000,000,000.
Purchase commitments.--Not less than 50 percent of the amount appropriated under paragraph (1) for any fiscal year is authorized to be appropriated solely for purchase commitments.''.
National Defense Preparedness Domestic Industrial Base Board.-- Title III of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 United States Code App.
is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
NATIONAL DEFENSE PREPAREDNESS DOMESTIC INDUSTRIAL BASE BOARD.
Establishment.--There is hereby established a board to be known as the National Defense Preparedness Domestic Industrial Base Board (hereafter in this section referred to as the `Board').
Membership.-- ``(1) Number and appointment.--The Board shall consist of 5 members appointed by the President, from among individuals who-- ``(A) are or have been affiliated with the Department of Defense or a military department (as defined in section 101 of title 10, United States Code; and ``(B) have experience preparing the United States for a national security emergency or managing the development and acquisition of weapons or other defense products.
Political affiliation.--Not more than 3 members may be of the same political party.
Terms.-- ``(A) In general.--Each member shall be appointed a term of 5 years, except as provided in subparagraphs (A) and (B) ``(B) Terms of initial appointees.--As designated by the President at the time of appointment, of the members first appointed-- ``(i) 1 shall be appointed for a term of 5 years; ``(ii) 1 shall be appointed for a term of 4 years; ``(iii) 1 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years; ``(iv) 1 shall be appointed for a term of 2 years; and ``(v) 1 shall be appointed for a term of 1 year.
Vacancies.-- ``(A) Appointment for balance of term.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
Continuation of service.--A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
Appointment to vacancy.--A vacancy in the Board shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Board who are full-time officers or employees of the United States may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Board.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--3 members of the Board shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Board shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
Duties.-- ``(1) In general.--The Board shall take such action as may be necessary to ensure uninterrupted availability of national defense-related products, services, and industrial resources through long-term purchase agreements with domestic sources.
One-time en masse purchases.-- ``(A) In general.--The Board may, in the Board's discretion, purchase domestic products, materials, or industrial resources from a domestic concern that is at risk of bankruptcy and whose failure would threaten a critical industry for national security, including the steel industry, in which such concern is involved.
Storage for use.--Any product or material purchased by the Board under subparagraph (A) shall be kept in storage for use in the event of a national emergency, in accordance with the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act, or as the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of Energy may otherwise provide.
Study and monitor critical industries.--The Board shall study and monitor critical industries, including the steel industry, for national security and domestic concerns involved in any such industry to determine which are in danger of failing or otherwise losing the capacity to provide for national security.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection, the following definitions shall apply: ``(A) Domestic concern.--The term `domestic concern' has the same meaning given in section 104(h)(1) of the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1977.
Domestic product, material, or industrial resource.--The term `domestic products, materials, or industrial resources' means-- ``(i) in the case of unmanufactured products, materials, or industrial resources, products, materials, or resources all or substantially all of which were mined or produced in the United States; and ``(ii) in the case of manufactured or processed products, materials and industrial resources-- ``(I) all or substantially all of the component products, materials, or resources were mined or produced in the United States; and ``(II) all or substantially all of the manufacturing, processing, fabrication, or assembly of such product, material or resource was conducted within the United States.
Powers of the Board.-- ``(1) Hearings and sessions.-- ``(A) In general.--The Board may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Board considers appropriate.
Oaths and affirmations.--The Board may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Obtaining official data.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Board may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this section.
Request for information.--Upon request of the Chairperson of the Board, the head of the department or agency receiving the request for information under subparagraph (A) shall furnish that information to the Board.
Mails.--The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative support services.--Upon the request of the Board, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Board, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Board to carry out this section.
Staff.-- ``(1) Appointment.--The Board may appoint and fix the pay of a Director and such additional personnel as the Board considers appropriate.
Experts and consultants.--The Board may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of federal agencies.--Upon request of the Board, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Board to assist the Board in carrying out this section.''.
MANDATORY REVIEW OF MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS, AND TAKEOVERS OF DOMESTIC STEEL COMPANIES BY FOREIGN COMPANIES.
Section 721(b) of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 United States Code App.
2170(b)) is amended by inserting before the period at the end of the 1st sentence ``or in any instance in which a person of a foreign country (as defined in section 3502(d) of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988) seeks to engage in any merger, acquisition, or takeover that could result in the control by such person of a domestic steel company''.
EXTENSION OF DEFENSE PRODUCTION ACT OF 1950.
Section 717(a) of the Defense Production Act of 1950 (50 United States Code App.
2166(a)) is amended by striking ``September 30, 2001'' and inserting ``September 30, 2004''.