Rural Education Initiative.--Part J of title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8271 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 10975 as section 10976; and (2) by striking sections 10971 through 10974, and inserting the following: ``SEC.
``This subpart may be cited as the ``Rural Education Initiative Act''.
``Congress makes the following findings: ``(1) Under Federal law there is no consistent definition of rural schools.
Rural school districts do not benefit as much as the school districts could from Federal education funding because the unique needs of rural school districts do not necessarily fit the categorical Federal formula programs.
Rural schools often cannot compete for Federal funding distributed by competitive grants because the schools lack the personnel needed to prepare grant applications and the resources to hire specialists in the writing of Federal grant proposals.
Small school districts with fewer than 600 students often cannot use Federal grant funds distributed by formula because the formula allocation does not provide enough revenue to carry out the program the grant is intended to fund.
FORMULA GRANT PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.
Alternative Uses.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an eligible local educational agency may use the applicable funding, that the agency is eligible to receive from the State educational agency for a fiscal year, to support local or statewide education reform efforts intended to improve the achievement of elementary school and secondary school students and the quality of instruction provided for the students.
Notification.--An eligible local educational agency shall notify the State educational agency of the local educational agency's intention to use the applicable funding in accordance with paragraph (1) not later than a date that is established by the State educational agency for the notification.
Eligibility.--A local educational agency shall be eligible to use the applicable funding in accordance with subsection (a) if-- ``(1) the total number of students in average daily attendance at all of the schools served by the local educational agency is less than 600; and ``(2) all of the schools served by the local educational agency are located in a community with a Rural-Urban Continuum Code of 6, 7, 8, or 9, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Applicable Funding.--In this section, the term ``applicable funding'' means funds provided under each of the following provisions of law: ``(1) Section 307 of the Department of Education Appropriations Act, 1999.
Titles II, IV, and VI.
Disbursal.--Each State educational agency that receives applicable funding for a fiscal year shall disburse the applicable funding to local educational agencies for alternative uses under this section for the fiscal year at the same time that the State educational agency disburses the applicable funding to local educational agencies that do not intend to use the applicable funding for such alternative uses for the fiscal year.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant any other Federal, State or local education funds.
Special Rule.--References in Federal law to funds for the provisions of law set forth in subsection (c) may be considered to be references to funds for this section.
COMPETITIVE GRANT PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible local educational agencies to enable the local educational agencies to support local or statewide education reform efforts intended to improve the achievement of elementary school and secondary school students and the quality of instruction provided for the students.
Eligibility.--A local educational agency shall be eligible to receive a grant under this section if-- ``(1) the total number of students in average daily attendance at all of the schools served by the local educational agency is less than 600; and ``(2) all of the schools served by the local educational agency are located in a community with a Rural-Urban Continuum Code of 6, 7, 8, or 9, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Amount.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award a grant to a local educational agency under this section for a fiscal year in an amount equal to the amount determined under paragraph (2) for the fiscal year minus the total amount received under the provisions of law described under section 10973(c) for the fiscal year.
Determination.--The amount referred to in paragraph (1) is as follows: ``(A) If the number of children in average daily attendance at the schools served by such agency is greater than 0 and less than 50, then the amount is $20,000.
If the number of such children is greater than or equal to 50 and less than 150, then the amount is $30,000.
If the number of such children is greater than or equal to 150 and less than 300, then the amount is $40,000.
If the number of such children is greater than or equal to 300 and less than 450, then the amount is $50,000.
If the number of such children is greater than or equal to 450 and less than 600, then the amount is $60,000.
Census determination.-- ``(A) In general.--Each local educational agency desiring a grant under this section shall conduct a census not later than December 1 of each year to determine the number of kindergarten through grade 12 students in average daily attendance at the schools served by the local educational agency.
Submission.--Each local educational agency shall submit the number described in subparagraph (A) to the Secretary not later than March 1 of each year.
Penalty.--If the Secretary determines that a local educational agency has knowingly submitted false information under paragraph (3) for the purpose of gaining additional funds under this section, then the local educational agency shall be fined an amount equal to twice the difference between the amount the local educational agency received under this section, and the correct amount the local educational agency would have received under this section if the agency had submitted accurate information under paragraph (3).
Disbursal.--The Secretary shall disburse the funds awarded to a local educational agency under this section for a fiscal year not later than July 1 of that year.
Special Rule.--Any local educational agency that receives a grant under this section for a fiscal year shall be ineligible to receive funds for the fiscal year under the following provisions of law: ``(1) Subpart 2 of part A of title III.
Subpart 1 of part A of title VII.
Subpart 2 of part A of title VII.
Part A of title X.
Part B of title X.
Part I of title X.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant any other Federal, State or local education funds.
Academic Achievement.-- ``(1) In general.--Each local educational agency that uses or receives funds under section 10973 or 10974 for a fiscal year shall-- ``(A) administer a test, that is used Statewide, to assess the academic achievement of students in the schools served by the local educational agency; or ``(B) in the case of a local educational agency for which there is no Statewide test described in subparagraph (A), administer a test, that is selected by the local educational agency, to assess the academic achievement of students in the schools served by the local educational agency.
Special rule.--Each local educational agency that uses or receives funds under section 10973 or 10974 shall use the same test described in paragraph (1) for each year of participation in the program under such section.
State Educational Agency Determination Regarding Continuing Participation.--Each State educational agency that receives funding under the provisions of law described in section 10973(c) shall-- ``(1) after the 5th year that a local educational agency participates in a program under section 10973 or 10974 and on the basis of the results of the tests described in subsection (a), determine whether the students served by the local educational agency participating in the program performed better on the tests after the 5th year of the participation compared to the results on the tests after the 1st year of the participation; ``(2) only permit those local educational agencies that so participated and performed better on the tests to continue to so participate for an additional period of 5 years; and ``(3) prohibit those local educational agencies that so participated and did not perform better on the tests from such participation for a period of 5 years from the date of the determination.''.
Conforming Amendments.--Part J of title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8271 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) in section 10951 (20 United States Code 8271)-- (A) in subsections (a)(1) and (b), by striking ``1995'' and inserting ``2000''; and (B) in subsections (a)(1), (a)(3), and (b), by striking ``10975'' and inserting ``10976''; (2) in section 10952 (20 United States Code 8272)-- (A) by striking paragraph (4); and (B) by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4); (3) in the heading for subpart 2, by striking ``Demonstration Grants'' and inserting ``Initiative''; and (4) in section 10976 (as redesignated by subsection (a)(1)), by adding at the end the following: ``(d) Rural Eligible Local Educational Agency.--The term `rural eligible local educational agency' means a local educational agency-- ``(1)(A) in which at least 15 percent of the children enrolled in the schools served by such agency are eligible to be counted under part A of title I; and ``(B) which is not in a metropolitan statistical area; or ``(2) in which the total enrollment in the schools served by such agency is less than 2,500 students and that does not serve schools located in a metropolitan statistical area.