This Act may be cited as the ``Family Violence Prevention Act of 2002''.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART R--FAMILY VIOLENCE PREVENTION ``SEC.
``In this part the term `family violence' means any act or threatened act of violence, including any forceful detention of an individual, that-- ``(1) results or threatens to result in physical injury; and ``(2) is committed by a person against another individual (including an elderly individual or a child)-- ``(A) to whom such person is or was related by blood or marriage or is otherwise legally related; ``(B) with whom such person is or was lawfully residing; or ``(C) with whom such person is or has been in a social relationship of a romantic or intimate nature where the existence of such a relationship shall be determined based on a consideration of-- ``(i) the length of the relationship; ``(ii) the type of the relationship; and ``(iii) the frequency of interaction between the individuals involved in the relationship.
OFFICE OF FAMILY VIOLENCE.
Establishment.-- ``(1) In general.--There is established within the Department of Health and Human Services an Office of Family Violence (in this part referred to as the `Office') under the general authority of the Secretary.
Separate office.--The Office shall be a separate office headed by a Director who shall report to the Secretary through the Assistant Secretary for Health, and who shall also serve as Counsel to the Secretary.
Jurisdiction.--The Office shall-- ``(1) facilitate coordination between all programs within the Department of Health and Human Services relating to the prevention of family violence; ``(2) collaborate with family violence programs (including child abuse, domestic violence, and elder abuse programs) administered by other Federal departments or agencies to develop a Federal family violence prevention Internet website to provide information-- ``(A) to the public concerning the Federal resources available to combat family violence, including child abuse, domestic violence, and elder abuse; and ``(B) concerning ongoing or prospective research efforts that might be of use to family violence prevention advocates, researchers, and others; and ``(3) carry out other activities related to family violence (including child abuse, domestic violence, and elder abuse) prevention that are determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Director.-- ``(1) Appointment.--The President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, shall appoint a Director for the Office of Family Violence (in this part referred to as the `Director') to be responsible for the administration, coordination, and implementation of the programs and activities of the Office.
Other employment.--The Director shall not-- ``(A) engage in any employment other than that of serving as Director; or ``(B) hold any office in, or act in any capacity for, any organization, agency, or institution with which the Office makes any contract or other agreement.
Vacancy.--In the case of a vacancy, the President may designate an officer or employee who shall act as Director during the vacancy.
Compensation.--The Director shall be compensated at a rate of pay not to exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
Regulations.--The Director may, after appropriate consultation with representatives of States and units of local government, establish such rules, regulations, and procedures as are necessary to the exercise of the functions of the Office.
Staff.--The Secretary shall ensure that there is adequate staff to support the Director in carrying out the responsibilities of the Director under this part.
Report.--The Director shall annually report to the appropriate authorizing and appropriating committees of Congress concerning the coordination of activities that are being carried out by all family violence program within the Department of Health and Human Services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
FAMILY VIOLENCE RESEARCH CENTERS.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall provide for the establishment of 5 family violence research and education centers to conduct research and disseminate information, including professional and public education, concerning family violence.
Linkages.--In establishing centers under subsection (a), the Secretary shall ensure that-- ``(1) one center is linked to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention; ``(2) one center is linked to the National Institute of Mental Health; and ``(3) each center is linked to national, State, and local community resources, including domestic violence coalition shelters, community health centers, health care delivery systems, and domestic and sexual assault hotlines, through which information may be distributed.
General Duties.--Each center established under subsection (a)-- ``(1) shall provide for the conduct of family violence research, including, in collaboration with the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the administration of annual national surveys concerning the prevalence and characteristics of different forms of family violence, including child abuse, domestic violence, and elder abuse; and ``(2) may provide for the conduct of family violence research, including-- ``(A) research concerning the development, implementation, evaluation, and dissemination of appropriate curricula for health professional training in the area of family violence; ``(B) research concerning the effectiveness of different educational methodologies that are used to present the curricula described in subparagraph (A); ``(C) research concerning patterns of health care utilization by victims of family violence and child witnesses of family violence, the effects that family violence has on other health behaviors and the health status of individuals, families, and populations, and the health care costs attributable to family violence; ``(D) research concerning the effects of mandatory family violence reporting requirements, including-- ``(i) the effects of such requirements on-- ``(I) the prevalence and incidence of family violence; ``(II) victim and dependent safety and self-efficacy; ``(III) referral and treatment patterns; and ``(IV) access to health care, legal, and advocacy services; ``(ii) the development of mechanisms to provide resources, consultation, and technical assistance to State and local governments and to agencies and non-profit entities that are concerned with evaluating the effect of mandatory reporting on the health and safety of victims and dependents; ``(E) research and testing of best messages and strategies to mobilize public action concerning the prevention of family violence; ``(F) research on the relationship between childhood exposure to domestic violence and child and adult health and safety outcomes; ``(G) research on effective interventions for children exposed to violence; and ``(H) research on the effects of family violence on other health behaviors and health conditions.
Grants and Contracts.-- ``(1) In general.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Secretary may make grants to and enter into contracts with public and nonprofit private entities.
Application for award.--The Secretary may make an award of a grant or contract under paragraph (1) only if an application for the award is submitted to the Secretary and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such agreements, assurances, and information as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes for which the award is to be made.
Advisory Board.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall establish an advisory board to make recommendations concerning the research agenda carried out by the research centers under this section.
Composition.-- ``(A) Appointed members.--The advisory board shall be composed of 19 members to be appointed by the Secretary as follows: ``(i) Twelve members shall be appointed from among individuals who are scientific or health care experts in the areas of elder abuse, domestic violence, child abuse, mental health, epidemiology, social work, or health education.
Seven members shall be appointed from among nationally recognized experts in domestic violence, child abuse, and elder abuse who have a documented history of effective and respected work in their respective field, of which-- ``(I) at least one member shall be an expert in domestic violence and dating violence; ``(II) at least one member shall be an expert in child abuse; ``(III) at least one member shall be an expert in elder abuse; ``(IV) at least one member shall be an expert in the impact of domestic violence on children and youth; and ``(V) at least one member shall be an expert in domestic violence against older or disabled women.
Ex officio members.--The following shall be ex-officio members of the advisory board: ``(i) The Assistant Secretary for Health.
The Director of the National Institutes of Health.
The Director of the National Institute for Mental Health.
The Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
The Assistant Secretary for Children and Families.
The Assistant Secretary for Aging.
The Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration.
The Director of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration.
The Assistant Attorney General for the Office of Justice Programs.
Chairperson.--The members of the advisory board appointed under subparagraph (A) shall elect a chairperson from among such members.
Meetings.--The advisory board shall meet at the call of the chairperson or upon the request of the Secretary, but not less often than 4 times each year.
Duties.--In order to ensure the most effective use and organization of Federal resources concerning family violence, the advisory board shall provide advice and make recommendations to Congress and the Secretary with respect to the implementation and revision of the research agenda of the research centers established under this section.
Subcommittees.--In carrying out its functions under this subsection, the advisory board may establish subcommittees, convene workshops and conferences, and collect data.
Such subcommittees may be composed of advisory board members and nonmember consultants with expertise in the particular area addressed by such subcommittees.
Reports.--The advisory committee shall annually report to the appropriate authorizing and appropriations committees of Congress concerning the research agenda for the centers established under this section and the progress made in fulfilling that research agenda.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.
HEALTH PROFESSIONAL TRAINING GRANTS.
In General.--The Director of the Office shall award grants to eligible entities to enable such entities to develop, implement, evaluate, and disseminate family violence education and training curricula, programs, and strategies.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a grant under subsection (a), an entity shall-- ``(1) be-- ``(A) a health care delivery system or health care training entity, such as an academic health center, a federally qualified health center, a hospital, and a community health center; or ``(B) an entity not described in subparagraph (A) that enters into a collaborative relationship with an entity described in such subparagraph for purposes of this section, such as a national or local non-profit entity with expertise in family violence, a State coalition for domestic violence, a State coalition for sexual assault, and a State public health agency; ``(2) demonstrate an ability to maintain the training systems established with amounts received under the grant after the expiration of the grant funding and provide an assurance that such systems will be maintained if determined to be effective; and ``(3) prepare and submit to the Director at such time, in such manner, and containing such agreements, assurances, and information as the Director determines to be necessary to carry out the purposes for which the grant is to be made.
Use of Funds.--An entity shall use amounts received under a grant under this section to-- ``(1) conduct evaluations of existing family violence identification and treatment training programs; and ``(2) develop and implement innovative training models or programs to identify and appropriately treat and refer victims of family violence.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $25,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.