This Act may be cited as the ``Special Counsel Act of 1999''.
In General.--Part II of title 28, United States Code, is amended by striking chapter 40 and inserting the following: ``CHAPTER 40--SPECIAL COUNSEL ``Sec.
Special counsel ``The Attorney General may appoint a special counsel who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government to conduct the investigation or prosecution of a person for a possible violation of criminal law when the Attorney General determines that the appointment of a special counsel is in the public interest only in accordance with this chapter.
Jurisdiction ``(a) In General.--The Attorney General shall determine the special counsel's investigative and prosecutorial jurisdiction under this chapter.
Judicial Review.--The determination of jurisdiction by the Attorney General under subsection (a) shall not be subject to judicial review.
Regulations ``(a) In General.-- ``(1) Promulgation.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to approval by Congress as provided in subsection (b), the Attorney General shall promulgate regulations governing the operation and removal of a special counsel appointed under this chapter.
Regulations not requiring approval.--A regulation promulgated by the Attorney General on the appointment of a special counsel and the investigative or prosecutorial jurisdiction of a special counsel shall not be subject to approval under this section.
Resubmission.--If regulations are disapproved under subsection (b), the Attorney General shall submit new regulations to Congress for approval not later than 60 days after the date of disapproval.
Any new regulations or changes to existing regulations promulgated under this section shall be subject to Congressional approval as provided in subsection (b).
Congressional Approval.-- ``(1) In general.--Any regulations promulgated by the Attorney General under this section shall be subject to approval by joint resolution as provided in this subsection.
Contents of resolution.--For the purposes of paragraph (1), `joint resolution' means only a joint resolution introduced after the date on which Congress receives the regulations promulgated by the Attorney General under subsection (a) the matter after the resolving clause of which is as follows: ``The Congress approves the regulations promulgated by the Attorney General pursuant to section 593(a) of title 28, United States Code.''.
Referral to committee.--A resolution described in paragraph (2) introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Government Reform and the Committee on the Judiciary of the House of Representatives.
A resolution described in paragraph (2) introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Governmental Affairs and the Committee on the Judiciary of the Senate.
Such a resolution may not be reported before the 8th day after its introduction.
Discharge of committee.--If the committees to which are referred a resolution described in paragraph (2) have not reported such resolution (or an identical resolution) at the end of 15 calendar days after its introduction, such committees shall be deemed to be discharged from further consideration of such resolution and such resolution shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Floor consideration.-- ``(A) In general.--When the committees to which a resolution is referred have reported, or have been deemed to be discharged (under paragraph (4)) from further consideration of, a resolution described in paragraph (2), it is at any time thereafter in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any Member of the respective House to move to proceed to the consideration of the resolution, and all points of order against the resolution (and against consideration of the resolution) are waived.
The motion is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
The motion is not subject to amendment, or to a motion to postpone, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the motion is agreed to or disagreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion to proceed to the consideration of the resolution is agreed to, the resolution shall remain the unfinished business of the respective House until disposed of.
Debate.--Debate on the resolution, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the resolution.
A motion further to limit debate is in order and not debatable.
An amendment to, or a motion to postpone, or a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the resolution is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which the resolution is agreed to or disagreed to is not in order.
Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on a resolution described in paragraph (1), and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the appropriate House, the vote on final passage of the resolution shall occur.
Rulings of the chair on procedure.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to a resolution described in paragraph (2) shall be decided without debate.
Coordination with action by other house.--If, before the passage by one House of a resolution of that House described in paragraph (2), that House receives from the other House a resolution described in paragraph (2), then the following procedures shall apply: ``(A) The resolution of the other House shall not be referred to a committee.
With respect to a resolution described in paragraph (2) of the House receiving the resolution-- ``(i) the procedure in that House shall be the same as if no resolution had been received from the other House; but ``(ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the resolution of the other House.
Rules of house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- ``(A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and as such it is deemed a part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of a resolution described in paragraph (2), and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and ``(B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as relating to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.''.
Table of Chapters.--The item for chapter 40 in the table of chapters for part II is amended by striking ``Independent Counsel'' and inserting ``Special Counsel''.
Existing Regulations.--This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall apply to any regulations promulgated by the Attorney General with respect to the operation or removal of a special counsel who is not an officer or employee of the Federal Government to conduct the investigation or prosecution of a person for a possible violation of criminal law promulgated prior to the date of enactment of this Act.
Initial Regulations.--The Attorney General shall promulgate the regulations required by section 593 of title 28, United States Code, as added by section 2, not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.