This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Reserve Fiscal Responsibility Act of 1996''.
NON-MONETARY POLICY SPENDING SUBJECT TO CONGRESSIONAL APPROPRIATIONS.
Determination by Comptroller General.-- (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United States, in consultation with the Board, shall specifically identify the functions and activities of the Board and of each Federal reserve bank that are related to the establishment and conduct of the monetary policy of the United States.
Report.--Not later than April 30, 1997, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to the Congress containing the information referred to in paragraph (1).
Certain Spending Subject to Appropriations.--After September 30, 1997, all expenditures by the Board or any Federal reserve bank shall be made only as provided in advance in an appropriations Act, except that funds to pay expenditures related to the establishment and conduct of monetary policy, as identified under subsection (a), shall not be subject to appropriations in advance.
Annual Report.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall submit an annual report to the Congress on the compliance of the Federal Reserve System with the requirements of this section.
TREATMENT OF SURPLUS ACCOUNT.
Termination of Surplus Account Authorization.-- (1) Amendments to the federal reserve act.--Section 7(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 289) is amended-- (A) in the subsection heading, by striking ``and Surplus Funds''; (B) by striking paragraphs (2) and (3); (C) in paragraph (1)-- (i) by striking ``(1) Stockholder dividends.--''; and (ii) by redesignating subparagraphs (A) and (B) as paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively, and moving the margins 2 ems to the left; and (D) in paragraph (2), as redesignated, by striking ``subparagraph (A)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''.
Return of funds.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, each Federal reserve bank shall transfer to the Board for transfer to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury, all funds held on the date of enactment of this Act by that Federal reserve bank in a surplus account established under section 7(a) of the Federal Reserve Act (as that section existed on the day before the date of enactment of this Act).
Determination by Comptroller General.-- (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall determine what percentage, if any, of the net earnings of the Federal reserve banks should be transferred on an annual basis to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit in the general fund of the Treasury.
Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall report its determination under paragraph (1) to the Congress, together with any recommendations for necessary legislative action.
Audit Required.--Each Federal reserve bank shall annually obtain an audit from an independent auditor using generally accepted auditing standards.
Auditor's Qualifications.--The independent auditor referred to in subsection (a) shall-- (1) be a certified public accountant who is independent of the Federal reserve bank; and (2) meet any other qualifications that the Board may establish.
Certification Required.--In each audit required under subsection (a), the auditor shall certify, under penalty of perjury-- (1) that the auditor is a certified public accountant and is independent of the Federal Reserve System; and (2) that the auditor conducted the audit using generally accepted auditing standards.
Certification by Federal Reserve Bank.--Not later than 30 days after the completion of each audit required under subsection (a), the Federal reserve bank shall provide to the Comptroller General of the United States-- (1) a certification, under penalty of perjury, that-- (A) the Federal reserve bank has obtained the audit required under subsection (c); (B) the Federal reserve bank has received the certifications of the auditor required under paragraph (1); and (C) the audit fully complies with subsection (a); and (2) proof that the Federal reserve bank and the Board have each received a copy of the audit report.
Report to Board.--Each Federal reserve bank shall submit a copy of the audit conducted under this section to the Board, or an independent auditor designated by the Board.
Audit of Federal Reserve System.--The Board, in consultation with the Comptroller General of the United States, shall annually obtain an audit of the combined financial statements of all Federal reserve banks from an independent auditor, using generally accepted accounting standards, based on reports of audits submitted to the Board under subsection (d).
APPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL PROCUREMENT PROCEDURES.
Applicability.--The following provisions of law apply to the Board and to each Federal reserve bank as if the Board and such banks were executive agencies for the purposes of such provisions of law: (1) Title III of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (41 United States Code 251 et sequentes).
Title IX of the Federal Property and Administrative Services Act of 1949 (40 United States Code 541 et sequentes).
The Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 401 et sequentes).
The Information Technology Management Reform Act of 1996 (division E of Public Law 104-106; 40 United States Code 1401 et seq.).
Effective Date.--This section shall become effective on October 1, 1996.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Board'' means the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; and (2) the term ``Federal reserve bank'' has the same meaning as in the third undesignated paragraph of section 1 of the Federal Reserve Act.