The Congress finds the following: (1) California's rapid population growth and the lack of understanding about the environmental impacts of this growth have caused a number of serious present and potential barriers to future economic development of California.
California has great environmental complexity and diversity and a great variety of human interventions in its ecosystem.
Future environmental policies for California must be informed by careful cost-benefit analysis that considers the serious risks, and the benefits, of environmental policy.
The California Urban Environmental Research and Education Center promotes coordination of and collaboration on environmentally sound economic development in California and ensures that continued sustainable economic development can occur.
Due to the closing of many military facilities and installations in California, such Center can provide important assistance to the process of converting defense resources to non-defense uses.
The Center is in a position to develop model incentives and remove market barriers so as to motivate greater private sector involvement and investment in the solution of environmental problems.
Support.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall continue to support the development and expansion of the California Urban Environmental Research and Education Center.
Cooperative Agreement.-- (1) Authority.--If the California State University, Hayward consents and provides the matching funds required by paragraph (2), the Administrator shall enter into a series of cooperative agreements with the California State University, Hayward to provide continuing support for the Center.
The California State University, Hayward shall work in close cooperation with the other universities of the California State University system (including the California State Universities at Sacramento, San Jose, San Francisco, and Sonoma) in the research and policy analysis performed under any such cooperative agreement.
Matching funds.--In any cooperative agreement described in paragraph (1), the California State University, Hayward, shall guarantee matching funds or in-kind resources equal to 20 percent of the funds received by the Center from the Administrator.
The Center and the California State University, Hayward shall, to the maximum extent practicable, solicit additional funds or in-kind contributions from State, local, and private sector sources to increase the ability of the Center to conduct applied research and education projects under this Act.
Membership.--A university in the California State University system or a university in California which is not a university in the California State University system may become a member of the Center under such guidelines and conditions as are reasonable and mutually agreeable to the Center and the university.
Governing Board.-- (1) Initial appointments.--For the two-year period beginning on the date of the establishment of the Center, the Center shall have a Governing Board composed of the following: (A) The Executive Director of the Center.
One member appointed by the President of the California State University, Hayward.
One member appointed by the President of the California State University, Sacramento.
One member appointed by the President of the California State University, San Jose.
One member appointed by the President of the California State University, San Francisco.
One member appointed by the President of the California State University, Sonoma.
Subsequent appointments.--After the two-year period referred to in paragraph (1), the composition of the Governing Board shall be determined by the sitting members of the Governing Board, in consultation with the Presidents of each university of the California State University system, except as provided in subsection (d)(1).
Chair.--The Executive Director shall serve as chair of the Governing Board for the first five years after the establishment of the Center.
Subsequently, the Governing Board shall elect a chair from among its members.
Duties.--It shall be the duty of the Governing Board-- (A) to establish criteria for membership in the Center; (B) to establish criteria and requirements for the contribution of matching funds or in kind contributions by member universities and those applying for membership in the Center; (C) to establish guidelines for fair representation on the Governing Board of universities that are not universities of the California State University system; (D) to establish how scholarships, fellowships, and grants will be awarded by the Center; (E) to advise the Executive Director of the Center on matters pertaining to the management of the Center's internal projects and administration, with respect to the management of grants; and (F) to perform such other duties, with respect to the management of grants, as the Governing Board considers necessary to carry out the functions of the Center under this Act.
Executive Director; Staff.-- (1) Executive director.--The Center shall have an Executive Director who shall be appointed for a five-year term.
The President of the California State University, Hayward shall make the initial appointment of an Executive Director for a five-year term beginning on the date of the establishment of the Center, and shall make an appointment for the second five- year term.
The Governing Board shall appoint each Executive Director appointed after the initial two appointments.
Budget.--The Executive Director shall annually submit to the Governing Board a budget which includes projected staff requirements and other projected expenses.
The Governing Board shall review and advise on the budget each year.
Principal Office.--(1) The principal office of the Center shall be located in northern California.
Before the end of the two-year period beginning on the date of the establishment of the Center, the Governing Board shall consider the establishment of a second office and conference facility to be located in southern California, convenient to member universities.
In General.--The overall objective of the Center shall be to promote and foster sustainable economic development throughout the State of California, using the resources and skills of its universities and colleges whenever possible.
The Center shall achieve such objective by engaging in the following functions: (1) To develop an ongoing program of applied environmental research, education, and outreach that can be used by the Federal Government, State and local governments, and the private sector to ensure that future government policies to encourage economic development in California are grounded on sound, sustainable environmental and economic principles.
To foster public-private partnerships to find solutions to the environmental problems of California and ways of removing market barriers to private sector development.
To bring together researchers from the member universities and colleges of the Center to focus on the most important environmental problems of California related to sustainable economic development, with the aim of analysis and synthesis of policy implications and dissemination of policy oriented research findings to managers in the public and private sectors.
To support the following activities: (A) The coordination and funding of research activities of universities for collaborative collection and evaluation of data on California's geology, hydrology, soils, biology, weather and climate, natural hazards, demography, infrastructure, resource use, land-use patterns, land-ownership patterns, business development, environmental equity, and regulatory zones.
The analysis of public policy implications of economic development programs that affect the ecology of California.
The conduct of seminars and other educational programs for policy makers in the Federal Government, State and local governments, and the private sector on the implications of the findings and conclusions derived from the Center's activities.
The Center shall use electronic technology, such as computer networks and video conferencing, to convey the cumulative findings and conclusions derived from the Center's activities and to foster an exchange of ideas.
The conduct, not more than once each year, of a national conference on ecology and sustainable economic development for business and labor leaders to foster an exchange of ideas and information.
The provision of ready access to the Center's collective expertise for policy makers in the Federal Government and State and local governments, and for representatives of private- and public-sector organizations, through meetings, publications, special reports, video, electronic mail, computer networks, and other means to share up-to-date information on research findings and policy development for sustainable economic development.
The minimization of duplication and waste in applied research and demonstration programs within the areas of the Center's expertise.
The development of educational programs, curricula, and instructional materials for colleges, universities, and other educational institutions to impart the knowledge and skills required to implement environmentally sustainable economic development, for the purpose of equipping students for jobs in the public and private sectors.
The development of bachelors and masters degree programs for individuals who have lost or may lose employment as a result of cutbacks in defense spending to prepare such individuals for employment as environmental professionals, and the development of certification programs in environmental sciences and studies for such individuals.
The preparation of minority students for environmental professions, including the development of an enriched curriculum in the environmental sciences at the baccalaureate and post-graduate levels for underrepresented minority students to prepare such students for careers in various environmental areas, such as environmental health and the clean-up of military installations and facilities.
The development and administration of a repository of information on key environmental and related economic development issues that can be readily accessed by private- and public-sector entities, including imposition, if necessary, of a fee for users of the repository to cover the cost of its operation.
To work closely with other university research centers for which funds have been provided by the Environmental Protection Agency to help establish a National Environmental Outreach Program to assist the Federal Government, State and local governments, and the private sector in programs and projects designed to promote environmentally sound economic development.
To work closely with Federally-funded research centers, such as the Lawrence-Livermore National Research Laboratory, to foster the transfer and application of environmental technology to the private sector.
To help incubate or expand small, environmentally related businesses where market barriers exist to such incubation or expansion.
To assist small businesses in meeting environmental regulations by providing short courses and conferences and to develop methods and models by which small businesses may finance ``green'' investment where private-sector funds are otherwise not generally available.
To work closely, as requested, with public-sector officials, private-sector businesses, and individuals seeking alternative uses for military installations and facilities that have been or are about to be closed to assist in planning the environmental aspects of the conversion and clean-up of the installations and facilities, and to help with the economic development aspects of the closing of the installations and facilities.
During its first year, to develop a plan, in conjunction with other universities to extend the activities of the Center throughout the State within 3 years.
The plan shall pay particular attention to the need for environmentally sound conversion and economic use of military installations and facilities throughout the State.
Scholarships, Fellowships, and Grants.-- (1) Scholarships.--The Center may provide for the award of undergraduate scholarships for individuals studying in environmental fields at universities that are members of the Center.
Individuals who have lost or may lose employment as a result of the closing of a military installation or facility in the State of California shall have preference over other individuals in the award of scholarships under this paragraph.
Fellowships.--The Center may provide for the award of graduate assistantships and fellowships at the Center to encourage study in fields related to sustainable economic development.
Preference shall be given to those who have been or are about to be laid off as a result of military base closings in California.
Research grants.--The Center may award research grants to faculty at universities and colleges, both public and private, to encourage research critical to the achievement of the functions described in subsection (a).
The Center shall annually submit to the Administrator a report on the activities of the Center and on any changing budget needs.
The Center shall include in the first report submitted under this subsection a statement of any additional funds that may be required to extend the activities of the Center throughout the State.
The Center may receive funds and other property donated, bequeathed, or devised to the Center with or without a condition of restriction, for the purpose of furthering the activities of the Center.
All funds donated, bequeathed, or devised to the Center shall be retained in a separate account.
Each annual report submitted pursuant to section 4 shall include an accounting of the funds and property donated, bequeathed, or devised to the Center during the year covered by the annual report.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The term ``Center'' means the California Urban Environmental Research and Education Center established pursuant to section 2.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator for provision to the Center to carry out this Act $4,500,000 for fiscal year 1996 and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2000.
Availability.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the authority of subsection (a) shall remain available until expended.
Matching Funds.--In addition to amounts provided as described in section 2(b)(2), the Center shall make a good faith effort to match the amount of funds appropriated pursuant to this section with funding from State and local governments and the private sector.