This Act may be cited as the ``Black Box Privacy Protection Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Consumers have the right to know that event data recorders are installed in their vehicles, that they are capable of collecting data recorded in automobile accidents, and how such data may be used.
From the standpoint of consumer privacy rights, most consumers are not aware that their vehicles are recording data that not only may be used to aid traffic safety analyses, but has the potential of being used against them in a civil or criminal proceeding, or by their insurer to increase rates.
DISCLOSURE OF EVENT DATA RECORDERS ON AUTOMOBILES AND MOTORCYCLES.
Labeling Disclosure for Automobiles.--Section 3 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 United States Code 1232) is amended-- (1) in subsection (g)(4)(B) by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (2) in subsection (h), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(i)(1) the presence and location of an event data recorder; ``(2) the type of information recorded by the event data recorder and how such information is recorded; and ``(3) that the information recorded by the event data recorder also may be used in a law enforcement proceeding.''.
Labeling Disclosure for Motorcycles.--The Automobile Information Disclosure Act is further amended by adding after section 3 the following new section: ``SEC.
DISCLOSURE OF EVENT DATA RECORDERS ON MOTORCYCLES.
``Every manufacturer of new motorcycles distributed in commerce shall, prior to the delivery of any new motorcycle to any dealer, or at or prior to the introduction date of new models delivered to a dealer prior to such introduction date, securely affix to the new motorcycle a label on which such manufacturer shall disclose-- ``(1) the presence and location of an event data recorder; ``(2) the type of information recorded by the event data recorder and how such information is recorded; and ``(3) that the information recorded by the event data recorder also may be used in a law enforcement proceeding.''.
Definitions.--Section 2 of such Act (15 United States Code 1231) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) The term `event data recorder' means any device or means of technology installed in an automobile that records information such as automobile or motorcycle speed, seatbelt use, application of brakes or other information pertinent to the operation of the automobile or motorcycle, as applicable.
The term `motorcycle' means a vehicle having a seat or saddle for the use of the rider, designed to travel on not more than three wheels in contact with the ground, and weighing less than 1,500 pounds.
The term `new motorcycle' means a motorcycle the equitable or legal title to which has never been transferred by a manufacturer, distributor, or dealer to an ultimate purchaser.''.
Rulemaking.--Within 180 days following the enactment of this Act, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration shall prescribe regulations setting forth a uniform method by which a manufacturer shall provide the disclosures required by the amendments made by this section.
REQUIREMENT FOR EVENT DATA RECORDERS ON NEW AUTOMOBILES.
In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 301 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Event data recorders ``No person may manufacture for sale, sell, offer for sale, introduce or deliver into interstate commerce, or import into the United States, an automobile manufactured after 2015 (and bearing a model year of 2016 or later) that is equipped with an event data recorder, unless such event data recorder includes a function whereby the consumer can control the recording of information by the event data recorder.''.
Enforcement.--Section 30165(a)(1) of chapter 301 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``30129,'' after ``30127,''.
Table of Contents Amendment.--The table of contents for chapter 301 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding after the item relating to section 30128 the following new item: ``30129.
OWNERSHIP AND UNLAWFUL RETRIEVAL OF EVENT DATA RECORDER DATA.
Ownership Rights; Conduct Prohibited.--Any event data recorder in an automobile or motorcycle and any data recorded on any event data recorder in an automobile or motorcycle shall be considered the property of the owner of the automobile or motorcycle.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner of the automobile or motorcycle to download or otherwise retrieve data that is recorded on any event data recorder except under one of the following circumstances: (1) The owner of the automobile or motorcycle or the owner's agent or legal representative consents to the retrieval of the information.
In response to an order of a court having jurisdiction to issue the order.
The data is retrieved by a dealer, or by an automotive technician for the purpose of diagnosing, servicing, or repairing the automobile or motorcycle.
Treatment of Violations as Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices.--A violation of subsection (a) shall be treated as a violation of a rule defining an unfair or deceptive act or practice prescribed under section 18(a)(1)(B) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Enforcement by the Federal Trade Commission.--The Federal Trade Commission shall enforce this section in the same manner, by the same means, and with the same jurisdiction, powers, and duties as though all applicable terms and provisions of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 41 et sequentes) were incorporated into and made a part of this section.
As used in this Act: (1) The term ``consumer'' has the meaning given the term ``ultimate purchaser'' in section 2 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 United States Code 1231).
The term ``dealer'' has the meaning given that term in section 30102(a) of title 49, United States Code.
The term ``event data recorder'' means any device or means of technology installed in an automobile that records information such as vehicle speed, seatbelt use, application of brakes or other information pertinent to the operation of the automobile.
The terms ``manufacturer'', ``new automobile'', and ``new motorcycle'' have the meanings given those terms in section 2 of the Automobile Information Disclosure Act (15 United States Code 1231).
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act.