This Act may be cited as the ``NAFTA Infrastructure Responsibility Act of 1996''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the United States Customs Service collects over $600,000,000 per year in duties, fees, excise taxes, and fines from crossings of the border of the United States and Mexico; (2) although the United States Customs Service has collected increased duties, merchandise fees, and revenues from other commerce-related activities because of the ratification and implementation of the North American Free Trade Agreement, these increased revenues have not been accompanied by Federal funding for improving transportation facilities along the border of the United States and Mexico to ensure the free and safe flow of trade destined for all States and regions of the United States; (3) because of NAFTA, all 4 States along the border of the United States and Mexico will require significant investments in highway infrastructure capacity and motor carrier safety enforcement at a time when such States face extreme difficulty in obtaining funds to maintain current highway conditions; (4) the full benefits of increased international trade can be realized only if delays at the border of the United States and Mexico are significantly reduced; and (5) the increased revenues described in paragraph (2) should be used to provide Federal funding for transportation improvements required to accommodate NAFTA-generated traffic, in an amount above and beyond regular Federal transportation funding apportionments, obligational authority, and minimum allocation funds under title 23, United States Code, the Intermodal Surface Transportation Efficiency Act of 1991 (Public Law 102-240), and other laws.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Commercial motor vehicle.--The term ``commercial motor vehicle'' means a motor vehicle that is used in commerce to transport passengers or property and has a gross vehicle weight rating of 26,001 or more pounds.
Major mexican border crossing facility.--The term ``major Mexican border crossing facility'' means a Mexican border crossing facility used by 150,000 or more northbound commercial motor vehicles in a calendar year.
Mexican border crossing facility.--The term ``Mexican border crossing facility'' means a Federal facility located in the United States that is used to enter the United States from Mexico.
Mexican border state.--The term ``Mexican border State'' means California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.
Minor mexican border crossing facility.--The term ``minor Mexican border crossing facility'' means a Mexican border crossing facility used by less than 150,000 northbound commercial motor vehicles in a calendar year.
NAFTA.--The term ``NAFTA'' means the North American Free Trade Agreement.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
DIRECT FEDERAL ASSISTANCE FOR BORDER CONSTRUCTION AND CONGESTION RELIEF.
In General.--The Secretary shall make grants under subsections (b) and (c) to eligible recipients that submit to the Secretary an application that demonstrates need, due to increased traffic resulting from the implementation of NAFTA, for assistance in carrying out transportation projects that are necessary to relieve traffic congestion and improve enforcement of motor carrier safety laws.
Grants for Connectors to Mexican Border Crossing Facilities.-- The Secretary shall make grants to Mexican border States and units of general purpose local government in Mexican border States for the purposes of-- (1) connecting the National Highway System designated under section 103(b) of title 23, United States Code, with Mexican border crossing facilities; and (2) upgrading connectors described in paragraph (1) that are in existence as of the date of the grant.
Grants for Commercial Motor Vehicle Enforcement Facilities.-- The Secretary shall make grants to Mexican border States to construct, operate, and maintain commercial motor vehicle enforcement facilities.
Location of Projects.--All projects carried out using amounts from grants made available under this section shall be located in the United States and within 60 miles of the border of the United States and Mexico, except as specifically approved by the Secretary.
Apportionment of Amounts.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall apportion the amounts appropriated for a fiscal year for making grants under this section among the Mexican border States as follows: (A) 90 percent in the ratio which the number of major Mexican border crossing facilities in each Mexican border State bears to the total number of major Mexican border crossing facilities in all Mexican border States, as determined by the Secretary under paragraph (2).
10 percent in the ratio which the number of minor Mexican border crossing facilities in each Mexican border State bears to the total number of minor Mexican border crossing facilities in all Mexican border States, as determined by the Secretary under paragraph (2).
Determinations.--The Secretary shall make each determination required by paragraph (1) concerning the number of commercial motor vehicles using a Mexican border crossing facility on an annual basis using the most recent calendar year information that can be obtained from the United States Customs Service.
Cost Sharing.--A grant under this section shall be used to pay the Federal share of the cost of a project.
The Federal share shall be 80 percent.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $100,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1997 through 2002.
BORDER INFRASTRUCTURE INNOVATIVE FINANCING.
Purposes.--The purposes of this section are-- (1) to encourage the establishment and operation of State infrastructure banks in accordance with section 350 of the National Highway System Designation Act of 1995 (109 United States Statutes at Large 618; 23 United States Code 101 note); and (2) to advance transportation infrastructure projects supporting international trade and commerce.
Federal Line of Credit.--Section 350 of the National Highway System Designation Act of 1995 (109 United States Statutes at Large 618; 23 United States Code 101 note) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (l) as subsection (m); and (2) by inserting after subsection (k) the following: ``(l) Federal Line of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--There is authorized to be appropriated from the general fund of the Treasury $98,000,000 to be used by the Secretary to enter into agreements with Mexican border States that have established infrastructure banks under this section to make lines of credit available to the States.
Amount.--The line of credit available to each participating Mexican border State shall be equal to the product of-- ``(A) the amount appropriated under paragraph (1); and ``(B) the quotient obtained by dividing-- ``(i) the contributions of the Mexican border State to the Highway Trust Fund during the preceding fiscal year; and ``(ii) the total contributions of all participating Mexican border States with infrastructure banks to the Highway Trust Fund during the preceding fiscal year.
Use of line of credit.--The line of credit under this subsection shall be available to provide Federal support in accordance with this subsection to a State infrastructure bank engaged in providing credit enhancement for projects to construct Federal-aid highways which will support a significant amount of traffic resulting from NAFTA.
Limitations.-- ``(A) In general.--A line of credit under this subsection may be drawn on only-- ``(i) with respect to a completed project described in paragraph (3) that is receiving credit enhancement through an infrastructure bank; ``(ii) when the cash balance available in the infrastructure bank is insufficient to pay a claim for payment relating to the project; and ``(iii) when all subsequent revenues of the project have been pledged to the infrastructure bank.
Third party creditor rights.--No third party creditor of a public or private entity carrying out a project eligible for assistance from an infrastructure bank shall have any right against the Federal Government with respect to a line of credit under this subsection, including any guarantee that the proceeds of a line of credit will be available for the payment of any particular cost of the public or private entity that may be financed under this subsection.
Interest rate and repayment period.--Any draw on a line of credit under this subsection shall-- ``(A) accrue, beginning on the date the draw is made, interest at a rate equal to the current (as of the date the draw is made) market yield on outstanding, marketable obligations of the United States with maturities of 30 years; and ``(B) shall be repaid within a period of not more than 30 years.
Relationship to state apportionment.--Funds made available to States to carry out this subsection shall be in addition to funds apportioned to States under section 104 of title 23, United States Code.
Mexican border state defined.--The term `Mexican border State' means California, Arizona, New Mexico, and Texas.