This Act may be cited as the ``Hazardous Materials Transportation Authorization Act of 1993''.
Section 115(a) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1812(a)) is amended by striking all after ``not to exceed'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``$12,600,000 for fiscal year 1994, $13,100,000 for fiscal year 1995, and $13,600,000 for fiscal year 1996.''.
EXEMPTIONS FROM REQUIREMENT TO FILE REGISTRATION STATEMENT.
Section 106(c) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1805(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(16) Foreign offerors.--A person who is domiciled outside the United States and who offers, solely from a location outside the United States, hazardous materials for transportation in commerce does not have to file a registration statement under this subsection.''.
PLANNING GRANTS FOR INDIAN TRIBES.
Authority To Make Grants.--Section 117A(a)(1) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1815(a)(1)) is amended-- (1) in the introductory matter, by inserting ``and Indian tribes'' immediately after ``States''; and (2) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``within a State and between a State and another State'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``within the lands under the jurisdiction of a State or Indian tribe, and between the lands under the jurisdiction of a State or Indian tribe and the lands of another State or Indian tribe''.
Maintenance of Effort.--Section 117A(a)(2) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1815(a)(2)) is amended by inserting ``or Indian tribe'' immediately after ``State'' each place it appears.
Coordination of Planning.--Section 117A(a) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1815(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Coordination of planning.--A State or Indian tribe receiving a grant under this subsection shall ensure that planning under the grant is coordinated with emergency planning conducted by adjacent States and Indian tribes.''.
TRAINING CRITERIA FOR SAFE HANDLING AND TRANSPORTATION.
Section 106(b)(3) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1805(b)(3)) is amended-- (1) in the paragraph heading, by striking ``emergency response'' and -i-n-s-e-r-t inserting in lieu thereof ``employee''; (2) by inserting ``or duplicate'' immediately after ``conflict with''; and (3) by striking all after ``Labor relating to'' through ``(and amendments thereto) and'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``hazard communication, and hazardous waste operations and emergency response, contained in part 1910 of title 29 of the Code of Federal Regulations (and amendments thereto) or''.
DISCLOSURE OF FEES LEVIED BY STATES, POLITICAL SUBDIVISIONS, AND INDIAN TRIBES.
Section 112(b) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1811(b)) is amended-- (1) by inserting immediately after ``(b) Fees.--'' the following heading: ``(1) Restriction.--''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Disclosure.--A State or political subdivision thereof or Indian tribe that levies a fee in connection with the transportation of hazardous materials shall, upon the Secretary's request, report to the Secretary on-- ``(A) the basis on which the fee is levied upon persons involved in such transportation; ``(B) the purposes for which the revenues from the fee are used; ``(C) the annual total amount of the revenues collected from the fee; and ``(D) such other matters as the Secretary requests.''.
Section 109 of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1808(e)) is amended by striking the first sentence and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``The Secretary shall, once every 2 years, prepare and submit to the President for transmittal to the Congress a comprehensive report on the transportation of hazardous materials during the preceding 2 calendar years.''.
In implementing the Intelligent Vehicle-Highway Systems Act of 1991 (23 United States Code 307 note), the Secretary of Transportation shall ensure that the National Intelligent Vehicle-Highway Systems Program addresses, in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, the use of intelligent vehicle- highway system technologies to promote hazardous materials transportation safety.
The Secretary of Transportation shall ensure that one or more operational tests funded under such Act shall promote such safety and advance technology for providing information to persons who provide emergency response to hazardous materials transportation incidents.
RAIL TANK CAR SAFETY.
Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall issue final regulations under the following: (1) The rulemaking proceeding under Docket HM-175A entitled ``Crashworthiness Protection Requirements for Tank Cars''.
The rulemaking proceeding under Docket HM-201 entitled ``Detection and Repair of Cracks, Pits, Corrosion, Lining Flaws, Thermal Protection Flaws and Other Defects of Tank Car Tanks''.
SAFE PLACEMENT OF TRAIN CARS.
The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a study of existing practices regarding the placement of cars on trains, with particular attention to the placement of cars that carry hazardous materials.
In conducting the study, the Secretary shall consider whether such placement practices increase the risk of derailment, hazardous materials spills, or tank ruptures or have any other adverse effect on safety.
The results of the study shall be submitted to Congress within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Transportation shall, within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, amend regulations-- (1) under the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1801 et sequentes) to prohibit the driver of a motor vehicle transporting hazardous materials in commerce, and (2) under the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984 (49 App.
United States Code 2501 et sequentes) to prohibit the driver of any commercial motor vehicle, from driving the motor vehicle onto a highway-rail grade crossing without having sufficient space to drive completely through the crossing without stopping.
DRIVER'S RECORD OF DUTY STATUS.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall promulgate regulations amending section 395.8(k) of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, to require that any supporting document bearing on the record of duty status of a driver who operates a commercial motor vehicle-- (1) be -r-e-t-r-a-i-n-e-d-, retained, by the motor carrier using such driver, for at least 6 months following its receipt of such document; and (2) include information identifying the driver and vehicle related to the document.
Definition.--In this section, the term ``supporting document'' means any electronic or paper document or record generated in the normal course of business, in the provision of transportation by commercial motor vehicle, that could be used by a safety inspector or motor carrier to verify the accuracy of entries in a driver's record of duty status, including trip reports, pay slips, bills of lading or shipping papers, and receipts for fuel, lodging, and tolls.
SAFETY PERFORMANCE HISTORY OF NEW DRIVERS.
Amendment of Regulations.--Within 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall amend section 391.23 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, to-- (1) specify the safety information that must be sought under that section by a motor carrier with respect to a driver; (2) require that such information be requested from former employers and that former employers furnish the requested information within 30 days after receiving the request; and (3) ensure that the driver to whom such information applies has a reasonable opportunity to review and comment on the information.
Safety Information.--The safety information required to be specified under subsection (a)(1) shall include information on-- (1) any motor vehicle accidents in which the driver was involved during the preceding 3 years; (2) any failure of the driver, during the preceding 3 years, to undertake or complete a rehabilitation program under section 12020 of the Commercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 (49 App.
United States Code 2701) after being found to have used, in violation of law or Federal regulation, alcohol or a controlled substance; (3) any use by the driver, during the preceding 3 years, in violation of law or Federal regulation, of alcohol or a controlled substance subsequent to completing such a rehabilitation program; and (4) any other matters determined by the Secretary of Transportation to be appropriate and useful for determining the driver's safety performance.
Former Employer.--For purposes of this section, a former employer is any person who employed the driver in the preceding 3 years.
RETENTION OF SHIPPING PAPERS.
Amendment.--Section 105(g) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 United States Code 1804(g)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Retention of papers.--After the hazardous material to which a shipping paper provided to a carrier under paragraph (1) applies is no longer in transportation, the person who provided the shipping paper and the carrier required to maintain it under paragraph (1) shall retain the paper at their respective principal places of business.
Such person and carrier shall, upon request, make the shipping paper available to a Federal, State, or local government agency at reasonable times and locations.''.
Regulations.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall issue regulations implementing the requirements of paragraph (5) of section 105(g) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act, as added by subsection (a) of this section.
TOLL FREE NUMBER FOR REPORTING.
The Secretary of Transportation shall establish a toll free ``800'' telephone number for transporters of hazardous materials and other individuals to report to the Secretary possible violations of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1801 et sequentes) or any order or regulation issued under this Act.
Amendments Relating to Packaging.--(1) Sections 103(5)(B), 103(6)(A)(iii), and 109(c) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1802(5)(B), 1802(6)(A)(iii), 1808(c)) are each amended by striking ``packages'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``packaging''.
Sections 105(a)(3), 105(a)(4)(B)(v), 110(a)(1), and 120 of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1804(a)(3), 1804(a)(4)(B)(v), 1809(a)(1), 1818) are each amended by striking ``a package'' and inserting in lieu thereof -`-`-p-a-c-k-a-g-i-n-g-'-'-.
Sections 106(c)(1)(B) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1805(c)(1)(B)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``a bulk package'' and inserting in lieu thereof -`-`-b-u-l-k ``a bulk packaging''; and (B) by striking ``the package'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``the bulk packaging''.
Other.--(1) Section 105(a)(3) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1804(a)(3)) is amended by inserting ``hazardous materials'' immediately after ``shipped''.
Section 105(e)(1) of the Hazardous Materials Transportation Act (49 App.
United States Code 1804(e)(1)) is amended by striking ``or package'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``, package, or packaging (or a component of a container, package, or packaging)''.
EXEMPTION FROM HOURS OF SERVICE REQUIREMENTS.
The Secretary of Transportation shall exempt farmers and retail farm supplies from the hours of service requirements contained in section 395.3 of title 49, Code of Federal Regulations, when such farmers and retail farm supplies are transporting farm supplies for agricultural purposes within a 50-mile radius of their distribution point during the crop-planting season.