This Act may be cited as the ``Safe and Healthy Oceanic Recovery and Enhancement Act''.
TRANSFER OF AUTHORITY TO ISSUE PERMITS FOR TRANSPORTATION OF DREDGED MATERIAL FOR OCEAN DUMPING.
Transfer.--The authority under section 103 of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1413) to issue permits for transportation of dredged material for the purpose of dumping it into ocean waters is transferred from the Secretary of the Army to the Commission on Dredge Material Policy established by the amendment made by section 3 of this Act (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
References.--Any reference in any other Federal law, Executive order, rule, regulation, or delegation of authority, or any document of or pertaining to a department or office from which authority is transferred by this section to the head of such department or office, or to such department or office, is deemed to refer to the Commission.
Exercise of Authorities.--Except as otherwise provided by law, the Commission may, for purposes of performing the authority transferred by this section, exercise all authorities under any other provision of law that were available with respect to the exercise of that authority to the Secretary of the Army immediately before the effective date of the transfer of the function under this section.
Savings Provisions.-- (1) Legal documents.--All orders, determinations, rules, regulations, permits, grants, loans, contracts, agreements, certificates, licenses, and privileges-- (A) that have been issued, made, granted, or allowed to become effective by the Secretary of the Army or any other Government official, or by a court of competent jurisdiction, in the exercise of any authority that is transferred by this section, and (B) that are in effect on the effective date of such transfer (or become effective after such date pursuant to their terms as in effect on such effective date), shall continue in effect according to their terms until modified, terminated, superseded, set aside, or revoked in accordance with law by the President, the Commission, a court of competent jurisdiction, or operation of law.
Proceedings.--This section shall not affect any proceedings or any application for any benefits, service, license, permit, certificate, or financial assistance pending on the date of the enactment of this Act with respect to any authority transferred by this section, but such proceedings and applications shall be continued.
Orders shall be issued in such proceedings, appeals shall be taken therefrom, and payments shall be made pursuant to such orders, as if this section had not been enacted, and orders issued in any such proceeding shall continue in effect until modified, terminated, superseded, or revoked by a duly authorized official, by a court of competent jurisdiction, or by operation of law.
Nothing in this paragraph shall be considered to prohibit the discontinuance or modification of any such proceeding under the same terms and conditions and to the same extent that such proceeding could have been discontinued or modified if this section had not been enacted.
Suits.--This section shall not affect suits commenced before the date of the enactment of this Act, and in all such suits, proceeding shall be had, appeals taken, and judgments rendered in the same manner and with the same effect as if this section had not been enacted.
Nonabatement of actions.--No suit, action, or other proceeding commenced by or against any individual in the official capacity of such individual as an officer or employee responsible for exercising an authority transferred by this section, shall abate by reason of the enactment of this Act.
Continuance of suits.--If any Government officer in the official capacity of such officer is party to a suit with respect to a function of the officer, and under this section the authority to perform such function is transferred to any other officer or office, then such suit shall be continued with the other officer or the head of such other office, as applicable, substituted or added as a party.
Administrative procedure and judicial review.--Except as otherwise provided by this Act, any statutory requirements relating to notice, hearings, action upon the record, or administrative or judicial review that apply to the exercise of any authority transferred by this section shall apply to the exercise of such authority by the Commission.
Transfer of Assets.--Except as otherwise provided in this Act, so much of the personnel, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, allocations, and other funds employed, used, held, available, or to be made available in connection with an authority transferred to the Commission by this section shall be available to the Commission at such time or times as the Director of the Office of Management and Budget directs for use in connection with the authorities transferred.
Delegation and Assignment.--Except as otherwise expressly prohibited by law or otherwise provided in this Act, the Commission may delegate any of the authorities transferred to the Commission by this section to such officers and employees of the Commission as the Commission may designate, and may authorize successive redelegations of such authority as may be necessary or appropriate.
No delegation of functions under this subsection or under any other provision of this Act shall relieve the Commission of responsibility for the administration of the authority.
Authority of Director of the Office of Management and Budget With Respect to Functions Transferred.-- (1) Determinations.--If necessary, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall make any determination of the authority that are transferred under this section.
Incidental transfers.--The Director of the Office of Management and Budget, at such time or times as the Director shall provide, may make such determinations as may be necessary with regard to the authority transferred by this section, and may make such additional incidental dispositions of personnel, assets, liabilities, grants, contracts, property, records, and unexpended balances of appropriations, authorizations, allocations, and other funds held, used, arising from, available to, or to be made available in connection with such authority as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
The Director shall provide for the termination of the affairs of all entities terminated pursuant to this Act and for such further measures and dispositions as may be necessary to effectuate this Act.
Availability of Existing Funds.--Existing appropriations and funds available for the performance of functions, programs, and activities terminated pursuant to this Act shall remain available, for the duration of their period of availability, for necessary expenses in connection with the termination and resolution of such functions, programs, and activities.
Conforming Amendments.--The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1413) is amended-- (1) in section 3 (33 United States Code 1402) by adding at the end the following: ``(n) The term `Commission' means the Commission on Dredge Material Policy established by title IV.
''; (2) in title I by striking ``Secretary'' each place it appears in reference to the Secretary of the Army, other than in section 106(d)(2)(C) (33 United States Code 1416(d)(2)(C)), and inserting ``Commission''; (3) in section 103 (33 United States Code 1413) by striking the section heading and inserting the following: ``permits for transportation of dredged material''; and (4) in section 106(d)(2)(C) (33 United States Code 1416(d)(2)(C)) by striking ``Secretary of the Army'' and inserting ``Commission''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF COMMISSION ON DREDGE MATERIAL POLICY.
The Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (33 United States Code 1401 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``TITLE IV--COMMISSION ON DREDGED MATERIAL POLICY ``SEC.
``There is established a commission to be known as the `Commission on Dredged Material Policy'.
``The Commission shall carry out the duties of the Commission under title I of this Act.
Number and Appointment.-- ``(1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 16 members appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, from among individuals who are knowledgeable in ocean and dredging activities, including individuals representing State and local governments, ocean- related industries, academic and technical institutions, and public interest organizations involved with scientific, regulatory, economic, and environmental ocean and dredging activities.
The membership of the Commission shall be balanced geographically to the extent consistent with maintaining the highest level of expertise on the Commission.
Recommendations.--Of the members of the Commission appointed under this subsection-- ``(A) 4 shall be appointed from a list of 8 individuals who shall be recommended by the majority leader of the Senate in consultation with the Chairman of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate; ``(B) 4 shall be appointed from a list of 8 individuals who shall be recommended by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the Chairmen of the Committees on Resources, Transportation and Infrastructure, and Science of the House; ``(C) 2 shall be appointed from a list of 4 individuals who shall be recommended by the minority leader of the Senate in consultation with the ranking minority party member of the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate; and ``(D) 2 shall be appointed from a list of 4 individuals who shall be recommended by the minority leader of the House of Representatives in consultation with the ranking minority party members of the Committees on Resources, Transportation and Infrastructure, and Science of the House.
Terms.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraphs (2) and (3), each member shall be appointed for a term of 4 years.
Terms of initial appointees.--As designated by the President at the time of appointment, of the members first appointed-- ``(A) 4 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years; and ``(B) 2 shall be appointed for a term of 2 years.
Vacancies.--Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the member's predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of that member's term until a successor has taken office.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.--Members of the Commission shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-4 of the General Schedule for each day (including travel time) during which they are engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members of the Commission.
The term of office of the Chairperson shall be 2 years.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members, except that the first meeting of the Commission shall occur not later than 30 days after the completion of appointment of its members.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.--With the approval of the Chairperson, the Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Chairperson, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for supplies and services.