This Act may be cited as the ``Adoption Incentives Act of 1995''.
EXCLUSION OF ADOPTION ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
In General.--Gross income of an employee does not include employee adoption assistance benefits, or military adoption assistance benefits, received by the employee with respect to the employee's adoption of a child.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Employee adoption assistance benefits.--The term `employee adoption assistance benefits' means payment by an employer of qualified adoption expenses with respect to an employee's adoption of a child, or reimbursement by the employer of such qualified adoption expenses paid or incurred by the employee in the taxable year.
Employer and employee.--The terms `employer' and `employee' have the respective meanings given such terms by section 127(c).
Military adoption assistance benefits.--The term `military adoption assistance benefits' means benefits provided under section 1052 of title 10, United States Code, or section 514 of title 14, United States Code.
Qualified adoption expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified adoption expenses' means reasonable and necessary adoption fees, court costs, attorney fees, and other expenses-- ``(i) which are directly related to, and the principal purpose of which is for, the legal adoption of an eligible child by the taxpayer, and ``(ii) which are not incurred in violation of State or Federal law or in carrying out any surrogate parenting arrangement.
Eligible child.--The term `eligible child' means any individual-- ``(i) who has not attained age 18 as of the time of the adoption, or ``(ii) who is physically or mentally incapable of caring for himself.
Coordination With Other Provisions.--The Secretary shall issue regulations to coordinate the application of this section with the application of any other provision of this title which allows a credit or deduction with respect to qualified adoption expenses.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 137 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Cross references to other Acts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.
WITHDRAWAL FROM IRA FOR ADOPTION EXPENSES.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Qualified adoption expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--Any amount which is paid or distributed out of an individual retirement plan of the taxpayer, and which would (but for this paragraph) be includible in gross income, shall be excluded from gross income to the extent that-- ``(i) such amount exceeds the sum of-- ``(I) the amount excludable under section 137, and ``(II) any amount allowable as a credit under this title with respect to qualified adoption expenses; and ``(ii) such amount does not exceed the qualified adoption expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Qualified adoption expenses.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `qualified adoption expenses' has the meaning given such term by section 137, except that such term shall not include any expense in connection with the adoption by an individual of a child who is the child of such individual's spouse.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.