SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Unemployment Compensation Extension Act''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
TITLE I--TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION Sec.
Extension of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002.
Entitlement to additional weeks of temporary extended unemployment compensation.
TITLE II--EXTENDED BENEFITS UNDER THE FEDERAL-STATE EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION ACT OF 1970 Sec.
Temporary State authority to waive application of lookbacks under the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970.
TITLE III--RAILROAD UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE Sec.
Temporary increase in extended unemployment benefits under the Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act.
TITLE I--TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION SEC.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, whenever in this title an amendment is expressed in terms of an amendment to a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 26 United States Code 3304 note).
EXTENSION OF THE TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION ACT OF 2002.
Six-Month Extension of Program.--Section 208 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), an agreement entered into under this title shall apply to weeks of unemployment-- ``(1) beginning after the date on which such agreement is entered into; and ``(2) ending before July 1, 2004.
Transition.--In the case of an individual who is receiving temporary extended unemployment compensation for the week which immediately precedes the first day of the week that includes July 1, 2004, temporary extended unemployment compensation shall continue to be payable to such individual for any week thereafter from the account from which such individual received compensation for the week immediately preceding that termination date.
No compensation shall be payable by reason of the preceding sentence for any week beginning after December 31, 2004.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 26 United States Code 3304 note).
ENTITLEMENT TO ADDITIONAL WEEKS OF TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
Weeks of TEUC Amounts.--Paragraph (1) of section 203(b) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--The amount established in an account under subsection (a) shall be equal to 26 times the individual's weekly benefit amount for the benefit year.''.
Weeks of TEUC-X Amounts.--Section 203(c)(1) is amended by striking ``an amount equal to the amount originally established in such account (as determined under subsection (b)(1))'' and inserting ``7 times the individual's weekly benefit amount for the benefit year''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section-- (A) shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 26 United States Code 3304 note); but (B) shall apply only with respect to weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment of this Act, subject to paragraph (2).
Special rules.--In the case of an individual for whom a temporary extended unemployment compensation account was established before the date of enactment of this Act, the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (as amended by this title) shall be applied subject to the following: (A) Any amounts deposited in the individual's temporary extended unemployment compensation account by reason of section 203(c) of such Act (commonly known as ``TEUC-X amounts'') before the date of enactment of this Act shall be treated as amounts deposited by reason of section 203(b) of such Act (commonly known as ``TEUC amounts''), as amended by subsection (a).
For purposes of determining whether the individual is eligible for any TEUC-X amounts under such Act, as amended by this title-- (i) any determination made under section 203(c) of such Act before the application of the amendments made by this title shall be disregarded; and (ii) any such determination shall instead be made by applying section 203(c) of such Act, as amended by this title-- (I) as of the time that all amounts established in such account in accordance with section 203(b) of such Act (as amended by this title, and including any amounts described in subparagraph (A)) are in fact exhausted, except that (II) if such individual's account was both augmented by and exhausted of all TEUC-X amounts before the date of enactment of this Act, such determination shall be made as if exhaustion (as described in section 203(c)(1) of such Act) had not occurred until such date of enactment.
Section 203(c)(2)(B) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``or'' at the end; (2) by striking subparagraph (B) and inserting the following: ``(B) such a period would then be in effect for such State under such Act if-- ``(i) section 203(d) of such Act were applied as if it had been amended by striking `5' each place it appears and inserting `4'; and ``(ii) with respect to weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment of this clause, paragraph (1)(A) of such section 203(d) did not apply; or ``(C) with respect to weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment of this clause, the average rate of total unemployment in such State (seasonally adjusted) for the period consisting of the most recent 3 months for which data for all States are published before the time of exhaustion equals or exceeds 6.5 percent.
For purposes of this subparagraph (C), determinations of the rate of total unemployment in any State for any period (and of any seasonal adjustment) shall be made by the Secretary.''.
TITLE II--EXTENDED BENEFITS UNDER THE FEDERAL-STATE EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION ACT OF 1970.
TEMPORARY STATE AUTHORITY TO WAIVE APPLICATION OF LOOKBACKS UNDER THE FEDERAL-STATE EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION ACT OF 1970.
For purposes of conforming with the provisions of the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970 (26 United States Code 3304 note), a State may, for weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment of this Act and ending before December 31, 2004, waive the application of either subsection (d)(1)(A) of section 203 of such Act or subsection (f)(1)(A)(ii) of such section, or both.
TITLE III--RAILROAD UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE SEC.
TEMPORARY INCREASE IN EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT BENEFITS UNDER THE RAILROAD UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE ACT.
Section 2(c)(2) of the Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act (45 United States Code 352(c)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) Temporary increase in extended unemployment benefits.-- ``(i) Employees with 10 or more years of service.--Subject to clause (iii), in the case of an employee who has 10 or more years of service (as so defined), with respect to extended unemployment benefits-- ``(I) subparagraph (A) shall be applied by substituting ``130 days of unemployment'' for ``65 days of unemployment''; and ``(II) subparagraph (B) shall be applied by inserting ``(or, in the case of unemployment benefits, 13 consecutive 14-day periods'' after ``7 consecutive 14-day periods''.
Employees with less than 10 years of service.--Subject to clause (iii), in the case of an employee who has less than 10 years of service (as so defined), with respect to extended unemployment benefits, this paragraph shall apply to such an employee in the same manner as this paragraph would apply to an employee described in clause (i) if such clause had not been enacted.
Application.--The provisions of clauses (i) and (ii) shall apply to an employee who received normal benefits for days of unemployment under this Act during the period beginning on July 1, 2002, and ending before July 1, 2004.