This Act may be cited as the ``Defense Reuse Community Partnership Act''.
BASE DISPOSAL MANAGEMENT CONTRACT.
Use of Independent Site Manager.--(1) In order to fulfill the responsibilities of the Secretary of Defense under a base closure law, the Secretary may enter into one or more contracts with independent entities (in this section referred to as a ``Site Manager'') to assist the Secretary in managing the site planning, approval, preparation, and disposal of excess and surplus real property at military installations to be closed or realigned under such base closure law.
The Secretary shall select a Site Manager in consultation with the affected local community and may make the selection without reference to Federal acquisition laws and regulations.
During the term of a contract entered under this subsection and the five-year period beginning on the termination date of the contract, the Site Manager subject to that contract (and its affiliates) shall be barred from bidding for or acquiring any interest in real property or facilities located at any of the military installations to be managed by the Site Manager, unless such acquisition is necessary to execute the terms of the contract.
Qualifications.--In selecting a Site Manager, the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that the Site Manager, either directly or through its principals, has had prior experience-- (1) in the site planning of properties located at military installations; (2) in dealing with local land use authorities in the States in which the military installations to be managed are located; (3) in managing the cleanup of hazardous waste contamination; (4) in resolving land use issues under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et sequentes) and the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes); and (5) in meeting such other qualifications as the Secretary considers to be necessary to perform the tasks set forth in this section.
Duties Generally.--Under the contract entered into under subsection (a), a Site Manager shall-- (1) analyze the land use potential of the military installations to be managed by the Site Manager; (2) coordinate with the applicable State and local authorities to develop reuse options and obtain necessary zoning and infrastructure approvals with respect to these installations; (3) manage the remediation of any adverse environmental conditions on these installations; (4) coordinate with State and Federal agencies to complete all reports and analyses required under applicable law with respect to these installations; (5) initiate and coordinate the notices and consultations with Federal, State, regional, and local agencies contemplated under the authority delegated to the Secretary of Defense under a base closure law and the procedures contemplated under section 501 of the Stewart B. McKinney Homeless Assistance Act (42 United States Code 11411); (6) manage through the use of community assets the maintenance and interim use of these installations pending final disposition; (7) prepare real property and facilities at these installations for disposal (including any necessary site- clearing and infrastructure installation); and (8) manage the sale of sale parcels in accordance with subsection (f).
Appraisal.--Before incurring any expenses under the contract, the Secretary of Defense shall cause each proposed sale parcel at a military installation to be managed by a Site Manager to be appraised to determine the then-current ``as-is'' value of the parcel.
The appraisal shall be conducted in accordance with land appraisal regulations issued by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency and the Office of Thrift Supervision under title XI of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (12 United States Code 3331 et sequentes).
Budget.--A Site Manager and the Secretary of Defense shall jointly develop a detailed budget for each phase of the site preparation and approval process for each military installation to be managed by the Site Manager.
The contract entered into under subsection (a) shall authorize the Site Manager through the sole exercise of its reasonable business judgment, in accordance with the approved budget and without reference to Federal acquisition laws and regulations, to engage contractors and other professionals to complete all aspects of the site preparation and approval process, including environmental remediation.
The Secretary shall reimburse the Site Manager for the reasonable overhead costs incurred by the Site Manager and for payments due under the contracts and subcontracts contemplated by this section.
Sale Procedures and Disposition of Proceeds.--After a sale parcel managed by a Site Manager has received all necessary approvals and is otherwise ready for sale, the Site Manager shall sell the parcel, as an agent for the Secretary of Defense, in one or more transactions.
Each sale shall be on terms acceptable to the Secretary, determined in consultation with the Site Manager and appropriate local authorities.
The proceeds from each sale shall be divided among the Department of Defense, the Site Manager involved, and appropriate local authorities as follows: (1) The Secretary of Defense shall receive an amount equal to-- (A) the initial ``as-is'' appraised value of the parcel established in accordance with subsection (d); (B) the costs incurred by the Secretary under the contract with the Site Manager (other than environmental analysis and remediation costs, costs of preparing or conducting reports, analyses, notices, and consultations required under applicable law, property maintenance costs, and all other costs that the Secretary would be required to incur if the contract with the Site Manager did not exist) and the reasonable costs of conducting the sale; and (C) \1/3\ of the remainder of the proceeds.
From amounts remaining after operation of paragraph (1), the applicable local authorities, as determined by the Secretary, shall receive \1/2\ of the remainder.
If the appropriate local authorities cannot be determined satisfactorily to the Secretary, the State in which the military installation involved is located shall receive the amount that would be distributed pursuant to this paragraph.
From amounts remaining after operation of paragraph (1), the Site Manager involved shall receive \1/2\ of the remainder.
Reports.--(1) At such intervals as the Secretary of Defense may prescribe, each Site Manager shall submit to the Secretary reports describing the activities of the Site Manager under a contract entered into under subsection (a) and such other information as the Secretary may require.
Not later than May 31, 1994, and May 31, 1995, the Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress a report regarding all military installations covered by a contract under this section and the status of the site preparation and disposal process at the installations.
Base Closure Law Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term ``base closure law'' means each of the following: (1) The Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Title II of the Defense Authorization Amendments and Base Closure and Realignment Act (Public Law 100-526; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
Section 2687 of title 10, United States Code.
Any other similar law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.