This Act may be cited as the ``Eva M. Clayton Fellows Program Act''.
EVA M. CLAYTON FELLOWS PROGRAM.
In General.--Subtitle I of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 3291 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EVA M. CLAYTON FELLOWS PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a fellowship program to be known as the `Eva M. Clayton Fellows Program' to provide for fellowships to conduct research and education on the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition in accordance with this section.
Fellows.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall select eligible faculty members to receive a fellowship to conduct research or education programs relating to the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition (in this section referred to as `Clayton Fellows').
Term.--The term of a fellowship awarded under this subsection shall be two years.
Location of service.-- ``(A) First year of service.--During the first year of service under a fellowship awarded under this subsection, each Clayton Fellow shall serve at the qualified institution at which the Clayton Fellow is a faculty member.
Second year of service.--During the second year of service under a fellowship awarded under this subsection, each Clayton Fellow-- ``(i) may, if a fellowship position is made available pursuant to subsection (d), serve at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; or ``(ii) shall, if such position is not made available, continue to serve as described in subparagraph (A).
Travel.--During the term of service under a fellowship awarded under this subsection, a Clayton Fellow may travel as necessary to conduct work on the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition.
Application.--An eligible faculty member seeking a fellowship under this subsection shall submit to the Secretary an application that contains-- ``(A) a resume or curriculum vitae that includes information on the expertise, education, and training of such faculty member; ``(B) a description of the research or education programs the faculty member intends to conduct while serving as a Clayton Fellow; ``(C) a certification that the qualified institution at which the eligible faculty member is a faculty member has agreed to maintain the faculty status, benefits, and faculty position of the eligible faculty member during and after the return of the eligible faculty member to the qualified institution from the fellowship program established under subsection (a); and ``(D) such other information as the Secretary may require.
Selection.--In selecting eligible faculty members to serve as Clayton Fellows, the Secretary may give priority to eligible faculty members at land-grant colleges and universities.
Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which a Clayton Fellow completes a year of service under a fellowship awarded under this subsection, each Clayton Fellow shall submit to the Secretary a report containing-- ``(A) a description of the research and education programs conducted by the Clayton Fellow during the preceding year of service, including the purpose and results of such research or education programs; ``(B) a self-assessment of the effectiveness of the research or education programs conducted by the Clayton Fellow during such year; ``(C) an evaluation of each Fellow Protege who provided assistance to the Clayton Fellow during such year; ``(D) a description of best practices for the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition and a proposal to teach such practices at the qualified institution at which the Clayton Fellow is a faculty member upon completion of the fellowship awarded under this subsection; and ``(E) such other information as the Secretary may require.
Submission of evaluation to peace corps.--Each Clayton Fellow shall submit to the Master's International program of the Peace Corps a copy of the evaluation submitted to the Secretary under paragraph (6)(C).
Termination.--The Secretary may terminate a fellowship awarded under this subsection at any time during the fellowship.
Fellow Proteges.-- ``(1) In general.--Each Clayton Fellow shall select at least one eligible student to assist such Clayton Fellow in conducting research or education programs on the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition (in this section referred to as a `Fellow Protege').
Location of service.-- ``(A) In general.--Each Fellow Protege shall provide assistance to a Clayton Fellow-- ``(i) in the country or region that is the subject of the work of the Clayton Fellow relating to the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition; or ``(ii) if the Clayton Fellow is serving at the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, at the Food and Agriculture Organization.
Travel.--A Fellow Protege may travel as necessary to provide assistance to a Clayton Fellow during the term of assistance of such Protege.
Application.--Each eligible student seeking to assist a Clayton Fellow under this subsection shall submit to a Clayton Fellow an application that contains-- ``(A) documentation proving that the student-- ``(i) has permission from the Master's International program of the Peace Corps to provide assistance to a Clayton Fellow in accordance with this section; and ``(ii) is eligible to serve as a Fellow Protege under this subsection, including proof of enrollment and good academic standing; ``(B) an explanation of how the academic work of the student relates to the work of the fellowship program established under subsection (a); ``(C) an academic transcript; and ``(D) such other information as the Clayton Fellow may require.
Selection of fellow proteges.--In selecting eligible students to serve as Fellow Proteges, a Clayton Fellow-- ``(A) shall consult with the Secretary; and ``(B) may give priority to students enrolled at land-grant colleges and universities.
Report.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which a Fellow Protege completes a term of assistance under this subsection, each Fellow Protege shall submit to the Secretary a report containing-- ``(A) a description of the type and extent of the assistance such Fellow Protege provided to a Clayton Fellow in conducting research or education programs on the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition during the preceding term of assistance as a Fellow Protege; ``(B) a self-assessment of the effectiveness of such assistance; ``(C) an evaluation of the Clayton Fellow for whom the Fellow Protege provided such assistance; ``(D) a description of best practices identified by such Fellow Protege for the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition; and ``(E) such other information as the Secretary may require.
Termination.--A Clayton Fellow may terminate the term of assistance of a Fellow Protege at any time during such term of assistance.
United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization.-- ``(1) Establishment of fellowship positions.--The President shall direct the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States at the United Nations to urge the United Nations to establish within the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations fellowship positions for Clayton Fellows to conduct research and education programs on the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition.
Consultation.--Upon the establishment of a fellowship position under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consult with the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations with respect to the selection of Clayton Fellows.
Administration.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall award a grant to administer and implement the fellowship program established under subsection (a) to a nonprofit organization that-- ``(A) represents or is comprised of individuals associated with an institution of higher education specified in section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1067q(a)); and ``(B) is an organization described in paragraph (3) of section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and exempt from tax under such section.
Use of funds.--The organization awarded a grant under paragraph (1) may use grant funds only for the following purposes: ``(A) To provide for each Clayton Fellow and each Fellow Protege payment for expenses related to conducting work on the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition under the fellowship established under subsection (a), including-- ``(i) housing or accommodations; and ``(ii) travel.
To provide on behalf of each Fellow Protege at the end of the term of assistance of such Protege in an amount that is proportionate to such term of assistance-- ``(i) scholarship assistance in the form of a direct lump-sum payment to the qualified institution at which such Protege is enrolled; or ``(ii) if such Protege graduates from the qualified institution upon completion of the term of assistance as a Fellow Protege, loan repayment assistance for loans made, insured, or guaranteed under part B, or made under part D or E, of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1071 et sequentes, 1087a et sequentes, 1087aa et seq.)
for which such Protege is the borrower, in the form of a direct lump-sum payment-- ``(I) in the case of a loan made, insured, or guaranteed under part B of such Act, to the holder of the loan; ``(II) in the case of a loan made under part D of such Act, to the Secretary of Education; and ``(III) in the case of a loan made under part E of such Act, to the institution of higher education making such loan.
To pay the costs of administering the fellowship program established under subsection (a).
Annual assessment.-- ``(A) Annual assessment.--The organization awarded a grant under paragraph (1) or this paragraph shall annually submit to the Secretary an assessment of the fellowship program established under subsection (a) that contains-- ``(i) a description of the use of the funds received by the organization under this section during the preceding year of such fellowship program; ``(ii) an assessment by the organization of the effectiveness of the activities carried out using such funds; ``(iii) information regarding the application of any funds provided by non- Federal sources during such year; ``(iv) a description of the best practices identified by the organization for future fellowship programs to be carried out by the Secretary; and ``(v) such other information as the Secretary may require.
In general.--If after reviewing the annual assessment described in subparagraph (A), the Secretary determines that the organization awarded a grant under paragraph (1) or this paragraph did not administer and implement the fellowship program established under subsection (a) in accordance with this section, the Secretary may-- ``(i) revoke or suspend funding for such grant, in whole or in part; ``(ii) accept applications from other eligible entities to administer and implement the fellowship program established under subsection (a); and ``(iii) transfer funding revoked or suspended under clause (i) to the eligible entity the Secretary selects after reviewing applications submitted under clause (ii).
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Eligible faculty member.--The term `eligible faculty member' means an individual who is a faculty member of a qualified institution.
Eligible student.--The term `eligible student' is a student who is-- ``(A) enrolled in the Master's International program of the Peace Corps; ``(B) enrolled and in good academic standing at a qualified institution; and ``(C) pursuing a master's or other graduate degree in an area of study related to the eradication of world hunger and malnutrition.
Qualified institution.--The term `qualified institution' means-- ``(A) an institution of higher education specified in section 371(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1067q(a)); or ``(B) a land-grant college or university.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2012 through 2018.''.
Submission of Initial Assessment.--The first assessment required under subsection (f) of section 1459B of the National Agricultural Research, Extension, and Teaching Policy Act of 1977 (as added by subsection (a) of this section) shall be submitted not later than 30 days after the date on which the first year of service of the first fellowship awarded under such section ends (as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture).