This Act may be cited as the ``Columbia River Habitat Protection and Recreational Access Act of 1997''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The 51-mile stretch of the Columbia River, known as the ``Hanford Reach'', provides 80 percent of the fall Chinook salmon in the river system, critical habitat for wildlife, a high-quality waterfowl sanctuary, as well as numerous scenic, historic, and recreational opportunities for the public.
In 1996 Congress, through Public Law 104-333, prohibited damming, dredging, channeling, or other such activities along the Hanford Reach in order to help preserve and protect the unique environmental benefits of the region.
The lands surrounding the Hanford Reach area of the Columbia River, Washington, should be properly managed in order to protect plant, fish, wildlife, cultural, recreational, and scenic resources, while preserving access to these lands.
Recognizing the unique and pristine values of the area, local citizens in cooperation with Federal and State authorities have developed a comprehensive protection plan which has enhanced salmon habitat along the Hanford Reach.
This plan, known as the Vernita Bar Agreement, has preserved the free flowing, riparian character of the Hanford Reach, and serves as a blueprint for further successful management along the Columbia River.
Although dozens of local, State, and Federal environmental protection and management laws and regulations exist for the Hanford Reach, management efforts can be better integrated and can lead to more efficient use of public resources and improved habitat and recreation management.
Several of the areas adjacent to the Hanford Reach of the Columbia River, including lands known as the Wahluke Slope, currently owned by the United States, have been extensively studied and reviewed through environmental impact statements and have been declared environmentally sound and certified suitable for conveyance.
Inasmuch as Federal financial resources are constrained, joint partnerships among Federal, State, and local entities can provide long-term habitat and wildlife management, maintain recreational opportunities, and develop a responsible and environmentally sound local land use plan for the region.
The people and the governments of Benton, Franklin, Grant, and Adams Counties desire to enter into such a partnership with the State of Washington and the United States to ensure the continued protection of plant, fish, wildlife, cultural, recreational, and scenic resources on the lands surrounding the Hanford Reach.
Such a cooperative partnership will provide a forum for public input from the entire region and ensure the long-term protection of the river as wild, scenic, and accessible.
Congress recommends the formation of a commission, of which a majority of the members of such a commission represent the local entities, to ensure that the above goals are achieved and to maintain maximum involvement by the citizens of Benton, Franklin, Grant, and Adams Counties.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy; (2) the term ``Hanford Works'' means the property represented as ``Department of Energy'' under the Land Status Legend on the Bureau of Land Management topographic map of Priest Rapids, Washington, Edition-1991; and (3) the term ``Commission'' means the Hanford Reach Protection and Management Commission.
GENERAL AUTHORITY; PROPERTY DESCRIPTIONS.
Authority.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary for no consideration shall convey to the governmental entities referred to in subsection (b) all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the properties described in subsection (b).
Conveyances.-- (1) State of washington.--The Secretary shall convey to the State of Washington the property that consists of the portion of the Hanford Works that runs along both banks of the Columbia River and lies within the one quarter mile to the north of the mean high water mark on the north bank of the Columbia River, and that lies within the one quarter mile to the south of the mean high water mark on the south bank of the Columbia River.
Adams county, washington.--The Secretary shall convey to Adams County, Washington, the property that consists of the portion of the Hanford Works that lies within Adams County, Washington.
Grant county, washington.--The Secretary shall convey to Grant County, Washington, the property that consists of the portion of the Hanford Works that lies within Grant County, Washington, to the north of the Columbia River and that is not part of the conveyance made pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection.
Franklin county, washington.--The Secretary shall convey to Franklin County, Washington, the property that consists of the portion of Hanford Works that lies within Franklin County, Washington, to the north of the Columbia River and that is not part of the conveyance made pursuant to paragraph (1) of this subsection.
Additional properties.--In addition to properties described in paragraphs (1) through (4), the Secretary may convey to a State or local government referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) such property within the Hanford Works as the Secretary and the State or local government agree is appropriate to carry out this Act.
Special Rules for State of Washington.-- (1) Environmental safety.--The conveyance made under section 4(b)(1) shall be made only after the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency certifies to the Secretary that-- (A) the properties described in section 4(b)(1) are clean of hazardous, toxic, or radioactive materials or substances; (B) all corrective, remedial, or response actions have been completed; and (C) all obligations of the Secretary at the Hanford Nuclear Reservation under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes) and other applicable laws have been fulfilled.
Federal leaseholds.--Any leasehold interest by any agency of the United States on lands described under section 4(b) shall terminate upon enactment of this Act, and such interest shall be transferred pursuant to section 4.
Water rights and utility easements.--The conveyances under section 4 shall be made subject to all existing water rights and all easements and rights of any public and private utility districts which operate and maintain transmission and generation facilities along the lands described under section 4.
Establishment of Hanford Reach Protection and Management Commission.--Not later than 6 months after the conveyances under section 4(b)(1) are made, the State of Washington shall enter into a written joint agreement with the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties to establish the Hanford Reach Protection and Management Commission as follows: (1) Membership appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members.
As soon as practicable, but not more than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the members shall be appointed as follows: (A) One member who shall be a resident of Benton County, appointed by the government of such county.
One member who shall be a resident of Franklin County, appointed by the government of such county.
One member who shall be a resident of Grant County, appointed by the government of such county.
One member who shall be a resident of the State of Washington, appointed by the Governor of the State of Washington.
One member who shall be a resident of the State of Washington, appointed by the Secretary of Energy.
One member who shall be a resident of the State of Washington, appointed by the Secretary of the Interior.
One member who shall be a resident of any county in the State of Washington through or along which the Columbia River runs, appointed by a majority vote of the other members of the Commission.
Terms of office.--The length of the terms of office of the members appointed under (1) shall be fixed by each appointing governmental entity at the time of appointment, but no term shall exceed 4 years.
Vacancy.--Any vacancy that may occur prior to the expiration of a member's term shall be filled for the balance of such term by appointment made by the entity which appointed the vacating member.
Restriction.--Except as provided herein, no person shall be appointed to the Commission who is an employee, agent, or independent contractor of the United States or any agency thereof.
Failure to appoint.--In the event a member has not been appointed within 6 months of the establishment of the Commission, any such vacancy shall be filled by joint appointment by the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties.
Establishment of commission authority.--As soon as practicable after the appointment of a majority of the members of the Commission, such members shall be authorized to convene meetings of the Commission and to adopt rules and provisions governing the administration, voting, meeting, terms of service, and finances of the Commission.
The first meeting shall be held no later than 1 year from the date of the establishment of the Commission.
Development of hanford reach protection and management plan.-- (A) The primary duty of the Commission shall be to develop and implement a plan to manage the lands conveyed pursuant to section 4(b)(1) to protect and enhance plant resources, fish and wildlife resources, cultural resources, recreational access, and other uses or resources prescribed by the Commission.
From the date the conveyances under section 4(b)(1) are made until such time as a permanent protection and management plan is approved by the Commission, the lands conveyed pursuant to such section shall be managed under an interim management plan approved by the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties, which shall be consistent with the purposes of this Act.
Nonperformance of State of Washington, Transfer to and Management by Counties Authorized.--If the State of Washington does not fulfill its obligations under subsection (b), all right, title, and interest to the property conveyed pursuant to section 4(b)(1) shall be transferred to the counties, with the consent of such counties, in which the lands are situated in order to carry out the purposes of this Act, and the governments of such counties shall jointly establish the Commission pursuant to subsection (b) and to provide for the management of the lands conveyed pursuant to section 4(b)(1).
Reversion and Right To Reenter.--If the State of Washington does not fulfill its obligations under subsection (b), and if the governments of Benton, Franklin, and Grant Counties do not fulfill their obligations under subsection (c), all right, title, and interest to the property conveyed pursuant to section 4(b)(1) shall revert to the United States and the United States shall have the right of immediate entry thereon.
Use of Federal Resources Authorized.--The Secretary of the Interior may enter into agreements with the State of Washington and the governmental entities referred to in paragraphs (1) through (4) of section 4(b) to allow the utilization of personnel, and the provision of technical and financial assistance from the United States Fish and Wildlife Service to assist the county governments in the administration and management of the lands transferred under this Act.
Special Rule for Adams County, Grant County, and Franklin County.--The properties described under paragraphs (2) through (4) of section 4(b) shall be conveyed only after Adams County, Grant County, and Franklin County, Washington, have submitted a written report to the Secretary of the Interior which shall include-- (1) a risk analysis of debris slides in the White Bluffs Wasteway; (2) any recommendations necessary to address the risk of such slides; and (3) a comprehensive land use plan of the Wahluke Slope.