SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``New Mexico Forest Health and Fire Prevention Act of 1998''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents Sec.
New Mexico Program of Forest Health and Fire Prevention.
Forest Health and Fire Protection Fund.
Congress finds the following: (1) The management of National Forest System lands in the State of New Mexico must become proactive instead of passive or delayed.
The best proactive management approach to prevent catastrophic fires would be to utilize the talents of local communities for the process of thinning the forests.
At the same time, local communities will create businesses through developing value-added products from the harvested wood.
Increases in both the number and severity of wildfires are occurring as a result of high tree densities, species composition and structure that are outside the historic range of variability.
Fire disturbances contribute to significant soil erosion, degradation of air and water quality, loss of watershed values, loss of wildlife habitat and damage to other forest resources.
Serious destruction or degradation of important forest resources occurs in all regions of New Mexico.
The health of the land is directly related to the economic health of the communities it surrounds.
Management activities of forests should be designed to incorporate local communities in the management process.
The National Forest System lands in New Mexico are at an unacceptable risk of destruction by catastrophic wildfire.
The condition of these forests can pose a significant threat of destruction to human life and property as well as to the habitat of fish, and wildlife (including threatened and endangered species), public recreation areas, timber, watershed and other important forest resources.
Restoration and protection of important forest resources require active forest management involving rural communities who will integrate environmentally compatible harvesting techniques and develop businesses which are operated at the local level and driven by market forces.
Many units of the National Forest System in New Mexico have an increasing backlog of unfunded projects to restore and protect degraded forest resources.
Adequate funding, structured so as to maximize allocation of monies on-the-ground projects, is needed to address this backlog in an efficient, cost- effective way.
A comprehensive, Statewide effort is needed to restore and protect important forest resources in an organized, community wide, timely and scientific manner.
There should be immediate action to improve National Forest System lands in New Mexico where serious resource degradation has been thoroughly identified and assessed or where serious resource destruction or degradation by natural disturbance is imminent.
Inventory and analysis of the status and trends in the fire conditions of forests and their resources are needed to identify and reverse the destruction or degradation of important forest resources in a timely and effective manner.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Federal forest lands.--The term ``Federal forest lands'' means National Forest System lands located within the State of New Mexico.
Community.--The term ``community'' means a rural community located within the uplands of New Mexico, which is surrounded by, or adjacent to, Federal forest lands.
Fund.--The terms ``Forest Health and Fire Prevention Fund'' and ``Fund'' mean the fund established under section 5.
Implementation date.--The term ``implementation date'' means January 15, 2000, or the first day of the 19th full month following the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever is later.
However, if the implementation date under the second option would occur within six months of the next January 15, the Secretary may designate that January 15 as the implementation date.
Land management plan.--The term ``land management plan'' means a land and resource management plan prepared by the Forest Service pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604) for Federal forest lands under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Agriculture.
New mexico program.--The term ``New Mexico Program'' means the program to restore and protect forest resources located on Federal forest lands within New Mexico required by section 4.
Overhead expenses.--The terms ``overhead expenses'' and ``overhead'' mean the following: (A) Common services and indirect expenses, as such terms are defined by expense items 1-10 in Appendix E of the United States Forest Service Forest Timber Cost Efficiency Study Final Report, dated April 16, 1993 (pages 125-126).
Direct and indirect general administration expenses, as such terms are identified in Appendix D of the United States Forest Service Management Program Annual Report.
Any other cost of line management or program support that cannot be directly attributable to specific projects or programs.
Recovery area.--The term ``recovery area'' means an area of Federal forest lands identified by the District 3 Regional Forester under section 4(c)-- (A) that has experienced small stand timber and woody tree encroachment which will contribute significantly to disturbances from wildfire; or (B) in which the forest structure, function, or composition has been altered so as to increase substantially the likelihood of wildfire in the area and the consequent risks of damage to soils, water quality, watershed values, habitat and other forest resources from wildfire.
Recovery project.--The term ``recovery project'' means a project designed by the District 3 Regional Forester to allow communities to restore, or protect forest resources within an identified recovery area, including thinning, salvage, prescribed fire (after appropriate thinning), sanitation and other insect and disease control, riparian and other habitat improvement, soil stabilization and other water quality improvement and protection.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
NEW MEXICO PROGRAM OF FOREST HEALTH AND FIRE PREVENTION.
New Mexico Program Required.--Not later than the implementation date, the District 3 Regional Forester shall commence a statewide program to restore and protect forest resources located on Federal forest lands within New Mexico through the performance of recovery projects in identified recovery areas.
Initial Implementation.-- (1) Initial project.--Not later than the implementation date, the initial project under the New Mexico Program shall be the thinning of Monument Canyon Research Natural Area located near Jemez Springs, New Mexico, on the Santa Fe National Forest, because this research area is representative of the open Ponderosa Pine Forests typical of New Mexico.
This formally established research area exemplifies the situation and research stated in the findings specified in section 2.
The research implementation will require treatments to reduce small diameter trees.
Monitoring of the treatments will be designed by an assembled group of leading research scientists in the southwest.
Initial standards and guidelines.--The research scientists located at the Monument Canyon Research Natural Area will provide the initial project standards and guidelines.
Monitoring.--Continued monitoring and information transfer with the Monument Canyon Research Natural Area scientists will provide the basis for modification of standards and criteria for use with regard to other recovery projects.
Identification of Recovery Areas.-- (1) Allocation of funds; identification and ranking of recovery areas.--For each fiscal year during the New Mexico Program, the Secretary shall allocate, in accordance with the standards and criteria established and in effect for the New Mexico Program, amounts from the Forest Health and Fire Prevention Fund to Region 3 of the Forest Service for the purpose of conducting recovery projects in identified recovery areas.
In making such allocations, the District 3 Regional Forester shall-- (A) identify recovery areas within which allocated amounts should be used to conduct recovery projects; and (B) prioritize recovery areas for the purpose of their receiving allocated amounts.
Authorized use of funds for 5-year project.--Amounts allocated by the Secretary pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be available, without further allocation by the Secretary, to carry out and administer a 5-year recovery project.
Selection of Recovery Projects.-- (1) Selection and final decision required.--The District 3 Regional Forester (or the designees of the regional forester) shall select and render a final decision on the recovery projects to be carried out within each identified recovery area.
Prohibited project locations.--The District 3 Regional Forester (or the designees of the regional forester) shall not select or implement a recovery project under the authority of this Act in any of the following: (A) Any unit of the National Wilderness Preservation System or any roadless area on Federal forest lands designated by Congress before the date of the enactment of this Act for study for possible inclusion in such system.
Any riparian area, late successional reserve, or old growth area, designated before the date of the enactment of this Act by the applicable land management plan, within which the implementation of recovery projects is prohibited.
Any other area, designated before the date of the enactment of this Act by the applicable land management plan, in which the implementation of recovery projects is prohibited by law, a court order, or the applicable land management plan.
Requirements For Recovery Project Selection.--In selecting recovery projects as required under subsection (d), the District 3 Regional Forester (or the designees of the regional forester) in New Mexico shall-- (1) identify for each recovery project the total acreage requiring treatment, the estimated cost of preparation and implementation and the estimated project duration; (2) ensure that the total acreage in a recovery area is not less than the total acreage identified by the Secretary for that recovery area; (3) consider and make paramount the economic benefits to be provided to local communities as a result of recovery project; (4) ensure that each recovery project is consistent with the land management plan, which may be modified as necessary, applicable to the recovery area within which the recovery project will be conducted; and (5) ensure that each recovery project is designed to be implemented in the most cost-effective manner reasonable to ensure benefits to communities and successful forest recovery.
FOREST HEALTH AND FIRE PREVENTION FUND.
Establishment.--There is established on the books of the Treasury a fund to be known as the ``Forest Health and Fire Prevention Fund''.
The Chief of the Forest Service shall be responsible for administering the Fund.
Credits to Fund.--There shall be credited to the fund the following: (1) Amounts authorized for and appropriated to the Fund.
Unobligated amounts in the roads and trails fund provided for in the fourteenth paragraph under the heading ``FOREST SERVICE'' of the Act of March 4, 1913 (37 United States Statutes at Large 843; 16 United States Code 501) as of the date of the enactment of this Act, and all amounts which would otherwise be deposited in such fund after such date.
The Federal share of revenues generated by recovery projects undertaken pursuant to the New Mexico Program.
Use of Fund.--During the time period specified under the Act, amounts in the Fund shall be available to the District 3 Regional Forester, without further appropriation, to carry out the New Mexico program and to plan, carry out, and administer recovery projects.
Limitation on Overhead Expenses.--The Secretary shall not allocate or assign overhead expenses to the Fund or to any of the activities or programs authorized by the Act.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $12,000,000 to carry out the provisions of the Act for the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted and each fiscal year thereafter through September 30, 2005, or September 30 of the 5th full fiscal year following the implementation date, whichever is later.
Deposit in Fund.--All sums appropriated pursuant to this section shall be deposited in the Forest Health and Fire Prevention Fund.
Effect on Existing Projects.--Any contract regarding a recovery project entered into before the end of the fiscal year specified in subsection (a), and still in effect at the end of such fiscal year, shall remain in effect until completed pursuant to the terms of the contract.
New Mexico Program Audit.--The Comptroller General shall conduct an audit of the New Mexico program at the end of the fourth full fiscal year following the implementation date.
Elements of Audit.--The audit under subsection (a) shall include an analysis of at least the following: (1) Whether the initial recovery project conducted under section 4(b), the New Mexico Program, and the administration of the Forest Health and Fire Prevention Fund were carried out in a manner consistent with the provisions of this Act.
The current and projected future financial status of the Forest Health and Fire Prevention Fund.
Any cost savings or efficiencies achieved under the New Mexico Program.