This Act may be cited as the ``Section Commission to Advise on Reforming Elections Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SELECT COMMISSION TO ADVISE ON REFORMING ELECTIONS.
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Select Commission to Advise on Reforming Elections'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
The purposes of the Commission are to study the laws relating to the financing of campaigns for elections for Federal office and to report and recommend legislation to reform those laws.
Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members appointed not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act by the President, of whom-- (1) Three members shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the majority leader of the House of Representatives; (2) Three members shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the majority leader of the Senate; (3) Two members shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the minority leader of the House of Representatives; (4) Two members shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the minority leader of the Senate; and (5) Two members shall be appointed from individuals meeting such criteria as the President may apply.
Chair.--The members of the Commission shall select two members to serve as co-chairs of the Commission.
Terms.--The members of the Commission shall serve for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Hearings.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Pay and Travel Expenses of Members.--(1) Each member of the Commission, other than the co-chairs, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Each co-chair shall be paid for each day referred to in the preceding sentence at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Members of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a staff director, who shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Commission; Services.-- (1) In general.--Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the staff director of the Commission, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classifications and General Schedule pay rates, and subject to the approval of the Commission, may appoint such personnel as the staff director considers necessary, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS- 15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Temporary and intermittent services.--Subject to the approval of the Commission, the staff director of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDATIONS FOR CHANGES IN LAW.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the appointment of its members, the Commission shall submit to the President, the Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representatives, and the majority and minority leaders of the Senate a report of the activities of the Commission.
Recommendations for Changes in Campaign Finance Laws.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Commission shall submit to the President, the Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representatives, and the majority and minority leaders of the Senate any recommendations for changes in the laws (including regulations) governing the conducting and financing of Federal campaigns (including any changes in the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives) to which seven or more members of the Commission may agree-- (A) by including such recommendations in the report submitted under subsection (a); or (B) with the approval of a majority of its members, by submitting a supplemental report containing such recommendations not later than 180 days after submitting the report under subsection (a).
Final deadline.--The Commission may not submit recommendations under this subsection after July 15, 1998.
Dissenting Views.--The Commission shall include in the report submitted under subsection (a) and in any recommendations submitted under subsection (b) any dissenting or minority views of its members, including recommendations for changes in law which were proposed by any member and to which seven or more members did not agree.
EXPEDITED CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF LEGISLATION IMPLEMENTING RECOMMENDATIONS.
Preparation of Legislation.--If the Commission submits any recommendation for changes in the laws under section 6(b), those members concurring in the recommendation shall include with the recommendation legislation to implement the recommendation.
Expedited Congressional Consideration of Legislation.-- (1) In general.--If any legislation is introduced the substance of which implements a recommendation of the Commission submitted under section 6(b), subject to paragraph (2), the provisions of section 2908 (other than subsection (a)) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 shall apply to the consideration of the legislation in the same manner as such provisions apply to a joint resolution described in section 2908(a) of such Act.
Special rules.--For purposes of applying paragraph (1) with respect to such provisions, the following rules shall apply: (A) Any reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the House of Representatives shall be deemed a reference to the Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives and any reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate shall be deemed a reference to the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate.
Any reference to the date on which the President transmits a report shall be deemed a reference to the date on which the recommendation involved is submitted under section 6(b).
The Commission shall cease to exist 90 days after the later of-- (1) the date of the submission of its report under section 6(a); or (2) the date of the submission of its recommendations under section 6(b).