This Act may be cited as the ``International Statistical Information and Analysis Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Both the public and private sectors in the United States would benefit from the collection, analysis, and dissemination of reliable statistical information about the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states.
Statistical information about the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states can be used in policy development on issues ranging from domestic and foreign trade to international population growth, health, and the environment.
United States Government statistical agencies could use data collected in the independent states and the Baltic states to develop statistical comparisons between the United States and the rest of the world.
Reliable economic statistical information can also assist United States businesses in identifying trade and investment opportunities in the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states.
Reliable information is needed about economic performance at both the macro and micro-economic levels as the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states make the transition from a centrally planned economy to a free market economy.
Reliable economic statistical information is especially important in evaluating the effectiveness of assistance provided to the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states by the United States Government, by nongovernmental organizations, and by international financial institutions.
Such evaluations would be facilitated by annual reports, prepared by the Secretary of Commerce with the assistance of United States Government statistical agencies, assessing the progress being made by the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states in establishing a free market economy.
United States Government statistical agencies (such as the Bureau of the Census of the Department of Commerce, the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor, the Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce, and the National Agricultural Statistics Service of the Department of Agriculture) have been involved in providing statistical assistance to foreign countries for more than 40 years.
United States Government statistical agencies have set the standard for modern statistical methodology used throughout the world.
United States Government statistical agencies have the personnel, facilities, expertise, and other resources to provide training and other technical assistance to the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states with respect to the collection, analysis, and dissemination of economic statistical data.
In addition, to the extent that the independent states or Baltic states use non- standard collection methods, United States Government statistical agencies have the ablility to reconcile discrepant data, thereby increasing its usefulness.
ECONOMIC STATISTICAL ANALYSIS REGARDING INDEPENDENT STATES OF THE FORMER SOVIET UNION AND BALTIC STATES.
Amendment to Title 13.--Title 13 of the United States Code is amended by adding at the end the following: ``CHAPTER 11--ECONOMIC STATISTICAL ANALYSIS REGARDING INDEPENDENT STATES OF THE FORMER SOVIET UNION AND BALTIC STATES ``Sec.
Preparation and publication of analysis.
Preparation and publication of analysis ``(a) The Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Congress each year a report analyzing the progress being made by the the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states in establishing a free market economy.
In preparing the reports required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall draw upon the information collected and the analysis performed under the auspices of the International Statistical Assistance Coordinating Committee established pursuant to section 4 of the International Statistical Information and Analysis Coordination Act of 1993.
The first report pursuant to subsection (a) shall be submitted as soon as reliable economic statistical information is available about the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states, but not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this chapter.
Definitions ``As used in this chapter-- ``(1) the term `independent states of the former Soviet Union' means Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan; and ``(2) the term `Baltic states' means Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.''.
Amendment to Table of Chapters.--The table of chapters at the beginning of title 13, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``11.
Economic statistical analysis regarding independent 501''.
states of the former Soviet Union and Baltic states.
INTERNATIONAL STATISTICAL ASSISTANCE COORDINATING COMMITTEE.
Establishment and Membership.--The President shall establish an interagency committee to be known as the ``International Statistical Assistance Coordinating Committee'' (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Coordinating Committee'').
The Coordinating Committee shall consist of a representative of each of the following: (1) The Office of Management and Budget.
The Bureau of the Census of the Department of Commerce.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor.
The Bureau of Economic Analysis of the Department of Commerce.
The National Agricultural Statistics Service of the Department of Agriculture.
The Agency for International Development.
Functions.--Consistent with section 104(a) of the Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 (relating to Department of State coordination of assistance to the independent states of the former Soviet Union), the Coordinating Committee-- (1) shall determine priorities for providing training and other technical assistance to develop capabilities to monitor economic performance in the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of economic statistical data; (2) shall use the expertise of its constituent agencies in providing such assistance; (3) shall be responsible for coordinating such assistance with comparable assistance provided or coordinated by international or multilateral organizations or agencies; and (4) shall provide for the analysis by its constituent agencies of economic statistical data regarding the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states and for the dissemination of such analysis to United States businesses and other interested parties, including dissemination through the annual report required by section 501 of title 13, United States Code.
Annual Reports.--The Coordinating Committee shall prepare an annual report describing the assistance provided through the Coordinating Committee pursuant to this section.
Such report shall be submitted to the Congress as part of the annual congressional presentation materials on international economic assistance.
UNITED STATES ASSISTANCE TO IMPROVE MONITORING OF ECONOMIC PERFORMANCE IN INDEPENDENT STATES OF THE FORMER SOVIET UNION AND BALTIC STATES.
Statistical Capability Assistance.--United States assistance that is provided to encourage the development of a free-market economic system in the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states shall include training and other technical assistance to develop capabilities to monitor economic performance in those republics and states through the collection, analysis, and dissemination of economic statistical data.
International Statistical Assistance Coordinating Committee.-- The assistance required by subsection (a) shall be coordinated through the Coordinating Committee and shall otherwise be provided in accordance with section 4(b).
Funding.--It is the sense of the Congress that at least $3,000,000 of the funds allocated for each of the fiscal years 1994 through 1998 for United States economic assistance to encourage the development of a free-market economic system in the independent states of the former Soviet Union and the Baltic states should be used for training and other technical assistance pursuant to this section.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``independent states of the former Soviet Union'' means Armenia, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Georgia, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Moldova, Russia, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Ukraine, and Uzbekistan; and (2) the term ``Baltic states'' means Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania.