This Act may be cited as the ``Senior Self-Sufficiency Act''.
Part A of title IV of the Older Americans Act of 1965 (42 United States Code 3001 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
DEMONSTRATION PROJECTS IN NATURALLY OCCURRING RETIREMENT COMMUNITIES.
Program Authorized.--The Assistant Secretary shall award grants to eligible entities to carry out 10 demonstration projects to provide comprehensive supportive services to older individuals who reside in noninstitutional residences in naturally occurring retirement communities to enhance the quality of life of such individuals and reduce the need to institutionalize such individuals.
Those residences for which assistance is provided under section 202 of the National Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q) in naturally occurring retirement communities shall not receive services through a demonstration project under this section if such services would otherwise be provided as part of the assistance received by such residences under such section 202.
Eligible Entity.--An entity is eligible to receive a grant under this section if such entity is a nonprofit public or private agency, organization, or institution that proposes to provide services only in geographical areas considered to be low- or middle-income areas.
Priority.-- ``(1) In general.--In awarding grants under this section, the Assistant Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities that provided comprehensive supportive services in fiscal year 2002 to older individuals who resided in noninstitutional residences in naturally occurring retirement communities.
Rural areas.--Two of the 10 grants awarded under this section shall be awarded to eligible entities that propose to provide services to residents in rural areas.
Grant Period.--Each grant awarded under this section shall be awarded for a period of 4 years, with not more than $1,000,000 being awarded annually.
Application.--An eligible entity desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Assistant Secretary in such form and containing such information as the Assistant Secretary may require, including a plan for continuing services provided under the grant after the grant expires.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Cost-sharing.--An eligible entity receiving a grant under this section may require cost-sharing from individuals receiving services only in a manner consistent with the requirements of title III.
Construction.--An entity may not use funds received under a grant under this section to construct or permanently improve (other than remodeling to make facilities accessible to older individuals) any building or other facility.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Naturally occurring retirement community.--The term `naturally occurring retirement community' means a geographical area in which not less than 40 percent of the noninstitutional residences are occupied for not less than 10 years by heads of households who are older individuals, but does not include residences for which assistance is provided under section 202 of the National Housing Act of 1959 (12 United States Code 1701q).
The definition provided for in the previous sentence may be modified by the Secretary as such definition relates to grants for rural areas.
Supportive services.--The term `supportive services' means services offered to residents that may include-- ``(A) case management; ``(B) health services and education; ``(C) nutrition services, nutrition education, meals, and meal delivery; ``(D) transportation services; ``(E) home and personal care services; ``(F) continuing adult education; ``(G) information and referral services; and ``(H) any other services and resources appropriate to enhance the quality of life of residents and reduce the need to institutionalize such individuals.
Matching Requirement.--The Assistant Secretary may not make a grant to an eligible entity under this section unless that entity agrees that, with respect to the costs to be incurred by the entity in carrying out the program for which the grant was awarded, the entity will make available in cash or in-kind (directly or through donations from public or private entities) non-Federal contributions equaling 5 percent of Federal funds provided under the grant for the second year that such grant is provided, 10 percent of Federal funds provided under the grant for the third year that such grant is provided, and 15 percent of Federal funds provided under the grant for the fourth year that such grant is provided.
Report.--Not later than the beginning of the fourth year of distributing grants under this section, the Assistant Secretary shall evaluate services provided with funds under this section and submit a report to Congress summarizing the results of such evaluation and recommending what services should be taken in the future.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, not more than $10,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2003 through 2006.