ELIMINATION OF FOREIGN BASE COMPANY SHIPPING INCOME AS FOREIGN BASE COMPANY INCOME.
Elimination of Foreign Base Company Shipping Income.--Section 954 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to foreign base company income) is amended-- (1) by striking paragraph (4) of subsection (a) (relating to foreign base company shipping income), and (2) by striking subsection (f) (relating to foreign base company shipping income).
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (D) of section 904(d)(2) (relating to the definition of shipping income for purposes of the foreign tax credit) is amended to read as follows: ``(D) Shipping income.-- ``(i) In general.--The term `shipping income' means income derived from, or in connection with, the use (or hiring or leasing for use) of any aircraft or vessel in foreign commerce, or from, or in connection with, the performance of services directly related to the use of any such aircraft, or vessel, or from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of any such aircraft or vessel.
Special rules.-- ``(I) Such term includes dividends and interest received from a foreign corporation in respect of which taxes are deemed paid under section 902 (other than dividends from a noncontrolled section 902 corporation out of earnings and profits accumulated in taxable years beginning before January 1, 2003) and gain from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of stock or obligations of such a foreign corporation to the extent that such dividends, interest, and gains are attributable to shipping income.
Such term includes that portion of the distributive share of the income of a partnership attributable to shipping income.
Such term includes any income derived from a space or ocean activity (as defined in section 863(d)(2)).
Such term does not include, except as provided in subclause (I), any dividend or interest income which is foreign personal holding company income as defined in section 954(c).
Such term does not include financial services income.''
Sections 952(c)(1)(B)(iii) of such Code is amended by striking subclause (I) and redesignating subclauses (II) through (VI) as subclauses (I) through (V), respectively.
Section 953 of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``954(i)'' and inserting ``954(h)'' in subsections (b)(3) and (e) each place it appears, and (B) by striking ``954(h)(7)'' and inserting ``954(g)(7)'' in subsection (e)(7)(A).
Section 954 of such Code is amended-- (A) in subsection (a) by inserting ``and'' at the end of paragraph (3) and redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (4), (B) in subsection (b)-- (i) by striking ``the foreign base shipping income,'' in paragraph (5), (ii) by striking paragraphs (6) and (7), and (iii) by redesignating paragraph (8) as paragraph (6), and (C) by redesignating subsections (g), (h), and (i) as subsections (f), (g), and (h), respectively.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years of foreign corporations beginning after December 31, 1999, and to taxable years of United States shareholders (within the meaning of section 951(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) within which or with which such taxable years of such foreign corporations end.