This Act may be cited as the ``Family Dairy Farmer and Rural Community Rescue Act of 2002''.
In this Act: (1) Board.--The term ``Board'' means a Regional Supply Management Board.
Class i, ii, iii, and iv milk.--The terms ``Class I milk'', ``Class II milk'', ``Class III milk'', and ``Class IV milk'' mean milk classified as Class I, II, III, or IV milk, respectively, under an order.
District.--The term ``District'' means a Regional Supply Management District.
Eligible producer.--The term ``eligible producer'' means an individual or entity that directly or indirectly has an interest in the production of milk.
Eligible production.--The term ``eligible production'' means the lesser of-- (A) the quantity of milk produced by an eligible producer during a month; or (B) 230,000 pounds per month.
Marketing area.--The term ``marketing area'' means a marketing area subject to an order.
Order.--The term ``order'' means-- (A) an order issued under section 8c of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 United States Code 608c), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937; or (B) a comparable State order, as determined by the Secretary.
Participating state.--The term ``participating State'' means a State that is participating in the program authorized by section 3.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
State.--The term `State' means one of the 48 contiguous States of the United States.
Trust fund.--The term ``Trust Fund'' means the National Dairy Producers Trust Fund.
NATIONAL COUNTER-CYCLICAL INCOME SUPPORT PROGRAM FOR DAIRY PRODUCERS.
Income Support for Eligible Producers for Milk Sold to Processors in Participating States.--During each of calendar years 2003 through 2011, the Secretary shall carry out a program under this section to support the income of eligible producers for milk sold to processors in participating States.
Participating States.-- (1) Automatic participation.--Each State shall be a participant in the program established by the Secretary under this section unless the State elects to withdrawal from the program as provided in paragraph (2).
Withdrawal.--For a State to withdraw from participation in the program under this section, the Governor of the State (with the concurrence of the legislature of the State) shall provide written notice to the Secretary of the withdrawal of the State from participation in the program.
Effective date of withdrawal.--In the case of written notice submitted by a State during the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the withdrawal of the State shall take effect on the date on which the notice is submitted to the Secretary.
After the end of such period, the withdrawal of the State shall take effect on the date that is one year after the date on which the notice is provided to the Secretary.
Regional Supply Management Districts.--To carry out this section, the Secretary shall establish 5 Regional Supply Management Districts to be composed of the following States, unless and until the States withdrawal from participation in the program under subsection (b): (1) Northeast district.--A Northeast District consisting of the States of Connecticut, Delaware, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, and Vermont.
Southern district.--A Southern District consisting of the States of Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Carolina, Oklahoma, South Carolina, Texas, Tennessee, Virginia, and West Virginia.
Upper midwest district.--An Upper Midwest District consisting of the States of Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, and Wisconsin.
Intermountain district.--An Intermountain District consisting of the States of Arizona, Colorado, Idaho, Montana, Nevada, Utah, and Wyoming.
Pacific district.--A Pacific District consisting of the States of California, Oregon, and Washington.
Regional Supply Management Boards.-- (1) In general.--Each District shall be administered by a Regional Supply Management Board.
Composition.--The Board of a District shall be composed of not less than two, and not more than three, members from each participating State in the District, appointed by the Secretary from nominations submitted by the Governor of the State.
Nominations.--The Governor of a participating State shall nominate at least five residents of the State to serve on the Board, of which-- (A) at least one nominee shall be an eligible producer at the time of nomination; and (B) at least one nominee shall be a consumer representative.
National Dairy Producers Trust Fund.-- (1) Establishment and funding.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the National Dairy Producers Trust Fund, which shall consist of-- (A) the payments received by the Secretary and deposited in the Trust Fund under subsection (g); and (B) the payments made by the Secretary to the Trust Fund under subsection (i).
Expenditures.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available to the Secretary, to the extent provided for in advance in an appropriations Act, to carry out this section.
Administrative and Increased Food Assistance Costs.--The Secretary shall use amounts in the Trust Fund to cover-- (1) administrative costs incurred by the Secretary and Boards in carrying out this section; and (2) the increased cost of any milk and milk products provided under any food assistance program administered by the Secretary that results from carrying out this section.
Payments From Processors to Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--During any month for which the Secretary estimates that the average price paid by processors for Class I milk in a District will not exceed a target price applicable to that District, each processor in a participating State in the District that purchases Class I milk from an eligible producer during the month shall pay to the Secretary for deposit in the Trust Fund an amount obtained by multiplying-- (A) the payment rate determined under subparagraph (B); by (B) the quantity of Class I milk purchased from the eligible producer during the month.
Payment rate.--The payment rate for a payment made by a processor that purchases Class I milk in a participating State in a District under paragraph (1)(A) shall be equal to-- (A) in the case of a marketing area in the District, the difference between the target price for that marketing area and the minimum price required to be paid to eligible producers for Class I milk in that marketing area; and (B) in the case of an area in the District not covered by an order, the difference between the target price for the area and the minimum price determined by the Secretary, taking into account the minimum price referred to in subparagraph (A) in adjacent marketing areas.
Target Prices.--For purposes of subsection (g), the following target prices shall be in effect: (1) $17.50 per hundredweight, in the case of the Northeast marketing area.
$17.35 per hundredweight, in the case of the Appalachian marketing area.
$18.25 per hundredweight, in the case of the Florida marketing area.
$17.35 per hundredweight, in the case of the Southeast marketing area.
$16.05 per hundredweight, in the case of the Upper Midwest marketing area.
$16.25 per hundredweight, in the case of the Central marketing area.
$16.25 per hundredweight, in the case of the Mideast marketing area.
$16.15 per hundredweight, in the case of the Pacific Northwest marketing area.
$17.25 per hundredweight, in the case of the Southwest marketing area.
$16.60 per hundredweight, in the case of the Arizona- Las Vegas marketing area.
$16.15 per hundredweight, in the case of the Western marketing area.
In the case of an area not covered by an order, a price per hundredweight determined by the Secretary, taking into account the target prices in adjacent marketing areas.
Counter-Cyclical Payments From Secretary to Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--To the extent provided for in advance in an appropriations Act, the Secretary shall use the funds, facilities, and authorities of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make a payment each month to the Trust Fund in an amount determined by multiplying-- (A) the payment rate determined under paragraph (2); by (B) the quantity of eligible production of Class II, Class III, and Class IV milk sold in the various Districts during the month, as determined by the Secretary.
Payment rate.--The payment rate for a payment made to the Trust Fund for a month under paragraph (1)(A) shall equal 25 percent of the difference between-- (A) $13.00 per hundredweight; and (B) the weighted average of the price received by producers in each District for Class III milk during the month, as determined by the Secretary.
Payments From Trust Fund to Boards.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall use any amounts in the Trust Fund that remain after providing the compensation required under subsection (f) to make monthly payments to Boards.
Amount.--The amount of a payment made to a Board of a District for a month under paragraph (1) shall bear the same ratio to payments made to all Boards for the month as the eligible production sold in the District during the month bears to eligible production sold in all Districts.
Payments by boards to producers.-- (A) In general.--With the approval of the Secretary, a Board of a District shall use payments received under paragraph (2) to make payments to eligible producers for eligible production of milk that is commercially sold in a participating State in the District.
Supply management.--In carrying out subparagraph (A), a Board of a District may-- (i) use a portion of the payments described in subparagraph (A) to provide bonuses or other incentives to eligible producers for eligible production to manage the supply of milk produced in the District; and (ii) request the Secretary to review a proposed action under clause (i).
Reimbursement of commodity credit corporation.-- (i) In general.--If the Secretary determines that the Commodity Credit Corporation has incurred additional costs to carry out the milk price support program as a result of overproduction of milk due to the operation of this section in a District, the Secretary shall require the Board of the District to reimburse the Commodity Credit Corporation for the additional costs.
Board assessment.--The Board of the District may impose an assessment on the sale of milk within participating States in the District to compensate the Commodity Credit Corporation for the additional costs.
COUNTER-CYCLICAL PAYMENTS FOR ELIGIBLE PRODUCERS FOR MILK SOLD TO PROCESSORS IN NONPARTICIPATING STATES.
Payments to Eligible Producers.--To the extent provided for in advance in an appropriations Act, during each of calendar years 2003 through 2011, the Secretary shall use the funds, facilities, and authorities of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make payments to an eligible producer in a District for milk sold to processors in a State that is not a participating State in an amount determined by multiplying-- (1) the payment rate determined under subsection (b); by (2) the payment quantity determined under subsection (c).
Payment Rate.--The payment rate for a payment made to an eligible producer in a District for a month under subsection (a) shall equal 25 percent of the difference between-- (1) $13.00 per hundredweight; and (2) the average price received by producers in the District for Class III milk during the month, as determined by the Secretary.
Payment Quantity.--The payment quantity for a payment made to an eligible producer in a District for a month under subsection (a) shall be equal to-- (1) the quantity of eligible production of Class II, Class III, and Class IV milk for the eligible producer during the month, as determined by the Secretary; less (2) the quantity of any milk that is sold by the eligible producer to a processor in a participating State during the month.
In determining the amount of payments made for eligible production under this Act, no individual or entity directly or indirectly may be paid on production in excess of 230,000 pounds of milk per month.