This Act may be cited as the ``America's Law Enforcement and Mental Health Project''.
MENTAL HEALTH DIVERSION COURTS.
Amendment.--Part V of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 is amended to read as follows: ``PART V--MENTAL HEALTH DIVERSION COURTS ``SEC.
``The Attorney General may make grants to States, State courts, local courts, units of local government, and Indian tribal governments, acting directly or through agreements with other public or nonprofit entities, for 25 programs that involve-- ``(1) continuing judicial supervision, including periodic review at least every 45 days, over preliminarily qualified offenders with mental illness, mental retardation, or co- occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorders who are charged with nonviolent misdemeanors, for a period not to exceed 1 year; and ``(2) the integrated administration of services, which includes-- ``(A) specialized training of law enforcement and judicial personnel to identify and address the unique needs of a mentally ill or mentally retarded offender; ``(B) voluntary diversion into outpatient or inpatient mental health treatment that carries with it the possibility of prosecution of the original criminal charge if the mentally ill or mentally retarded defendant is noncompliant with program requirements; ``(C) centralized case management involving the consolidation of all of a mentally ill or mentally retarded defendant's misdemeanor cases, including violations of misdemeanor probation, and the coordination of all treatment plans of mental health and social service providers; and ``(D) life skills training, such as housing placement, vocational training, education, job placement, health care, and relapse prevention for each participant who requires such services.
``In this part the term `preliminarily qualified offender with mental illness, mental retardation, or co-occurring mental and substance abuse disorders' means a person who-- ``(1)(A) previously or currently has been diagnosed by a qualified mental health professional as having a mental illness, mental retardation, or co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorders; or ``(B) manifests obvious signs of mental illness, mental retardation, or co-occurring mental illness and substance abuse disorders during arrest or confinement or before any court; and ``(2) is deemed eligible for diversion by designated judges.
Consultation.--The Attorney General shall consult with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and any other appropriate officials in carrying out this part.
Use of Components.--The Attorney General may utilize any component or components of the Department of Justice in carrying out this part.
Regulatory Authority.--The Attorney General shall issue regulations and guidelines necessary to carry out this part which include, but are not limited to, the methodologies and outcome measures proposed for evaluating each applicant program.
Applications.--In addition to any other requirements that may be specified by the Attorney General, an application for a grant under this part shall-- ``(1) include a long-term strategy and detailed implementation plan; ``(2) explain the applicant's inability to fund the program adequately without Federal assistance; ``(3) certify that the Federal support provided will be used to supplement, and not supplant, State, Indian tribal, and local sources of funding that would otherwise be available; ``(4) identify related governmental or community initiatives which complement or will be coordinated with the proposal; ``(5) certify that there has been appropriate consultation with all affected agencies and that there will be appropriate coordination with all affected agencies in the implementation of the program; ``(6) certify that participating offenders will be supervised by one or more designated judges with responsibility for the mental health diversion court program; ``(7) specify plans for obtaining necessary support and continuing the proposed program following the conclusion of Federal support; and ``(8) describe the methodology and outcome measures that will be used in evaluating the program.
``To request funds under this part, the chief executive or the chief justice of a State or the chief executive or chief judge of a unit of local government or Indian tribal government shall submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and containing such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
``The Federal share of a grant made under this part may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs of the program described in the application submitted under section 2205 for the fiscal year for which the program receives assistance under this part, unless the Attorney General waives, wholly or in part, the requirement of a matching contribution under this section.
The use of the Federal share of a grant made under this part shall be limited to new expenses necessitated by the proposed diversion program, including the development of treatment services and the hiring and training of personnel.
In-kind contributions may constitute a portion of the non- Federal share of a grant.
``The Attorney General shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, an equitable geographic distribution of grant awards is made that considers the special needs of rural communities, Indian tribes, and Alaska Natives.
``A State, Indian tribal government, or unit of local government that receives funds under this part during a fiscal year shall submit to the Attorney General a report in March of the following year regarding the effectiveness of this part.
TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE, TRAINING, AND EVALUATION.
Technical Assistance and Training.--The Attorney General may provide technical assistance and training in furtherance of the purposes of this part.
Evaluations.--In addition to any evaluation requirements that may be prescribed for grantees, the Attorney General may carry out or make arrangements for evaluations of programs that receive support under this part.
Administration.--The technical assistance, training, and evaluations authorized by this section may be carried out directly by the Attorney General, in collaboration with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or through grants, contracts, or other cooperative arrangements with other entities.''.
Technical Amendment.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et seq.
), is amended by inserting after part U the following: ``Part V--Mental Health Diversion Courts ``Sec.
Technical assistance, training, and evaluation.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1001(a) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793(a)), is amended by inserting after paragraph (19) the following: ``(20) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out part V, $2,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2000 through 2004.