Congress makes the following findings: (1) The military health care system of the Department of Defense and the Veterans Health Administration of the Department of Veterans Affairs are national institutions that collectively manage more than 1,500 hospitals, clinics, and health care facilities worldwide to provide services to more than 11,000,000 beneficiaries.
In the post-Cold War era, these institutions are in a profound transition that involves challenging opportunities.
During the period from 1988 to 1998, the number of military medical personnel has declined by 15 percent and the number of military hospitals has been reduced by one-third.
During the two years since 1996, the Department of Veterans Affairs has revitalized its structure by decentralizing authority into 22 Veterans Integrated Service Networks.
In the face of increasing costs of medical care, increased demands for health care services, and increasing budgetary constraints, the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs have embarked on a variety of dynamic and innovative cooperative programs ranging from shared services to joint venture operations of medical facilities.
In 1984, there was a combined total of 102 Department of Veterans Affairs and Department of Defense facilities with sharing agreements.
By 1997, that number had grown to 420.
During the six years from fiscal year 1992 through fiscal year 1997, shared services increased from slightly over 3,000 services to more than 6,000 services ranging from major medical and surgical services, laundry, blood, and laboratory services to unusual speciality care services.
The Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs are conducting four health care joint ventures in New Mexico, Nevada, Texas, Oklahoma, and are planning to conduct four more such ventures in Alaska, Florida, Hawaii, and California.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs are to be commended for the cooperation between the two departments in the delivery of medical care, of which the cooperation involved in the establishment and operation of the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs Executive Council is a praiseworthy example; (2) the two departments are encouraged to continue to explore new opportunities to enhance the availability and delivery of medical care to beneficiaries by further enhancing the cooperative efforts of the departments; and (3) enhanced cooperation is encouraged for-- (A) the general areas of access to quality medical care, identification and elimination of impediments to enhanced cooperation, and joint research and program development; and (B) the specific areas in which there is significant potential to achieve progress in cooperation in a short term, including computerization of patient records systems, participation of the Department of Veterans Affairs in the TRICARE program, pharmaceutical programs, and joint physical examinations.
JOINT SURVEY ON POPULATIONS SERVED.
Survey Required.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall jointly conduct a survey of their respective medical care beneficiary populations to identify, by category of beneficiary (defined as the Secretaries consider appropriate), the expectations of, requirements for, and behavior patterns of the beneficiaries with respect to medical care.
The two Secretaries shall develop the protocol for the survey jointly, but shall obtain the services of an entity independent of the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs for carrying out the survey.
Matters To Be Surveyed.--The survey shall include the following: (1) Demographic characteristics, economic characteristics, and geographic location of beneficiary populations with regard to catchment or service areas.
The types and frequency of care required by veterans, retirees, and dependents within catchment or service areas of Department of Defense and Veterans Affairs medical facilities and outside those areas.
The numbers of, characteristics of, and types of medical care needed by the veterans, retirees, and dependents who, though eligible for medical care in Department of Defense or Department of Veterans Affairs treatment facilities or other federally funded medical programs, choose not to seek medical care from those facilities or under those programs, and the reasons for that choice.
The obstacles or disincentives for seeking medical care from such facilities or under such programs that veterans, retirees, and dependents perceive.
Any other matters that the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs consider appropriate for the survey.
Report.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit a report on the results of the survey to the appropriate committees of Congress.
The report shall contain the matters described in subsection (b) and any proposals for legislation that the Secretaries recommend for enhancing Department of Defense and Department of Veterans Affairs cooperative efforts with respect to the delivery of medical care.
REVIEW OF IMPEDIMENTS TO COOPERATION.
Review Required.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall jointly conduct a review to identify impediments to cooperation between the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs regarding the delivery of medical care.
The matters reviewed shall include the following: (1) All laws, policies, and regulations, and any attitudes of beneficiaries of the health care systems of the two departments, that have the effect of preventing the establishment, or limiting the effectiveness, of cooperative health care programs of the departments.
The requirements and practices involved in the credentialling and licensure of health care providers.
The perceptions of beneficiaries in a variety of categories (defined as the Secretaries consider appropriate) regarding the various Federal health care systems available for their use.
Report.--The Secretaries shall jointly submit a report on the results of the review to the appropriate committees of Congress.
The report shall include any proposals for legislation that the Secretaries recommend for eliminating or reducing impediments to interdepartmental cooperation that are identified during the review.
PARTICIPATION OF DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS IN TRICARE.
Review Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall review the TRICARE program to identify opportunities for increased participation by the Department of Veterans Affairs in that program.
The ongoing collaboration between Department of Defense officials and Department of Veterans Affairs officials regarding increasing the participation shall be included among the matters reviewed.
Semiannual Report.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall jointly submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a semiannual report on the status of the review and on efforts to increase the participation of the Department of Veterans Affairs in the TRICARE program.
No report is required under this subsection after the submission of a semiannual report in which the Secretaries declare that the Department of Veterans Affairs is participating in the TRICARE program to the extent that can reasonably be expected to be attained.
PHARMACEUTICAL BENEFITS AND PROGRAMS.
Examination Required.--(1) The Federal Pharmaceutical Steering Committee shall-- (A) undertake a comprehensive examination of existing pharmaceutical benefits and programs for beneficiaries of Federal medical care programs, including matters relating to the purchasing, distribution, and dispensing of pharmaceuticals and the management of mail order pharmaceuticals programs; and (B) review the existing methods for contracting for and distributing medical supplies and services.
The committee shall submit a report on the results of the examination to the appropriate committees of Congress.
Report.--The committee shall submit a report on the results of the examination to the appropriate committees of Congress.
STANDARDIZATION OF PHYSICAL EXAMINATIONS FOR DISABILITIES.
The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report on the status of the efforts of the Department of Defense and the Department of Veterans Affairs to standardize physical examinations administered by the two departments for the purpose of determining or rating disabilities.
APPROPRIATE COMMITTEES OF CONGRESS DEFINED.
For the purposes of this Act, the appropriate committees of Congress are as follows: (1) The Committee on Armed Services and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate.
The Committee on National Security and the Committee on Veterans' Affairs of the House of Representatives.
DEADLINES FOR SUBMISSION OF REPORTS.
Report on Joint Survey of Populations Served.--The report required by section 3(c) shall be submitted not later than January 1, 2000.
Report on Review of Impediments to Cooperation.--The report required by section 4(b) shall be submitted not later than May 1, 1999.
Semiannual Report on Participation of Department of Veterans Affairs in TRICARE.--The semiannual report required by section 5(b) shall be submitted not later than January 1 and June 1 of each year.
Report on Examination of Pharmaceutical Benefits and Programs.--The report on the examination required under section 6 shall be submitted not later than 60 days after the completion of the examination.
Report on Standardization of Physical Examinations for Disabilities.--The report required by section 7 shall be submitted not later than June 1, 1999.