This Act may be cited as the ``Integrity in Banking and Money Laundering Prevention Act of 1999''.
Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) Money laundering is a serious problem: between $100,000,000,000 and $300,000,000,000 in United States currency is ``laundered'' each year and the total dollar amount involved in international money laundering likely exceeds $500,000,000,000.
Money laundering is critical to the survival of the illicit drug trade, which has annual worldwide revenues of more than $400,000,000,000, more than 8 percent of the total value of international trade.
Money laundering affords drug dealers, terrorists, arms dealers, and other criminals the opportunity to erode the integrity of our financial institutions.
Through money laundering, criminals are able to hide profits from narcotics sales, tax fraud, terrorism, and arms smuggling.
Money laundering by international criminal enterprises challenges the legitimate authority of national governments, corrupts government institutions, endangers the financial and economic stability of nations, and routinely violates legal norms, property rights, and human rights.
United States financial institutions are a critical link in our efforts to combat money laundering.
The high profitability, intense competition, high level of confidentiality, and close relationships of trust developed between private bankers and their clients make private banking vulnerable to money laundering, and it is estimated that private banking services have banking assets ranging from $200,000,000,000 to $300,000,000,000.
As private banking grows, and competition for high net worth individuals as customers increases, anti-money laundering legislation should be extended to reach all financial institutions, including such entities as securities brokers and dealers.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To ensure that United States financial institutions make combating money laundering the highest of priorities.
To close the existing gaps in law that allow money laundering to flourish in the private banking system.
To designate foreign high-intensity money laundering areas for the purpose of targeting areas of concentrated money laundering activities.
To establish a comprehensive report on the extent of private banking by banks and other financial institutions operating within the United States.
To prevent the abuse of concentration, omnibus, or suspense accounts by money launderers and drug traffickers.
To enhance the ability of law enforcement officials to reconstruct an audit trail in the course of a criminal investigation by requiring United States financial institutions to maintain documentation of offshore accounts.
To subject securities brokers and dealers to the suspicious activities reporting requirements to which depository institutions are subject.
For purposes of this Act, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Beneficial owner.--The term ``beneficial owner'', with respect to an account at a financial institution, any person or group which controls the account or for whose benefit the account is maintained.
Concentration account.--The term ``concentration account'' means a business account maintained by a financial institution in which funds from various sources are commingled.
Financial institution.--The term ``financial institution'' has the meaning given to such term in section 5312(a)(2) of title 31, United States Code.
High net worth individual.--The term ``high net worth individual'' means any individual-- (A) whose individual net worth, or, in the case of a married individual, whose joint net worth (with such individual's spouse), exceeds $1,000,000; or (B) who had-- (i) individual gross income in excess $400,000 in each of the 2 preceding calendar years; or (ii) who had joint gross income (with such individuals spouse) in excess of $600,000 in each of the 2 preceding calendar years, and who has a reasonable expectation of achieving gross income in the current calendar year in excess of the amount described in clause (i) or (ii), as the case may be.
Money laundering.--The term ``money laundering'' means any action or process whereby the existence, illegal source, or illegal application or expenditure of income is concealed or disguised so as to give income the appearance of legitimacy.
Private banking.--The term ``private banking'' means, with respect to a financial institution, the personal delivery of financial products and services to high net worth individuals, which may include the acceptance of deposits, lending, investing in investment companies, personal trust and estate administration, fund transfer services, establishing payable through accounts, the establishment of accounts in foreign banks, and other services which are not provided generally to all clients of the financial institution.
REPORT ON PRIVATE BANKING ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Before the end of the 18-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the Federal banking agencies (as defined in section 3(z) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act) shall submit a report on private banking activities in the United States to the Committee on Banking and Financial Services of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate.
Contents of Report.--The report required under subsection (a) shall include information on the following: (1) The nature and extent of private banking in the United States.
Regulatory efforts to monitor private banking and ensure that such private banking operations are conducted in compliance with subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, and section 21 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
The policies and procedures of financial institutions that are designed to ensure compliance by such institutions with the requirements of subchapter II of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, and section 21 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
REQUIRE THAT ANTI-MONEY LAUNDERING PROGRAMS PROHIBIT MONEY LAUNDERING THROUGH CONCENTRATION ACCOUNTS AT FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BY REQUIRING PROPER MAINTENANCE OF SUCH ACCOUNTS.
Section 5318(h) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Availability of certain account information.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall prescribe regulations under this subsection which require financial institutions to maintain all accounts in such a way as to ensure that the name of the account holder and the number of the account are associated with all account activity of the account holder.''
DESIGNATION OF FOREIGN HIGH-INTENSITY MONEY LAUNDERING AREAS.
In General.--Subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code (as added by the Money Laundering and Financial Crimes Strategy Act of 1998) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``Part 3--International Money Laundering and Related Financial Crimes ``Sec.
Designation of foreign high-intensity money laundering areas ``(a) In General.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General and the Federal banking agencies, shall develop criteria for identifying areas outside the United States in which money laundering activities are concentrated.
Designation.--The Secretary shall designate as a high- intensity money laundering area any foreign country in which there is an area identified, in accordance with the criteria developed pursuant to subsection (a), as an area in which money laundering activities are concentrated.
Notice and Warning.--Upon the designation, under subsection (b), of a country as a high-intensity money laundering area, the Secretary shall provide-- ``(1) a written notice to each financial institution of the identity of the country designated; and ``(2) a written warning that there is a concentration of money laundering activity in such country.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subchapters for chapter 53 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following item: ``Part 3--International Money Laundering and Related Financial Crimes ``5361.
Designation of foreign high-intensity money laundering areas.''.
DOUBLE THE CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS INVOLVING HIGH- INTENSITY MONEY LAUNDERING AREAS.
In General.--Section 5322 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Doubled Penalty.--The court may double the sentence of fine or imprisonment, or both, that could otherwise be imposed on any person for a violation described in subsection (a) or (b) if the person commits the violation with respect to a transaction involving a person in, a relationship maintained for a person in, or a transport of a monetary instrument involving a foreign country, knowing that a designation of the foreign country as a high-intensity money laundering area under section 5361 was in effect at the time of the violation.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to any violation committed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ENHANCED ABILITY TO IDENTIFY PROPERLY THE BENEFICIAL OWNER OF OFFSHORE ACCOUNT.
Section 5318 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) Requirements Relating to Effective Enforcement of Subchapter.-- ``(1) In general.--In an effort to assist law enforcement in tracing funds identifying beneficial owners of accounts set up by financial institutions in the United States, the Secretary of the Treasury shall require any domestic financial institution making a transaction for any person or maintaining a relation for any person with a foreign financial institution or a foreign financial agency, including a foreign branch or subsidiary of the domestic financial institution, to keep and maintain records within the United States of the beneficial owner of any accounts outside the United States to which funds of that person are transferred by the domestic financial institution or at a place-- ``(A) where a summons under this section to produce such records is legally effective; and ``(B) from which the records are capable of being delivered to the place designated in accordance with subsection (c)(1) within 48 hours of the receipt of the summons.
Information in records.--The records required under paragraph (1) shall contain the following information in the manner and to the extent that the Secretary prescribes in regulations, and subject to such exemptions as the Secretary determines to be appropriate: ``(A) The identity and address of participants in a transaction or relationship.
The legal capacity in which a participant is acting.
The identity of the real parties in interest.''.
REGULATIONS RELATING TO SUSPICIOUS ACTIVITY REPORTS BY BROKERS AND DEALERS.
Before the end of the 1-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Securities and Exchange Commission, shall prescribe regulations in final form under section 5318(g) of title 31, United States Code, requiring brokers and dealers registered with the Securities and Exchange Commission under the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 to report, in accordance with such section 5318(g), any suspicious transaction relevant to a possible violation of law or regulation.