EXCLUSION OF NET CAPITAL GAIN OF TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS.
In General.--Part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to treatment of capital gains) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXCLUSION OF NET CAPITAL GAIN OF TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS.
``In the case of a taxpayer other than a corporation, gross income shall not include an amount equal to the net capital gain of the taxpayer for the taxable year.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 1 of such Code is amended by striking subsection (h).
Subsection (b) of section 55 of such Code is amended by striking paragraph (3).
Section 1222 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Determinations under this section shall be made before the application of section 1203.''
The table of sections for part I of subchapter P of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Exclusion of net capital gain of taxpayers other than corporations.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.
EXCLUSION INTEREST AND DIVIDEND INCOME FROM TAX.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amounts specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by inserting after section 115 the following new section: ``SEC.
EXCLUSION OF DIVIDENDS AND INTEREST RECEIVED BY INDIVIDUALS.
Exclusion From Gross Income.--Gross income does not include dividends and interest otherwise includible in gross income which are received during the taxable year by an individual.
Certain Dividends Excluded.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any dividend from a corporation which for the taxable year of the corporation in which the distribution is made is a corporation exempt from tax under section 521 (relating to farmers' cooperative associations).
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Exclusion not to apply to capital gain dividends from regulated investment companies and real estate investment trusts.-- ``For treatment of capital gain dividends, see sections 854(a) and 857(c).
Certain nonresident aliens ineligible for exclusion.--In the case of a nonresident alien individual, subsection (a) shall apply only in determining the taxes imposed for the taxable year pursuant to sections 871(b)(1) and 877(b).
Dividends from employee stock ownership plans.-- Subsection (a) shall not apply to any dividend described in section 404(k).''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (C) of section 32(c)(5) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of clause (i), by striking the period at the end of clause (ii) and inserting ``; or'', and by inserting after clause (ii) the following new clause: ``(iii) interest and dividends received during the taxable year which are excluded from gross income under section 116.''.
Subparagraph (A) of section 32(i)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``(determined without regard to section 116)'' before the comma.
Subparagraph (B) of section 86(b)(2) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(B) increased by the sum of-- ``(i) the amount of interest received or accrued by the taxpayer during the taxable year which is exempt from tax, and ``(ii) the amount of interest and dividends received during the taxable year which are excluded from gross income under section 116.''.
Subsection (d) of section 135 of such Code is amended by redesignating paragraph (4) as paragraph (5) and by inserting after paragraph (3) the following new paragraph: ``(4) Coordination with section 116.--This section shall be applied before section 116.''.
Paragraph (2) of section 265(a) of such Code is amended by inserting before the period ``, or to purchase or carry obligations or shares, or to make deposits, to the extent the interest thereon is excludable from gross income under section 116''.
Subsection (c) of section 584 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new flush sentence: ``The proportionate share of each participant in the amount of dividends or interest received by the common trust fund and to which section 116 applies shall be considered for purposes of such section as having been received by such participant.''.
Subsection (a) of section 643 of such Code is amended by redesignating paragraph (7) as paragraph (8) and by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) Dividends or interest.--There shall be included the amount of any dividends or interest excluded from gross income pursuant to section 116.''.
Section 854(a) of such Code is amended by inserting ``section 116 (relating to exclusion of dividends and interest received by individuals) and'' after ``For purposes of''.
Section 857(c) of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Restrictions Applicable to Dividends Received From Real Estate Investment Trusts.-- ``(1) Treatment for section 116.--For purposes of section 116 (relating to exclusion of dividends and interest received by individuals), a capital gain dividend (as defined in subsection (b)(3)(C)) received from a real estate investment trust which meets the requirements of this part shall not be considered as a dividend.
Treatment for section 243.--For purposes of section 243 (relating to deductions for dividends received by corporations), a dividend received from a real estate investment trust which meets the requirements of this part shall not be considered as a dividend.''.
The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 115 the following new item: ``Sec.
Exclusion of dividends and interest received by individuals.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.
REPEAL OF 1993 INCOME TAX INCREASE ON SOCIAL SECURITY BENEFITS.
Restoration of Prior Law Formula.--Subsection (a) of section 86 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``(a) In General.--Gross income for the taxable year of any taxpayer described in subsection (b) (notwithstanding section 207 of the Social Security Act) includes Social Security benefits in an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(1) one-half of the Social Security benefits received during the taxable year, or ``(2) one-half of the excess described in subsection (b)(1).''
Repeal of Adjusted Base Amount.--Subsection (c) of section 86 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(c) Base Amount.--For purposes of this section, the term `base amount' means-- ``(1) except as otherwise provided in this subsection, $25,000, ``(2) $32,000 in the case of a joint return, and ``(3) zero in the case of a taxpayer who-- ``(A) is married as of the close of the taxable year (within the meaning of section 7703) but does not file a joint return for such year, and ``(B) does not live apart from his spouse at all times during the taxable year.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subparagraph (A) of section 871(a)(3) of such Code is amended by striking ``85 percent'' and inserting ``50 percent''.
(A) Subparagraph (A) of section 121(e)(1) of the Social Security Amendments of 1983 (Public Law 98-21) is amended-- (i) by striking ``(A) There'' and inserting ``There''; (ii) by striking ``(i)'' immediately following ``amounts equivalent to''; and (iii) by striking ``, less (ii)'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
Paragraph (1) of section 121(e) of such Act is amended by striking subparagraph (B).
Paragraph (3) of section 121(e) of such Act is amended by striking subparagraph (B) and by redesignating subparagraph (C) as subparagraph (B).
Paragraph (2) of section 121(e) of such Act is amended in the first sentence by striking ``paragraph (1)(A)'' and inserting ``paragraph (1)''.
Effective Dates.-- (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, the amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.
Subsection (c)(1).--The amendment made by subsection (c)(1) shall apply to benefits paid after December 31, 2002.
Subsection (c)(2).--The amendments made by subsection (c)(2) shall apply to tax liabilities for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2002.
Maintenance of Transfers to Hospital Insurance Trust Fund.-- (1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to the Hospital Insurance Trust Fund established under section 1817 of the Social Security Act amounts equal to the reduction in revenues to the Treasury by reason of the enactment of this section.
Amounts appropriated by the preceding sentence shall be transferred from the general fund at such times and in such manner as to replicate to the extent possible the transfers which would have occurred to such Trust Fund had this Act not been enacted.
Reports.--The Secretary of the Treasury or the Secretary's delegate shall annually report to the Committee on Ways and Means of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Finance of the Senate the amounts and timing of the transfers under this section.