The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to enhance the appeal of service in the law enforcement agencies of the United States Department of Justice; (2) to extend benefits of a higher education to qualified and deserving young persons who by virtue of the death of or total disability of an eligible officer are not otherwise able to afford the same; and (3) to allow such family members to attain the vocational and educational status which such individual might normally have aspired to and obtained had a parent not been killed or disabled in the service of the country.
Benefits.--(1) Except as provided in subsection (b), an eligible dependent shall be entitled to educational assistance under this subpart for a period of one month for each month or fraction thereof of the eligible officer's service in a Federal law enforcement agency.
Such educational assistance shall consist of direct payments to-- (A) an educational institution or institution of higher learning for an eligible dependent's tuition, room, board, and other charges imposed by such institution; and (B) the eligible dependent for an educational assistance allowances to meet, in part, the cost of fees, supplies, books, equipment and other educational costs, which allowances shall be computed on the same basis set forth in title 38, subchapter IV of the United States Code.
Benefits for Dependents of Officers Killed.--For each eligible dependent of an eligible officer who is killed in the line of duty, criteria established in subsection (a) shall not apply.
Such eligible dependents shall be eligible to receive the benefits provided by this subpart for the maximum period of eligibility set forth in subsection (e).
Maximum Benefits.--No eligible dependent shall receive educational assistance under this subpart for a period in excess of forty-five months.
TIME LIMITATIONS FOR COMPLETING A PROGRAM OF EDUCATION.
No educational assistance shall be paid to or for an eligible dependent after-- (1) ten years after the date on which the eligible officer was killed or permanently and totally disabled; or (2) the eligible dependent's twenty-seventh birthday, whichever occurs later.
EDUCATIONAL AND VOCATIONAL COUNSELING.
Counseling Services.--The Attorney General shall make available to an eligible dependent upon such person's request, counseling services, including such educational and vocational counseling and guidance, testing, and other assistance as the Attorney General deems necessary to aid such person in selecting-- (1) an educational or training objective and an educational institution or training establishment appropriate for the attainment of such objective; or (2) an employment objective that would be likely to provide such eligible dependent with satisfactory employment opportunities in light of such person's personal circumstances.
Notification.--The Attorney General shall take appropriate steps (including individual notification where feasible) to acquaint all eligible persons with the availability and advantages of such counseling services.
Service Providers.--For purposes of this subpart, the Attorney General may provide by interagency agreement with Federal, or State agency to provide the services specified.
Application.--Any eligible dependent who desires to initiate a program of education under this subpart shall submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and containing such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
Approval.--The Attorney General shall approve such application unless the Attorney General finds that-- (1) such dependent is not eligible or is not longer eligible for or entitled to the educational assistance for which application is made; (2) the eligible dependent selected educational institution or training establishment fails to meet any requirement of this subpart; (3) the eligible dependent's enrollment in, or pursuit of, the program of education selected would violate a provision of this subpart; or (4) the eligible dependent is already qualified by reason of previous education or training, for the educational, professional, or vocational objective for which the program of education is offered.
Acceptance.--The Attorney General shall notify an eligible dependent of approval or disapproval of such dependent's application.
The Attorney General shall promulgate rules and regulations regarding unacceptable courses or programs of study for which funding will not be provided under this subpart.
DISCONTINUANCE FOR UNSATISFACTORY CONDUCT OR PROGRESS.
Discontinuation.--The Attorney General shall discontinue the direct payment to an educational institution or institution of higher education and educational assistance allowance of an eligible dependent if, at any time, the Attorney General finds that according to the regularly prescribed standards and practices of the educational institution, the dependent's conduct or progress is unsatisfactory.
Renewal.--The Attorney General may review the payment of the educational assistance allowance if the Attorney General finds that-- (1) the cause of the unsatisfactory conduct or progress of the eligible dependent has been removed; and (2) the program which the eligible dependent now proposes to pursue (whether the same or revised) is suitable to the eligible dependent's interests, and abilities.
Notwithstanding any other provisions of law and any other general or special law to the contrary, the Attorney General is authorized and directed to reimburse or pay each eligible dependent of an eligible officer who was killed in the performance of duties on or after July 1, 1992, but before the effective date of this statute, an amount equivalent to-- (1) the full cost of tuition, room and board, and other charges paid or for the eligible dependent to, and imposed on, an eligible dependent by an educational institution or institution of higher education; and (2) a retroactive educational assistance allowance for each month in which the eligible dependent attended an educational institution or institution of higher education, up to the date of the payment.
Following this initial payment, further benefits will be paid to or for the benefit of such eligible dependents in accordance with this chapter.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Federal law enforcement agency'' means the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, the Drug Enforcement Administration, the United States Marshals Service, and any other federal agency directly engaged in the enforcement of the criminal laws of the United States, or the apprehension of individuals subject to criminal prosecution by the United States.
The term ``eligible officer'' means any agent, special agent, marshal, deputy, or assistant marshal or other similar field officer by whatever name or title such officer is known in a Federal law enforcement agency who has served at least one hundred and eighty days and who is either killed in the performance of duties or suffers injuries that are totally and permanently disabling while performing such duties.
The term ``eligible dependent'' means the child of any eligible officer who is a ``dependent'' (as defined in section 152 of the Internal Revenue Code) or spouse of an eligible officer at the time of such officer's death or on the date of total and disabling injury.
The term ``program of education'' shall mean any curriculum or any combination of unit courses or subjects pursued at an educational institution which is generally accepted as necessary to fulfill requirements for the attainment of a pre- determined and identified educational, professional, or vocational objective.
Such term also means any curriculum of unit course or subjects pursued at an educational institution which fulfill requirements for the attainment of more than one predetermined and identified educational, professional, or vocational objective if all the objectives pursued as generally recognized as being reasonably related to a single career field.
To pursue any other course of study, an eligible dependent shall apply to the AG for approval.
The term ``educational institution'' means any public or private elementary school, secondary school, vocational school, correspondence school, business school, junior college, teachers' college, college, normal school, professional school, university, or scientific or technical institutions, or other accredited institutions furnishing education for adults.
The term ``institution of higher learning'' means a college, university, or similar institution, including a technical or business school, offering postsecondary level academic instruction that leads to an associate or higher degree if the school is empowered by the appropriate State educational authority under State law to grant an associate or higher degree.
When there is no State law to authorize the granting of a degree, the school may be recognized as an institution of higher learning if it is accredited for degree programs by a recognized accrediting agency.
Such term shall also include a hospital offering educational programs at the post-secondary level without regard to whether the hospital grants a postsecondary degree.
Such term shall also include an educational institution which is not located in a State, which offers a course leading to a standard college degree, or the equivalent, and which is recognized as such by the Secretary of Education (or comparable official) of the country or other jurisdiction in which the institution is located.
The term ``standard college degree'' means an associate or higher degree awarded by-- (A) an institution of higher learning that is accredited as a collegiate institution by a recognized regional or national accrediting agency; (B) an institution of higher learning that is a ``candidate'' for accreditation as that term is used by the regional or national accrediting agencies; or (C) an institution of higher learning upon completion of a course which is accredited by an agency recognized to accredit specialized degree-level programs.
For the purpose of this section, the accrediting agency must be one recognized by the Secretary of Education under the provisions of section 1775 of this title 38.