This Act may be cited as the ``Minority Equity Capital Formation Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) there is a severe shortage of capital available and targeted for investment in the United States minority business marketplace and that such shortage constitutes a ``capital gap''; (2) the capital gap is a significant barrier to increased minority entrepreneurship, employment, and economic development; (3) the development of targeted venture capital resources is an important and needed stimulus for economic development, employment growth, and wealth creation; (4) existing Federal incentives are inadequate to address the capital gap; (5) the existing system of federally regulated specialized small business investment companies (and similar public and private entities who support and invest in the minority small business marketplace) should be fully utilized to aggregate and efficiently deploy new capital investments; and (6) it is essential, and should be a high priority of the United States Government, to pursue a broad array of Federal tax and other domestic policies that will serve as a catalyst for the creation of capital pools for investment in the minority enterprise marketplace.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) authorize a Federal tax credit for investment in qualified minority fund interests; (2) increase the availability of venture capital for minority small business; (3) strengthen existing public and private minority venture capital financial institutions (as well as to encourage the formation of such new institutions); and (4) through these actions, support minority enterprise and economic development, increase minority entrepreneurship and employment, and to enhance the opportunities for minority persons to participate fully in the free enterprise system.
INCENTIVES FOR INVESTMENTS IN MINORITY VENTURE CAPITAL FUNDS.
General Rule.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credits against tax) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subpart: ``Subpart H--Incentives for Investments in Minority Venture Capital Funds ``Sec.
54. Credit for investment in minority venture capital funds.
Definitions and special rules.
54. CREDIT FOR INVESTMENT IN MINORITY VENTURE CAPITAL FUNDS.
General Rule.--For purposes of section 38, the minority venture capital fund credit determined under this section is an amount equal to 20 percent of the aggregate bases of qualified minority fund interests which are acquired by the taxpayer during the taxable year at their original issuance (directly or through an underwriter) and which are held by the taxpayer at the end of the taxable year.
Limitations.--The credit determined under paragraph (1) for any taxable year shall not exceed the lesser of-- ``(1) $250,000 ($125,000 in the case of a separate return by a married individual), or ``(2) $7,000,000, ($3,500,000 in the case of a separate return by a married individual), reduced by the amount of the credit allowed under paragraph (1) for all preceding taxable years.
Basis Reduction.-- ``(1) In general.--If a credit is determined under section 54(a) with respect to any qualified minority fund interest, the basis of such qualified minority fund interest shall be reduced by the credit so determined.
Certain dispositions.--If during any taxable year there is a recapture under subsection (c) with respect to any qualified minority fund interest, the basis of such interest (immediately before the event resulting in such recapture) shall be increased by an amount equal to the recapture amount.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `recapture amount' means any increase in tax under subsection (c) (or adjustment in carrybacks or carryovers under subsection (c)) to the extent attributable to the amount referred to in subsection (c)(1)(A).
Tax Credit Recaptured as Ordinary Income.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 1245-- ``(A) any property the basis of which is reduced under subsection (a) (and any other property the basis of which is determined in whole or in part by reference to the adjusted basis of such property) shall be treated as section 1245 property, and ``(B) any reduction under subsection (a) shall be treated as a deduction allowed for depreciation.
If an exchange of any stock or partnership interest the basis of which is reduced under subsection (a) qualifies under section 351(a), 354(a), 355(a), or 356(a), the amount of gain recognized under section 1245 by reason of this paragraph shall not exceed the amount of gain recognized in the exchange (determined without regard to this paragraph).
Certain events treated as dispositions.--For purposes of this subsection and subsection (c), if a credit was determined under section 54 with respect to any stock in a corporation or interest in a partnership and such stock or partnership interest, as the case may be, ceases to be a qualified minority fund interest, the taxpayer shall be treated as having disposed of such property (as of the time of such cessation) for an amount equal to its fair market value.
Increase in Tax if Disposition Within 5 Years.-- ``(1) In general.--If a taxpayer disposes of any qualified minority fund interest before the close of the fifth taxable year after the taxable year in which such interest was acquired by the taxpayer, the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year in which such disposition occurs shall be increased by the sum of-- ``(A) the recapture percentage of the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years which would have resulted solely from reducing to zero any credit determined under this subpart with respect to such interest, and ``(B) the interest amount determined under paragraph (3).
Recapture percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the recapture percentage is-- ``(A) 100 percent if the disposition occurs during the first, second, or third taxable year after the taxable year in which the qualified minority fund interest was acquired, and ``(B) 50 percent if the disposition occurs in the fourth or fifth taxable year after the taxable year in which such interest was acquired.
Interest amount.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the interest amount determined under this paragraph is interest determined at the overpayment rate established under section 662(a)(2) (without regard to section 6621(c))-- ``(A) on the recapture percentage of each decrease in credit referred to in paragraph (1)(A) for any prior taxable year, ``(B) for the period beginning on the due date for such prior taxable year and ending on the due date for the taxable year in which the disposition occurs.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `due date' means the due date (determined without regard to extensions) for filing the return of the tax imposed by this chapter.
Carrybacks and carryovers adjusted.--In the case of any disposition described in paragraph (1), the carrybacks and carryovers under section 39 shall be adjusted by reason of such disposition.
Coordination with other credits, etc.--Any increase in tax under paragraph (1) shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of-- ``(A) any credit allowable under subpart A, B, D, or G, and ``(B) the minimum tax imposed by section 55.
Special rules.--For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) Mere change in form.--A taxpayer shall not be treated as disposing of any qualified minority fund interest by reason of a mere change in the form of the taxpayer, the entity which issued such interest or any qualified minority business.
Exception for certain transfers.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any transfer by reason of death or in a transaction to which section 381(a) applies.
DEFINITIONS AND SPECIAL RULES.
Qualified Minority Business Defined.--For purposes of this subpart-- ``(1) General rule.--The term `qualified minority business' means any domestic business if-- ``(A) 50 percent or more of the total value of the ownership interests in such business are held (directly or indirectly) by individuals who are members of a minority, ``(B) throughout the 5-year period ending on the date as of which the determination is being made (or, if shorter, throughout the period such business was in existence), such business has been engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business or in startup activities relating to a trade or business, and ``(C) substantially all of the assets of such business are being used in the active conduct of a trade or business or in startup activities related to a trade or business.
Domestic business.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `domestic business' means-- ``(A) any domestic corporation or domestic partnership, and ``(B) any trade or business conducted in the United States as a sole proprietorship.
Qualified Minority Fund Interest Defined.--For purposes of this subpart, the term `qualified minority fund interest' means any stock in a domestic corporation or partnership interest in a domestic partnership if-- ``(1) such stock or partnership interest (as the case may be) is issued after the date of the enactment of this subpart solely in exchange for money, ``(2) such corporation or partnership (as the case may be) was formed exclusively for purposes of-- ``(A) acquiring at original issuance (directly or through an underwriter) owner interests in qualified minority businesses, or ``(B) making loans to such businesses, and ``(3) at least 80 percent of the total bases of its assets is represented by-- ``(A) investments referred to in paragraph (2), and ``(B) cash and cash equivalents.
Minority Individuals.--For purposes of this subpart, individuals are members of a minority if the participation of such individuals in the free enterprise system is hampered because of social disadvantage within the meaning of section 301(d) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958.
Controlled Group Rules.-- ``(1) In general.--All corporations which are members of the same controlled groups shall be treated as 1 corporation for purposes of this subpart.
Controlled group.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `controlled group' has the meaning given such term by section 179(d)(7).''
Credit Made Part of General Business Credit.--Subsection (b) of section 38 of such Code is amended by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (7), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (8) and inserting ``, plus'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(9) the minority venture capital fund credit determined under section 54.''
Credit May Offset 25 Percent of Minimum Tax.--Subsection (c) of section 38 of such Code is amended by redesignating paragraph (2) as paragraph (3) and by inserting after paragraph (1) the following new paragraph: ``(2) Credit for investments in minority venture capital funds may offset 25 percent of minimum tax.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a C corporation, the amount determined under paragraph (1)(A) shall be reduced by the lesser of-- ``(i) the portion of the credit under section 54 not used against the normal limitation, or ``(ii) 25 percent of the taxpayer's tentative minimum tax for the taxable year.
Portion of the credit under section 54 not used against normal limit.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the portion of the credit under section 54 for any taxable year not used against the normal limitation is the excess (if any) of-- ``(i) the portion of the credit under subsection (a) which is attributable to the credit under section 54, over ``(ii) the limitation of paragraph (1) (without regard to this paragraph) reduced by the portion of the credit under subsection (a) which is not so attributable.
Limitation.--In no event shall this paragraph permit the allowance of a credit which would result in a net chapter 1 tax less than an amount equal to 10 percent of the amount determined under section 55(b)(1)(A) without regard to the alternative tax net operating loss deduction.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term `net chapter 1 tax' means the sum of the regular tax liability for the taxable year and the tax imposed by section 55 for the taxable year, reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under this part for the taxable year (other than under section 34).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subparts for part IV subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following item: ``Subpart H. Incentives for investments in enterprises owned by disadvantaged individuals.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.