In this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the National Land and Resources Management Commission established by section 2.
Implementing bill.--The term ``implementing bill'' means a bill accompanying a report submitted to Congress by the President under section 4(a).
Land management agency.--The term ``land management agency'' means-- (A) the Bureau of Land Management and Bureau of Reclamation (with respect to land that has been withdrawn from the public domain for use in connection with water projects that have not been constructed as of the date of enactment of this Act) of the Department of the Interior; and (B) the Forest Service of the Department of Agriculture.
NATIONAL LAND AND RESOURCES MANAGEMENT COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established the National Land and Resources Management Commission.
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members, of whom-- (A) 3 shall be appointed by the President; (B) 3 shall be appointed by Speaker of the House of Representatives; and (C) 3 shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate.
Disqualification.--No person who is employed as an officer or employee of a land management agency may serve on the Commission while so employed.
Term.--A member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Compensation.-- (A) In general.--A member of the Commission who is not an officer or employee of the United States shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level ES5 of the Senior Executive Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Commission.
Federal employees.--A member of the Commission who is an officer or employee of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for the member's service as an officer or employee of the United States.
Travel expenses.--A member of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from the member's home or regular place of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Commission shall select a Chairperson from among its members.
Staff.--At the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of the department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Review and Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date on which all of the members of the Commission have been appointed, the Commission shall review, and submit to the President and Congress a report making recommendations for reforming, management of the public land by the land management agencies.
Matters To Be Addressed.--In the review and report under subsection (a), the Commission shall-- (1) examine changes in law and management practices and policies that should be adopted to-- (A) reduce administration and management overhead costs by 50 percent and the overall costs of land management by a minimum of 30 percent; (B) devote a greater proportion of the land management agencies' resources to the provision of services in the field and a lesser proportion to procedural and administrative matters; (C) improve service to land and resource users; (D) simplify land use planning requirements, including the provision that any challenge to a land use plan be made in the context of a challenge to a specific action proposed to be taken under the plan and not as a challenge to the plan on its face; (E) simplify the administrative appeals process, providing for no more than 1 level of intermediate appeal of an initial land management agency's decision before appeal to the head of the agency; (F) provide that an administrative withdrawal of public land from multiple use will expire after 5 years subject to renewal only if the land management agency makes appropriate findings justifying renewal of the withdrawal; and (G) consolidate the laws that apply specifically to management of the public land and ensure that other laws of general application are not applied with respect to public land management in such a manner as to impede the ability of the land management agencies to achieve the objectives of the land management laws; (2) review the patterns of Federal, State, and local public and private ownership and control of land and consider possible transfers of land (including transfers of ownership through sales or exchanges of land between government entities and private persons and transfers of administrative jurisdiction between government entities) for the purpose of allowing the most efficient and consistent management of the land and its resources; (3) propose the establishment of a single land management agency in 1 of the executive departments or as an independent agency to manage all of the land managed by the land management agencies on the date of enactment of this Act, including-- (A) a recommended structure of such an agency with regions or other subdivisions that recognize, to the extent feasible, State boundaries and other boundaries as appropriate; (B) adjustment of the boundaries of special management areas that preclude multiple use management, but without any net loss of acreage that will remain available for multiple use; and (C) identification of matters that will need to be addressed, such as maintenance of prior existing rights, contracts, permits, and the like, to allow for a smooth transition over a period of approximately 3 years; and (4) include a draft implementing bill proposing such amendments of the law as the Commission recommends.
Hearings and Public Participation.--The Commission shall-- (1) hold hearings in all regions of the country in which public land is situated; and (2) solicit written public comment early in the proceedings to learn the concerns of, and receive the benefit of ideas from, the public.
CONSIDERATION BY THE PRESIDENT AND CONGRESS.
Consideration by the President.--Not later than 180 days after receiving the report under section 3, the President shall-- (1) consider the report and make such modifications to the report as the President considers to be necessary or appropriate; and (2) submit the report to Congress.
Consideration by Congress.-- (1) Introduction.--Any member of the House of Representatives or Senate may introduce an implementing bill in the House of Representatives or Senate, respectively.
Referral.-- (A) House.--An implementing bill that is introduced in the House of Representatives shall be referred to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Senate.--An implementing bill that is introduced in the Senate shall be referred to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Discharge.--If the committee to which an implementing bill is referred has not reported the implementing bill by the end of the 20-day period beginning on the date on which the President submits the report to Congress under subsection (a), the committee shall, at the end of that period, be discharged from further consideration of the implementing bill, and the implementing bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be.
Consideration.-- (A) Motion to proceed to consideration.-- (i) Motion in order.--On or after the third day after the date on which the committee to which an implementing bill is referred has reported, or has been discharged (under paragraph (3)) from further consideration of, the implementing bill, it is in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any member of the House of Representatives or the Senate, respectively, to move to proceed to the consideration of the implementing bill (but only on the date after the calendar day on which the member announces to the House of Congress concerned the member's intention to do so).
Waiver of points of order.--All points of order against an implementing bill (and against consideration of the implementing bill) are waived.
Privilege.--A motion to proceed to the consideration of an implementing bill is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
No amendment or postponement.--A motion described in clause (iii) is not subject to amendment, to a motion to postpone consideration of the implementing bill, or to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business.
No motion to reconsider.--A motion to reconsider the vote by which a motion described in clause (iii) is agreed to or not agreed to shall not be in order.
Consideration.--If a motion described in clause (iii) is agreed to, the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, shall immediately proceed to consideration of the implementing bill without intervening motion, order, or other business, and the implementing bill shall remain the unfinished business of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, until disposed of.
Debate.-- (i) Time.--Debate on an implementing bill and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection with an implementing bill shall be limited to not more than 5 hours, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the implementing bill.
No amendment.--An amendment to an implementing bill is not in order.
Motion to limit debate.--A motion further to limit debate on an implementing bill is in order and not debatable.
No motion to postpone.--A motion to postpone consideration of an implementing bill, a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or a motion to recommit the implementing bill is not in order.
No motion to reconsider.--A motion to reconsider the vote by which an implementing bill is agreed to or not agreed to is not in order.
Vote on final passage.--Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on an implementing bill and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, the vote on final passage of the implementing bill shall occur.
Rulings.--Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the House of Representatives or of the Senate, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to an implementing bill shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by other house.-- (A) Procedure.--If, before the passage by 1 House of Congress of an implementing bill that was introduced in that House, that House receives from the other House an implementing bill-- (i) the implementing bill of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House that receives it otherwise than on final passage under clause (ii)(II); and (ii)(I) the procedure in the House that receives such an implementing bill with respect to the implementing bill that was introduced in that House shall be the same as if no implementing bill had been received from the other House; but (II) the vote on final passage shall be on the implementing bill of the other House.
No consideration.--On disposition of an implementing bill that is received by 1 House from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider such an implementing bill that was introduced in the receiving House.
Rules of the house of representatives and senate.--This subsection is enacted by Congress-- (A) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the House of Representatives and Senate, respectively, and is deemed to be part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of an implementing bill, and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (B) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as they relate to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
There is authorized to be appropriated $600,000 to carry out this Act.