BLACKWATER RIVER AND WITHLACOOCHEE STATE FORESTS, FLORIDA.
Release.--If the State of Florida, not later than 10 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, notifies the Secretary of Agriculture that encroachments by improvements or occupation have occurred before July 13, 2006, on one or more of the parcels of real property described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall release to Florida all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to any identified parcel, such right, title, and interest consisting of the reversionary interest of the United States on the affected areas within any identified parcel without further Federal administrative review or analysis.
Original Deeded Land Descriptions.-- (1) The parcel of real property described in a deed dated November 4, 1955, conveying certain lands in Santa Rosa County to the State of Florida.
The parcel of real property described in a deed dated April 11, 1957, conveying certain lands in Santa Rosa County to the State of Florida.
The parcel of real property described in a deed dated November 4, 1955, conveying certain lands in Okaloosa County to the State of Florida.
The parcel of real property described in a deed dated November 26, 1982, conveying certain lands in Citrus, Hernando, Pasco, and Sumter Counties to the State of Florida.
Deeds.--The 4 deeds referred to in subsection (b) are recorded as follows: (1) Deed Book 122, pages 397-437, Santa Rosa County, Florida.
Deed Book 133, pages 333-337, Santa Rosa County, Florida.
Deed Book 121, pages 511-528, Okaloosa County, Florida.
Official Record Book 610, pages 1228-1237, Citrus County, Florida.
Official Record Book 517, pages 491-500, Hernando County, Florida.
Official Record Book 269, pages 126-135, Sumter County, Florida.
Official Record Book 1240, pages 1065-1074, Pasco County, Florida.
Consideration.--The United States shall receive no funds as consideration for the release of the reversionary interests under subsection (a).
As consideration for such release, the State of Florida shall agree to the following: (1) Use of proceeds.--All net proceeds from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the real property subject to the reversionary interests shall be used by the State of Florida for the acquisition of other lands within or adjacent to the exterior boundaries of Blackwater River State Forest and Withlacoochee State Forest.
Use of acquired lands.--Any lands acquired by the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the real property subject to the reversionary interests shall become a part of the State forest in which the acquired lands are located and shall be subject to the condition that the acquired lands be used for public purposes.
Retention of land base.--The total land base of such State forests shall not be reduced below the original acreage of the real property included in the conveyances described in subsection (a), except in the case of any lands conveyed at the request of the United States, and the total land base shall be managed in perpetuity as State forest land.
Fund; records.--All net proceeds from the sale, exchange, or other disposition of the real property subject to the reversionary interests shall be maintained by the State of Florida in a separate fund prior to use under paragraph (1).
The record of all transactions involving such fund shall be open to inspection by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Indemnification.--The State of Florida shall agree to indemnify and hold the United States harmless with regard to any boundary disputes related to any parcel released under this section.
Survey; maps.--Before any release of a reversionary interest under subsection (a), the State of Florida shall provide to the Secretary, at the expense of the State of Florida, a survey and a map acceptable to the Secretary of the areas encroached upon by improvements or occupied to be identified and for which a release under subsection (a) is requested.
Instrument of Release.--Not later than 90 days after receipt from the State of Florida of an identified parcel under subsection (a), the Secretary of Agriculture shall execute and file in the appropriate office or offices a deed of release, amended deed, or other appropriate instrument effectuating the release of the reversionary interests on that parcel.
Availability of Records.--The survey and maps required under subsection (d)(6), deeds, and other relevant legal records related to any release of a reversionary interest under subsection (a) shall be kept on file and available for public inspection at the approprate office of the Department of Agriculture.