This Act may be cited as the ``Economic Development Loan Assistance Demonstration Program Act of 1995''.
ESTABLISHMENT AND SCOPE OF DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall carry out a program to demonstrate the effectiveness of encouraging economic development in enterprise communities by making grants to community development corporations for reducing interest rates on loans for economic development activities in the enterprise communities.
Selection of Enterprise Communities.-- (1) Number.--The Secretary shall carry out the demonstration program under this Act with respect to 5 enterprise communities, which the Secretary shall select not later than the expiration of the 30-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Diversity.--Of the enterprise communities selected under this subsection, not less than 2 shall be located in rural areas (as defined in section 1393(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986) and not less than 2 shall be located in metropolitan statistical areas (within the meaning of section 143(k)(2)(B) of such Code).
In selecting the enterprise communities, the Secretary shall provide for national geographic diversity among enterprise communities participating in the demonstration program.
GRANTS FOR ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT LOAN ASSISTANCE.
Authority.--Under the demonstration program under this Act, the Secretary may make grants to any community development corporation sponsored by a bank or thrift institution, by a nonbank economic development corporation, or by residents of an enterprise community selected under section 2(b).
Use.--Each community development corporation receiving a grant under the demonstration program under this Act shall use the grant amounts to assist businesses and nonprofit organizations by reducing interest rates on loans for economic development activities carried out in an enterprise community selected under section 2(b).
Other Requirements.--The Secretary shall require each community development corporation receiving a grant under the demonstration program under this Act to-- (1) use the grant amounts to reduce the interest rate on a loan described in subsection (b) by an amount not to exceed 60 percent of the market rate of interest on such loan; and (2) take any actions necessary to inform businesses and nonprofit organizations of the availability of such loans, including holding informational meetings, making public announcements, and placing notices in newspapers and other publications.
The Secretary shall monitor the use of grants made under this Act and the costs of administering such grants.
Annual Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, not later than 1 year after the date that amounts to carry out this Act are first made available under appropriations Acts and for each year thereafter in which amounts are available to carry out the demonstration program, a report containing an evaluation of the effectiveness of grants made under the demonstration program.
Study and Report on Expanded Program.-- (1) Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study regarding the effects and costs of carrying out a long-term and expanded program of making grants for the purposes under this Act.
The study shall determine the need for such grants and the amount of funds necessary to carry out an effective program of national scope.
Report.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress, not later than September 30, 1998, a report regarding the results of the study under paragraph (1) and any recommendations for carrying out a program as described in paragraph (1).
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Economic development activities.--The term ``economic development activities'' means the construction and rehabilitation of housing, downtown and neighborhood commercial revitalization, industrial development and redevelopment, small and minority business assistance, neighborhood marketing, training, and technical assistance, research and planning for nonprofit development groups, and other activities which create permanent private sector jobs.
Enterprise community.--The term ``enterprise community'' means an area that is designated as an enterprise community under section 1391 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act in fiscal years 1996, 1997, and 1998 a total of $100,000,000.
The Secretary may issue any regulations necessary to carry out this Act.