This Act may be cited as the ``Leave Equity for Adoptive Families Act of 1995''.
In General.--An employee who needs leave because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care shall be entitled to any leave benefit provided by the employee's employer to an employee who needs leave-- (1) to care for the employee's newborn biological child, or (2) to recover from the employee's own illness, injury, or disability.
Expiration of Entitlement.--Leave because of the placement of a son or daughter with the employee for adoption or foster care under subsection (a) shall commence no later than 12 months after the placement of a child with the employee for adoption or foster care.
In General.--Subject to the limitations contained in this section, any person may bring a civil action against an employer to enforce the provisions of section 2 in any appropriate court of the United States or in any State court of competent jurisdiction.
Timing of Commencement of Civil Action.--No civil action may be commenced under subsection (a) later than 1 year after the date of the last event that constitutes the alleged violation of section 2.
Venue.--An action brought under subsection (a) in a district court of the United States may be brought in any appropriate judicial district under section 1391 of title 28, United States Code.
Relief.--In any civil action brought under subsection (a), the court may-- (1) grant as relief against any respondent that violates section 2-- (A) any permanent or temporary injunction, temporary restraining order, or other equitable relief as the court determines appropriate, (B) damages in an amount equal to any wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation denied or lost to the employee bringing the action by reason of the violation of section 2 or in a case in which wages, salary, employment benefits, or other compensation have not been denied or lost to the employee, any actual monetary losses sustained by the employee as a direct result of such violation, including the cost of providing care, up to an amount equal to 12 weeks of wages or salary for the employee, and (C) interest at the prevailing rate on the total monetary damages calculated under subparagraph (B), and (2) award to a prevailing party (other than the United States) in the action a reasonable attorney's fee and expert witness fee.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to require an employer to provide any leave benefit that the employer would not otherwise have provided to an employee to care for a newborn biological child or to recover from the employee's illness, injury, or disability.
As used in this Act: (1) Employee.--The term ``employee'' means any individual employed by an employer.
Employer.--The term ``employer'' means any person engaged in commerce or in any industry or activity affecting commerce.
The terms ``commerce'' and ``industry affecting commerce'' mean any activity, business, or industry in commerce or in which a labor dispute would hinder or obstruct commerce or the free flow of commerce and includes such terms as defined in section 120 of the Labor Management Relations Act, 1947.
Employment benefits.--The term ``employment benefits'' means all benefits provided or made available to employees by an employer, including health insurance, sick leave, annual leave, parental leave, and disability leave regardless of whether such benefits are provided by a policy or practice of an employer or through an ``employee welfare benefit plan'', as defined in section 3(3) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (29 United States Code 1002(1)).
Leave benefit.--The term ``leave benefit'' means-- (A) any sick or parental leave provided by an employer, (B) any right to reemployment with the employer after the leave described in subparagraph (A); and (C) any right to the receipt of pay or employment benefits, or the accrual of seniority, during the leave described in subparagraph (A).
Parent.--The term ``parent'' means the biological parent, adoptive parent, prospective adoptive parent, foster parent, legal guardian, or stepparent, of a child.
Parental leave.--The term ``parental leave'' means any leave to enable a parent to care for a newborn biological child.
Placement.--The term ``placement'' means the introduction of a child into a family or the process to bring about the introduction of a child into a family.
Sick leave.--The term ``sick leave'' means any leave provided by an employer to enable an employee to recover from an illness, injury, or disability.
Son or daughter.--The term ``son or daughter'' means a biological or adopted child, a foster child, a stepchild, a legal ward, or a child placed for adoption.