This Act may be cited as the ``Pancreatic Islet Cell Transplantation Act of 2002''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Approximately 1,000,000 individuals in the United States have juvenile, or Type 1, diabetes.
In individuals with juvenile diabetes, the body's immune system attacks the pancreas and destroys islet cells that produce insulin.
Insulin is not a cure and individuals with juvenile diabetes face the constant threat of devastating complications as well as a drastic reduction in their quality of life and shortening of their life span.
The development of the ``Edmonton Protocol'' and subsequent variations of that protocol, involving the transplant of insulin-producing pancreatic islet cells into individuals with juvenile diabetes, have brought us within reach of a cure.
Islet cell transplants have been hailed as the most promising development in diabetes since the discovery of insulin.
Currently 80 percent of the approximately 70 patients who have received islet cell transplants using variations of the Edmonton Protocol have maintained normal glucose levels without insulin injections after 1 year.
One of the key hurdles in expanding the number of patients enrolled in these protocols is the insufficient number of pancreases available for islet cell transplantation.
The Federal Government should promote policies and regulations to increase the supply of pancreases for research, to coordinate efforts and information in the emerging area of islet cell transplantation, and to collect the data necessary to move islet cell transplantation from an experimental procedure to a standard therapy covered by insurance.
ORGAN PROCUREMENT ORGANIZATION CERTIFICATION.
Section 371 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 273) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Pancreases procured by an organ procurement organization and used for islet cell transplantation or research shall be counted for purposes of certification or recertification under subsection (b).''.
INTERAGENCY COMMITTEE ON ISLET CELL TRANSPLANTATION.
Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Health and Human Services the Interagency Committee on Islet Cell Transplantation (in this section referred to as the ``Committee'').
Membership.--The Committee shall be composed of a representative from-- (1) the National Institute on Diabetes and Digestive Kidney Diseases, who shall serve as chairperson of the Committee; (2) the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases; (3) the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; (4) the Health Resources and Services Administration; (5) the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services; (6) the Department of Defense; (7) the Department of Veterans Affairs; (8) the National Aeronautics and Space Administration; and (9) other agencies and National Institutes of Health representatives as determined appropriate by the chairperson and Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Duties.-- (1) Study.--The Committee shall conduct a study of-- (A) the adequacy of Federal research funding for taking advantage of scientific opportunities relating to islet cell transplantation; (B) current policies and regulations affecting the supply of pancreases for islet cell transplantation; (C) the effect of xenotransplantation on advancing islet cell transplantation; (D) the effect of United Network for Organ Sharing variances on pancreas retrieval and islet cell transplantation; and (E) the existing mechanisms to collect and coordinate outcome data from existing islet cell transplantation trials.
Recommendations.--The Committee shall develop recommendations concerning the matters studied under paragraph (1).
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Committee shall submit a report to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the appropriate committees of Congress that shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Committee, together with recommendations for such legislation and administrative actions as the committee considers appropriate to increase the supply of pancreases available for islet cell transplantation.
In General.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall request that the Institute of Medicine conduct, or contract with another entity to conduct, a study on the impact of islet cell transplantation on the health-related quality of life and the economic outcomes for individuals with juvenile diabetes and the cost- effectiveness of such treatment.
Matters Studied.--The study authorized under this section shall examine and consider the health-related quality of life of juvenile diabetes patients before and after pancreatic cell transplantation.
Outcome measures shall include-- (1) clinical outcomes, including episodes of hypoglycemia unawareness and the long-term development of diabetes-related clinical complications, including nephropathy, neuropathy, retinopathy, and vascular disease; (2) health-related quality of life outcomes, including patient levels of worry with respect to fear of hypoglycemia episodes, the ability to perform basic life and work-associated functions, and the impact on the quality of life of family members and caregivers; and (3) the cost-effectiveness of pancreatic islet cell transplantation, as compared to both standard medical management (such as continued daily insulin injections) and whole pancreas transplantation, for patients with juvenile diabetes.
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.--Cost-effectiveness analysis, as described in subsection (b)(3), shall include standard health profile instruments to assess post-treatment costs and benefits, including-- (1) direct measures, such as-- (A) post-transplant health care resource utilization; and (B) long-term health care resource utilization due to diabetes complications, including nephropathy, neuropathy, retinopathy, and vascular disease which can extend to include sight loss and limb loss; and (2) indirect measures, such as-- (A) time lost at work; and (B) productivity analysis.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act, such sums as may be necessary.