This Act may be cited as the ``Vehicle Damage Disclosure and Consumer Protection Act of 1993''.
Section 401 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 United States Code 1981) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following new sentences: ``It is also the purpose of this title to protect purchasers with respect to motor vehicles for which States have previously issued a title brand indicating prior damage.
It is further the purpose of this title to protect purchasers with respect to motor vehicles which have been repurchased, replaced, or reacquired under a State lemon law.''.
Section 402 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 United States Code 1982) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(9) The term `manufacturer buyback vehicle' means a motor vehicle that has been repurchased, replaced, or reacquired pursuant to a State lemon law.
The term `State lemon law' means a State law requiring that a motor vehicle manufacturer, distributor, or dealer repurchase, replace, or reacquire a new motor vehicle due to a nonconformity in materials or workmanship that renders the vehicle unfit for ordinary use or reasonably intended purposes.''.
DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS UPON TRANSFER OF OWNERSHIP OF A MOTOR VEHICLE.
Section 408 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 United States Code 1988) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h)(1) Any motor vehicle the ownership of which is transferred may not be licensed for use in any State unless the State discloses on the title whether records readily accessible to it indicate-- ``(A) whether the vehicle was previously issued a title that bore any word or symbol signifying that the vehicle was `salvage', `junk', `reconstructed', or `rebuilt', that it has been damaged by flood, or that it was a manufacturer buyback vehicle, and ``(B) if it was issued such a title, which State first issued such a title.
The Secretary shall-- ``(A) not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Vehicle Damage Disclosure and Consumer Protection Act of 1993, prescribe by rule the manner in which, and the date by which, a State shall disclose the information described in paragraph (1)(A) and the manner in which such information shall be retained.
not later than 12 months after such date of enactment, in consultation with the task force established under section 140(a) of the Anti Car Theft Act of 1992 (15 United States Code 2041 note), prescribe by rule uniform minimum standards and procedures relating to the disclosure by a State on a vehicle certificate of title that a vehicle has sustained severe damage, ``(C) study and develop recommendations (in consultation, to the extent practicable, with the task force described in subparagraph (B)) concerning whether, in order to maximize consumer protection, a disclosure of the dollar value of damage to a motor vehicle should be included on all of its certificates of title, at times of title transfer, in any case in which the motor vehicle has neither been declared a total loss by an insurer or vehicle owner nor had its title branded with any word or symbol signifying that the vehicle was `salvage', `junk', `reconstructed', or `rebuilt' or that it was damaged by flood, and ``(D) not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of the Vehicle Damage Disclosure and Consumer Protection Act of 1993, prescribe by rule the minimum requirements of form and content for State certificates of title.''.
DISCLOSURE OF MANUFACTURER BUYBACK VEHICLES.
Study.--The Secretary of Transportation shall conduct a study of the various means that may be required by Federal law for disclosing to prospective purchasers that a motor vehicle is a manufacturer buyback vehicle.
The study shall include a consideration of the advantages and disadvantages of each alternative, taking into account the cost to the vehicle manufacturer, distributor, or dealer of complying with such requirement and the effectiveness of the requirement in informing purchasers.
Means for Disclosure.--Among the means for disclosure that shall be the subject of the study required by this section are the following: (1) A national uniform sticker, affixed to the windshield of a motor vehicle prior to a purchaser's agreement to purchase the vehicle, that States that the vehicle is a manufacturer buyback vehicle.
A national uniform consumer disclosure statement, provided to any prospective purchaser before the purchase agreement occurs, that-- (A) includes the motor vehicle make, model, year, vehicle identification number, and any prior title numbers and prior States of title; and (B) discloses that the motor vehicle is (according to records available to the State issuing the certificate of title, including records from any State in which a certificate of title has previously been issued for such motor vehicle) a manufacturer buyback vehicle.
Report to Congress.--The Secretary of Transportation shall, not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, report to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Energy and Commerce of the House of Representatives on the results of the study required by this section.
Definitions.--The terms ``manufacturer buyback vehicle'', ``dealer'', and ``distributor'' have the meanings those terms have under section 402 of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act (15 United States Code 1988), as amended by this Act.
Passed the Senate November 20 (legislative day, November 2), 1993.
Attest: WALTER J. STEWART, Secretary.