This Act may be cited as the ``Police Officers' Bill of Rights Act of 1994''.
RIGHTS OF LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICERS.
Part H of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3781 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``rights of law enforcement officers ``Sec.
Political Activity.--Except when on duty or acting in an official capacity, no law enforcement officer shall be prohibited from engaging in political activity or be denied the right to refrain from engaging in such activity.
Rights of Law Enforcement Officers While Under Investigation.--When a law enforcement officer is under investigation or is subjected to questioning for any reason, other than in connection with an investigation or action described in subsection (h), under circumstances that could lead to disciplinary action, the following minimum standards shall apply: ``(1) Questioning of the law enforcement officer shall be conducted at a reasonable hour, preferably when the law enforcement officer is on duty, unless exigent circumstances otherwise require.
Questioning of the law enforcement officer shall take place at the offices of those conducting the investigation or the place where such law enforcement officer reports for duty unless the officer consents in writing to being questioned elsewhere.
The law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed, at the commencement of any questioning, of the name, rank, and command of the officer conducting the questioning.
During any single period of questioning of the law enforcement officer, all questions shall be asked by or through a single investigator.
The law enforcement officer under investigation shall be informed in writing of the nature of the investigation prior to any questioning.
Any questioning of a law enforcement officer in connection with an investigation shall be for a reasonable period of time and shall allow for reasonable periods for the rest and personal necessities of the law enforcement officer.
No threat against, harassment of, or promise or reward (except an officer of immunity from prosecution) to any law enforcement officer shall be made in connection with an investigation to induce the answering of any question.
All questioning of any law enforcement officer in connection with the investigation shall be recorded in full in writing or by electronic device, and a copy of the transcript shall be made available to the officer under investigation.
The law enforcement officer under investigation shall be entitled to the presence of counsel (or any other one person of the officer's choice) at any questioning of the officer, unless the officer consents in writing to being questioned outside the presence of counsel.
At the conclusion of the investigation, the person in charge of the investigation shall inform the law enforcement officer under investigation, in writing, of the investigative findings and any recommendation for disciplinary action that the person intends to make.
A law enforcement officer who brought before a disciplinary hearing shall be provided access to all transcripts, records, written statements, written reports and analyses and video tapes pertinent to the case that-- ``(A) contain exculpatory information; ``(B) are intended to support any disciplinary action; or ``(C) are to be introduced in the disciplinary hearing.
Opportunity for a Hearing.--(1) Except in a case of summary punishment or emergency suspension described in subsection (d), if an investigation of a law enforcement officer results in a recommendation of disciplinary action, the law enforcement agency shall notify the law enforcement officer that the officer is entitled to a hearing on the issues by a hearing officer or board.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a State shall determine the composition of a disciplinary hearing board and the procedures for a disciplinary hearing.
A disciplinary hearing board that includes employees of the law enforcement agency of which the officer who is the subject of the hearing is a member shall include at least one law enforcement officer of equal or lesser rank to the officer who is the subject of the hearing.
A penalty greater than that which was recommended by the trial board cannot be imposed upon the officer.
Summary Punishment and Emergency Suspension.--(1) This section does not preclude a State from providing for summary punishment or emergency suspension for misconduct by a law enforcement officer.
An emergency suspension shall not affect or infringe on the health benefits of a law enforcement officer.
Notice of Disciplinary Action.--When disciplinary action is to be taken against a law enforcement officer, the officer shall be notified of the action and the reasons therefor a reasonable time before the action takes effect.
Retaliation for Exercising Rights.--There shall be no penalty or threat of penalty against a law enforcement officer for the exercise of the officer's rights under this section.
Other Remedies Not Impaired.--(1) Nothing in this section shall be construed to impair any other legal remedy that a law enforcement officer has with respect to any rights under this section.
A law enforcement officer may waive any of the rights guaranteed by this section.
Application of Section.--This section does not apply in the case of-- ``(1) an investigation of criminal conduct by a law enforcement officer; or ``(2) a nondisciplinary action taken in good faith on the basis of a law enforcement officer's employment-related performance.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section-- ``(1) the term `disciplinary action' means the suspension, demotion, reduction in pay or other employment benefit, dismissal, transfer, or similar action taken against a law enforcement officer as punishment for misconduct; ``(2) the term `emergency suspension' means temporary action imposed by the head of the law enforcement agency when that official determines that the action is in the best interests of the public; ``(3) the term `summary punishment' means punishment imposed for a minor violation of a law enforcement agency's rules and regulations that does not result in disciplinary action; ``(4) the term `law enforcement agency' means a public agency charged by law with the duty to investigate crimes or apprehend or hold in custody persons charged with or convicted of crimes; and ``(5) the term `law enforcement officer' means a full-time police officer, sheriff, or correctional officer of a law enforcement agency.
Prohibition of Adverse Material in Officer's File.--A law enforcement agency shall not insert any adverse material into the file of any law enforcement officer unless the officer has had an opportunity to review and comment in writing on the adverse material.
Disclosure of Personal Assets.--A law enforcement officer shall not be required or requested to disclose any item of the officer's personal property, income, assets, sources of income, debts, personal or domestic expenditures (including those of any member of the officer's household), unless ``(1) the information is necessary in investigating a violation of any Federal, State, or local law, rule, or regulation with respect to the performance of official duties; or ``(2) such disclosure is required by Federal, State, or local law.
Enforcement of Protections for Law Enforcement Officers.--(1) A State shall have not more than 2 legislative sessions to enact a Law Enforcement Officers' Bill of Rights that provides rights for law enforcement officers that are substantially similar to the rights afforded under this section.
After the expiration of the time limit described in paragraph (1), a law enforcement officer shall have a cause of action in State court for the recovery of pecuniary and other damages and full reinstatement against a law enforcement agency that materially violates the rights afforded by this section.
The sovereign immunity of a State shall not apply in the case of a violation of the rights afforded by this section.
States' Rights.--This section does not preempt State law or collective bargaining agreements or discussions during the collective bargaining process that provide rights for law enforcement officers that are substantially similar to the rights afforded by this section.