This Act may be cited as the ``Revolutionary War Historic Preservation Study Act of 1994''.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Commission'' means the Revolutionary War Sites Advisory Commission established in section 4; (2) the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior; and (3) the term ``Revolutionary War sites'' means those sites and structures situated in the United States which are thematically tied with the nationally significant events that occurred during the Revolutionary War.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Revolutionary War sites provide a means for Americans to understand and interpret that period in American history; (2) the historical integrity of many of these sites are at risk because they are located in regions which are undergoing rapid urban and suburban development; and (3) it is important to obtain current information on the significance of such sites, threats to their integrity, and alternatives for their preservation and interpretation for the benefit of the Nation.
ESTABLISHMENT OF REVOLUTIONARY WAR SITES ADVISORY COMMISSION.
In General.--There is hereby established the Revolutionary War Sites Advisory Commission.
The Commission shall consist of 13 members appointed as follows: (1) Three individuals who are nationally recognized as experts and authorities on the history of the Revolutionary War, and 2 individuals who are nationally recognized as experts and authorities in historic preservation and land use planning, appointed by the Secretary.
The Director of the National Park Service or his or her designee.
The chair of the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation, or his or her designee.
Three individuals appointed by the Speaker of the United States House of Representatives in consultation with the chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Natural Resources.
Three individuals appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the United States Senate in consultation with the chairman and ranking minority member of the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources.
Chair.--The Commission shall elect a chair from among its members.
Vacancies.--Vacancies occurring on the Commission shall not affect the authority of the remaining members of the Commission to carry out the functions of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall be promptly filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Quorum.--A simple majority of Commission members shall constitute a quorum.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at least quarterly or upon the call of the chair or a majority of the members of the Commission.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall serve without compensation.
Members of the Commission, when engaged in official Commission business, shall be entitled to travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as persons employed intermittently in government service under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Termination.--The Commission established by this section shall terminate 90 days after the transmittal of the report to Congress as provided in section 7(c).
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
Executive Director.--The Director of the National Park Service, or his or her designee, shall serve as the Executive Director of the Commission.
Staff.--The Director of the National Park Service shall, on a reimbursable basis, detail such staff as the Commission may require to carry out its duties.
Staff of Other Agencies.--Upon the request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
Experts and Consultants.--Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, but at rates determined by the Commission to be reasonable.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission may for the purpose of carrying out this Act hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission may deem advisable.
Bylaws.--The Commission may make such bylaws, rules, and regulations, consistent with this Act, as it considers necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.
Delegation.--When so authorized by the Commission, any member or agent of the Commission may take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and upon the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
Preparation of Study.--The Commission shall prepare a study of Revolutionary War sites.
Such study shall identify the sites, determine the relative significance of such sites, assess short- and long-term threats to their integrity, and provide alternatives for the preservation and interpretation of such sites by Federal, State, and local governments, or other public or private entities, as may be appropriate.
The Commission shall research and propose innovative open space and land preservation techniques.
Such alternatives may include (but shall not be limited to) designation as units of the National Park System or as affiliated areas.
The study may include existing units of the National Park System.
Consultation.--During the preparation of the study referred to in subsection (a), the Commission shall consult with the Governors of affected States, affected units of local government, State and local historic preservation organizations, scholarly organizations, and such other interested parties as the Commission deems advisable.
Transmittal to the Secretary and Congress.--Not later than 2 years after the date that funds are made available for the study referred to in subsection (a), the Commission shall transmit such study to the Secretary and the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
Report.--Whenever the Commission submits a report of the study to the Secretary or the Office of Management and Budget, it shall concurrently transmit copies of that report to the Committee on Natural Resources of the United States House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.