This Act may be cited as the ``Public Safety Employer-Employee Cooperation Act of 1997''.
DECLARATION OF PURPOSE AND POLICY.
The Congress declares that the following is the policy of the United States: (1) Labor-management relationships and partnerships are based on trust, mutual respect, open communications, bilateral and consensual problem solving, and shared accountability.
Dispute resolution procedures are fair, determinative, simple, fast and inexpensive, and effectively and swiftly deal with issues.
Labor-management cooperation fully utilizes the strengths of both parties to best serve the interests of the public, operating as a team to carry out the public safety mission in a quality work environment.
In many public safety agencies it is the union that provides the institutional stability as elected leaders and appointees come and go.
The health and safety of the Nation and the best interest of public safety employers and employees can be best protected by the settlement of issues through the processes of collective bargaining.
The Federal Government shall make available governmental facilities for conciliation, mediation, and voluntary arbitration to aid and encourage employers and the representatives of their employees to reach and maintain agreements concerning rates of pay, hours, and working conditions, and to make all reasonable efforts to settle their differences by mutual agreement reached through collective bargaining or by such methods as may be provided for in any applicable agreement for the settlement of disputes.
Certain controversies which arise involving collective bargaining agreements may be avoided or minimized through mediations and conciliation.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
The term ``public safety officer'' means an employee of a public safety agency who is a law enforcement officer, a firefighter, or emergency medical services personnel.
The term includes an individual who is temporarily transferred to a supervisory or administrative position, but does not include a permanent management or supervisory employee.
The term ``firefighter'' means an individual employed in a fire department who-- (A) primarily performs work directly related to the control and extinguishment of fires; (B) is responsible for the maintenance and use of firefighting apparatus and equipment, fire prevention and investigation, communications and dispatch; or (C) provides emergency medical care.
The term ``law enforcement officer'' means a member of a law enforcement agency serving in a law enforcement position, which is usually indicated by formal training (regardless of whether the officer has completed or been assigned to such training) and usually accompanied by the power to make arrests.
The term ``emergency medical services personnel'' means an individual who provides out-of-hospital emergency medical care, including an emergency medical technician, paramedic, or first responder.
The term ``law enforcement agency'' means a State or local public agency that is charged by law with the duty to prevent or investigate crimes or apprehend or hold in custody persons charged with or convicted of crimes.
The term ``management or supervisory employee'' includes any public safety personnel exempted from the provisions of chapter 8 of title 29, United States Code.
The terms ``employer'' and ``public safety employer'' mean any State, political subdivision of a State, the District of Columbia, or any territory or possession of the United States.
RIGHT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OFFICERS TO ORGANIZE AND BARGAIN COLLECTIVELY.
Minimum Procedures.--To be exempt from the requirements of section 5, a State shall-- (1) grant public safety employees the right to form and join a labor organization which does not include management and supervisory employees and which is, or seeks to be, recognized as the exclusive bargaining agent of such employees; (2) require public safety employers to recognize the employees' labor organization (freely chosen by a majority of the employees), agree to bargain with the labor organization, and to commit any agreements to writing in a contract or memorandum of understanding; (3) allow bargaining over hours, wages, terms, and conditions of employment; (4) prohibit bargaining over issues which are inherent management functions; (5) protect all existing collective bargaining agreements, memoranda of understanding, certifications, recognitions, and elections; (6) require fact finding in the event of an interest impasse; (7) allow the parties voluntarily to agree to submit disagreements to arbitration; (8) require enforcement through State courts of all rights, responsibilities, and protections provided in this section and of any written contract or memorandum of understanding; and (9) prohibit strikes and lockouts.
Determination.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service shall issue a determination as to whether a State meets the requirements of subsection (a).
Subsequent determinations.--After the expiration of the 180-day period referred to in paragraph (1), an employer or labor organization may request the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service to determine whether the State meets the requirements of subsection (a).
The Director shall issue such a determination not later than 30 days after written receipt of such a request.
Failure to meet requirements.--A State that does not meet or exceed the requirements of subsection (a) shall be subject to the regulations and procedures described in section 5.
FEDERAL MEDIATION AND CONCILIATION.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Director of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service shall issue regulations establishing collective bargaining procedures for public safety employers and employees in States that are not granted an exemption under section 4.
Role of FMCS.--The regulations described in subsection (a) shall incorporate the rights and responsibilities in section 4(a), and shall use the services of the Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service.
The Federal Mediation and Conciliation Service shall have the same authority as a State Labor Relations Board, or in a case where no such Board exists, the National Labor Relations Board, for public safety employers and employees covered under this Act.
Enforcement.--A public safety employer, employee, and labor organization each shall have the right to seek enforcement of this section through appropriate State courts.
STRIKES AND LOCKOUTS PROHIBITED.
A public safety employer, employee, or labor organization may not engage in lockouts or strikes.
EXISTING COLLECTIVE BARGAINING UNITS AND AGREEMENTS.
A certification, recognition, election-held, collective bargaining agreement or memorandum of understanding which has been issued, approved, or ratified by any public employee relations board or commission or by any State or political subdivision or its agents (management officials) in effect on the day before the date of enactment of this Act shall not be invalidated by enactment of this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.