This Act may be cited as the ``Firefighter Investment and Response Enhancement (FIRE) Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Increased demands on firefighting personnel have made it difficult for local governments to adequately fund necessary fire safety precautions.
The Federal government has an obligation to protect the health and safety of the firefighting personnel of the United States and to ensure that they have the financial resources to protect the public.
The high rates in the United States of death, injury, and property damage caused by fires demonstrates a critical need for Federal investment in support of firefighting personnel.
Authority.--In accordance with this Act, the Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (in this Act referred to as the ``Director'') may make grants on a competitive basis to fire departments for the purpose of protecting the health and safety of the public and firefighting personnel against fire and fire-related hazards.
Establishment of Office for Administration of Grants.--Before making grants under subsection (a), the Director shall establish an office in the Federal Emergency Management Agency to establish spe- cific criteria for the selection of grant recipients and to administer the grants.
Use of Grant Funds.--The Director may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to use grant funds for any of the following: (1) To hire additional firefighting personnel.
To train firefighting personnel in firefighting, emergency response, arson prevention and detection, or the handling of hazardous materials, or to train such personnel to provide any of the training described in this paragraph.
To fund the creation of rapid intervention teams to protect firefighting personnel at the scenes of fires and other emergencies.
To certify fire inspectors.
To establish wellness and fitness programs for firefighting personnel to ensure that such personnel can carry out their duties.
To fund emergency medical services provided by fire departments.
To acquire additional firefighting vehicles, including fire trucks.
To acquire additional firefighting equipment, including equipment for communications and monitoring.
To acquire personal protective equipment required for firefighting personnel by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration, and other personal protective equipment for firefighting personnel.
To modify fire stations, fire training facilities, and other facilities to protect the health and safety of firefighting personnel.
To enforce fire codes.
To fund fire prevention programs.
To educate the public about arson prevention and detection.
Matching Requirement.--The Director may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to match with non-Federal funds 10 percent of the funds received under subsection (a) in any fiscal year.
Maintenance of Expenditures--The Director may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to maintain for the fiscal year in which the grant will be received its aggregate expenditures for uses described in subsection (c) at or above the average level of such expenditures in the 2 fiscal years preceding the fiscal year in which the grant will be received.
Report to the Director.--The Director may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant for the grant agrees to submit to the Director a report, including a description of how grant funds were used, with respect to each fiscal year for which a grant was received.
Variety of Grant Recipients.--The Director shall ensure that grants under subsection (a) for a fiscal year are made to a variety of fire departments, including, to the extent that there are eligible applicants-- (1) paid, volunteer, and combination fire departments; (2) fire departments located in communities of varying size; and (3) fire departments located in urban, suburban, and rural communities.
Limitation on Firefighting Vehicles.--The Director shall ensure that not more than 25 percent of the assistance made available under subsection (a) in a fiscal year is used for purposes authorized under section (c)(7).
Limitation on Administrative Costs.--Of amounts made available under section 4 for a fiscal year, the Director may use not more than 10 percent for the administrative costs of carrying out this Act.
Application.--The Director may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the fire department seeking the grant submits to the Director an application in such form and containing such information as the Director may require.
Firefighting Personnel Defined.--In this Act the term ``firefighting personnel'' means individuals, including volunteers, who are firefighters, officers of fire departments, or emergency medical service personnel of fire departments.
For the purposes of carrying out this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Director $1,000,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2005.