REPORTS ASSESSING THE IMPACT OF NAFTA ON JOBS AND THE ENVIRONMENT.
Report on Domestic Manufacturing and Jobs.--The Secretary of Commerce, after consultation with the appropriate government agencies, shall determine the levels of exports of United States manufactured goods to the NAFTA parties and imports into the United States of manufactured goods from NAFTA parties, and the number of jobs that have resulted from increased exports of manufactured goods to NAFTA parties and the loss of jobs that have resulted from increased imports into the United States of manufactured goods from NAFTA parties since January 1, 1994.
The Secretary of Commerce shall submit to the Congress a report on the determinations made under this paragraph not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Report Relating to Health and Environmental Impacts of NAFTA.-- The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, in consultation with the Secretariat for the NAFTA Commission on Environmental Cooperation, shall conduct investigations of whether pollution and health hazards in the United States have worsened since January 1, 1994, to the extent they may be attributable to the implementation of NAFTA, and specifically in and around the United States-Mexico border and the United States-Canada border, and shall report to the Congress on the results of those investigations not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Certifications Regarding Environmental Agreement.-- (1) Annual certifications.--The President shall, on the basis of the reports prepared under paragraph (2), submit to the Congress, not later than May 31 of each year, a report that certifies whether or not each NAFTA country is meeting commitments made in the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation-- (A) to ensure that the regulations of that country establish and enforce levels of environmental protection that meet the requirements of its constitution and other laws setting forth the country's policy on environmental protection; and (B) to effectively enforce the laws referred to in paragraph (1).
Basis of certification.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall prepare for the President an annual report on the enforcement by each NAFTA country of its laws governing environmental protection, and its progress in protecting the environment in accordance with its development.
In doing so, the Administrator shall consider the country's-- (A) air quality standards; (B) water effluent standards; and (C) hazardous waste disposal standards.
Each report under this paragraph shall be transmitted to the President not later than 30 days before the date on which the President is required to submit his report under paragraph (1).
Certifications Regarding Labor Agreement.-- (1) Annual certifications.--The President shall, on the basis of the reports prepared under paragraph (2), submit to the Congress, not later than May 31 of each year, a report that certifies whether or not each NAFTA country is meeting commitments made in the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation to comply with the objectives of that Agreement to promote and improve laws protecting worker rights and to promote compliance with these laws by using appropriate methods such as-- (A) monitoring and on-site inspection by persons trained to do so; (B) encouragement of voluntary compliance by employers; (C) mandatory reporting by employers to appropriate governmental authorities; and (D) enforcement actions.
Basis of certification.--The Secretary of Labor shall prepare for the President an annual report on the enforcement by each NAFTA country of its laws protecting worker rights.
In doing so, the Secretary shall consider the country's enforcement of such laws in accordance with the following labor principles (as stated in the Preamble of the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation): (A) Freedom of association.
The right to bargain collectively.
The right to strike.
Prohibition on forced labor.
Restrictions on labor by children and young people.
Elimination of employment discrimination.
Equal pay for men and women.
Prevention of occupational accidents and diseases.
Compensation in cases of work accidents and occupational diseases.
Each report under this paragraph shall be transmitted to the President not later than 30 days before the date on which the President is required to submit his report under paragraph (1).
As used in this Act: (1) International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institution'' has the meaning given that term in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262r(c)(2)).
NAFTA.--The term ``NAFTA'' means the North American Free Trade Agreement entered into by the United States, Canada, and Mexico on December 17, 1992.
NAFTA country.--The term ``NAFTA country'' has the meaning given that term in section 2(4) of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 United States Code 3301(4)).
NAFTA party.--The term ``NAFTA party'' means the United States, Canada, or Mexico.
North american agreement on environmental cooperation.--The term ``North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation'' has the meaning given that term in section 532(b)(2) of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 United States Code 3472(b)(2)).
North american agreement on labor cooperation.--The term ``North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation'' has the meaning given that term in section 531(b)(2) of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 United States Code 3471(b)(2)).