This Act may be cited as the ``Women Veterans Health Assessment Act of 1996''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Health care for veterans has traditionally been considered in terms of male veterans.
Women constitute nearly 5 percent of the total veteran population, a percentage that is growing.
There are currently 1,200,000 female veterans in the United States, a number which is steadily increasing.
REPORT ON WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE AND RESEARCH.
In General.--Not later than January 1, 1999, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives a report on the provision of health care services and the conduct of research carried out by, or under the jurisdiction of, the Secretary relating to women veterans.
The report shall be prepared through the Center for Women Veterans established under section 318 of title 38, United States Code, which shall prepare the report in consultation with the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans established under section 542 of that title.
Contents.--The report under subsection (a) shall include the following information: (1) The number of women veterans who have received general health care services and the number who have received gender- specific health care services in facilities under the jurisdiction of the Secretary (or the Secretary of Defense), shown by reference to the Department facility which provided (or, in the case of Department of Defense facilities, arranged for) those services.
A description of-- (A) the services provided at each such facility; (B) the type and amount of services provided by such personnel, including information on the numbers of inpatient stays and the number of outpatient visits through which such services were provided; and (C) the extent to which each such facility relies on contractual arrangements under section 1703 or 8153 of title 38, United States Code, to furnish care to women veterans in facilities which are not under the jurisdiction of the Secretary where the provision of such care is not furnished in a medical emergency.
The steps taken by each such facility to expand the provision of services at such facility (or under arrangements with the Department of Defense facility) to women veterans.
A description of the personnel of the Department who provided such services to women veterans, including the number of employees (including both the number of individual employees and the number of full-time employee equivalents) and the professional qualifications or specialty training of such employees and the Department facilities to which such personnel were assigned.
A description of any actions taken by the Secretary to ensure the retention of the personnel described in paragraph (4) and any actions undertaken to recruit such additional personnel or personnel to replace such personnel.
An assessment by the Secretary of any difficulties experienced by the Secretary in the furnishing of such services and the actions taken by the Secretary to resolve such difficulties.
A description (as of October 1 of the year preceding the year in which the report is submitted) of the status of any research relating to women veterans being carried out by or under the jurisdiction of the Secretary.
A description of the actions taken by the Secretary to foster and encourage the expansion of such research.
A description of any psychological intimidation of women veterans who seek health care from the Department, together with the relative prevalence of diagnosis referred to as the ``it's all in your head'' syndrome.
A description of the range in ages for women veterans who seek care at Department medical facilities, together with a determination as to whether younger women veterans (women in their fifties) are more likely, or less likely, to seek care at Department medical facilities than older women veterans (women in their seventies).
A description of deficiencies relating to patient privacy for women veterans in Department medical facilities.
A description of any difficulty experienced by the Secretary in compiling any of the information required for the submission of such report.
Study.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs, subject to subsection (f), shall conduct a study to determine the needs of women veterans for health care services.
The study shall be carried out through the Center for Women Veterans.
Consultation.--Before carrying out the study, the Secretary shall request the advice of the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans on the conduct of the study.
Persons To Be Included in Sample of Veterans Studied.--The study shall be based on-- (1) an appropriate sample of veterans who are women; and (2) an examination of the medical and demographic histories of the women comprising such sample.
Reports.--The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives reports relating to the study as follows: (1) Not later than January 1, 1998, an interim report describing (A) the information and advice obtained by the Secretary from the Advisory Committee on Women Veterans, and (B) the status of the study.
Not later than January 1, 2000, a final report describing the results of the study.