This Act may be cited as the ``Improved Military Medical Plan Act''.
INCLUSION OF CERTAIN COVERED BENEFICIARIES IN FEDERAL EMPLOYEES HEALTH BENEFITS PROGRAM.
FEHBP Option.--(1) Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1079a the following new section: ``Sec.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program ``(a) FEHBP Option.--(1) Subject to the availability of funds to carry out this section for a fiscal year and subject to the provisions of this section, eligible beneficiaries described in subsection (b) shall be afforded an opportunity to enroll in any health benefits plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5 that offers medical care comparable to the care authorized by section 1077 of this title to be provided under section 1076 of this title (in this section referred to as an `FEHBP plan').
The administering Secretaries shall enter into an agreement with the Director of the Office of Personnel Management to carry out paragraph (1).
Eligible Beneficiaries.--(1) An eligible beneficiary referred to in subsection (a) is any member or former member of the uniformed services described in section 1074(b) of this title, or any dependents of such member or former member described in section 1076(b) of this title, who is entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395c et sequentes).
An eligible beneficiary under this subsection shall not be required to satisfy any eligibility criteria specified in chapter 89 of title 5 as a condition for enrollment in an FEHBP plan under this section.
Areas of Enrollment.--(1)(A) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall, in consultation with the administering Secretaries, select the areas in which eligible beneficiaries must reside in order to be permitted to enroll in FEHBP plans under this section.
The Director shall select the largest number of such areas that is practicable.
The areas selected by the Director under subparagraph (A) shall include not less than six regions under the TRICARE program, with at least one such region including a site of the medicare subvention demonstration project for military retirees under section 1896 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ggg).
Commencing not later than one year after the date of submittal of the report required by subsection (j)(2), eligible beneficiaries nationwide shall be afforded an opportunity to enroll in an FEHBP plan in accordance with this section.
Priorities; List.--(1) Eligible beneficiaries shall be permitted to enroll in an FEHBP plan under this section based on the order in which such beneficiaries submit to the administering Secretary concerned an application to enroll in an FEHBP plan under this section.
Each administering Secretary shall maintain a list of eligible beneficiaries who apply to enroll in an FEHBP plan under this section, but whom such Secretary is not able to enroll because of the lack of available funds to carry out this section.
Eligible beneficiaries who are on a list under paragraph (2) at the time of the expansion of opportunities for eligible beneficiaries to enroll in FEHBP plans under subsection (c)(2) shall resubmit an application under this subsection to be afforded an opportunity to enroll in an FEHBP plan under this section.
Period of Enrollment.--The administering Secretaries shall provide a period of enrollment for eligible beneficiaries in FEHBP plans under this section for a period of 90 days-- ``(1) before the commencement of the availability of care under such plans under this section; and ``(2) for each subsequent year thereafter.
Term of Enrollment.--(1) An eligible beneficiary who elects to participate in a plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program under this section shall participate continuously in such a plan (whether in the plan originally elected or another plan) during the three-year period beginning on the date of commencement of the beneficiary's participation in such a plan under this section.
An eligible beneficiary who discontinues participation in a plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program under this section before the end of the period described in paragraph (1) shall not be eligible to reenroll in any plan under the program under this section.
Receipt of Care in Military Treatment Facilities.--(1) An eligible beneficiary enrolled in an FEHBP plan under this section may receive care at a military medical treatment facility subject to the availability of space in such facility.
The FEHBP plan concerned shall reimburse a facility for the cost of treatment provided under paragraph (1) to an eligible beneficiary enrolled in the plan under this section.
An FEHBP plan may adjust the copayments of an eligible beneficiary enrolled in the plan under this section so that receipt of care by the beneficiary at a military medical treatment facility results in no additional costs to the plan when compared with the costs the plan would have incurred if the beneficiary had received such care from a provider in the plan.
Contributions.--(1) Contributions shall be made for an eligible beneficiary who enrolls in an FEHBP plan under this section as if the beneficiary were an employee of the Federal Government.
The administering Secretary concerned shall be responsible for the Government contributions that the Director of the Office of Personnel Management determines would be payable by such Secretary under section 8906 of title 5 for an eligible beneficiary who is enrolled in an FEHBP plan under this section if the beneficiary were an employee of such Secretary.
Each eligible beneficiary enrolled in an FEHBP plan under this section shall be required to contribute the amount that would be withheld from the pay of a similarly situated Federal employee who is enrolled in the plan under chapter 89 of title 5.
Management of Participation.--(1) The Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall manage the participation of eligible beneficiaries in FEHBP plans under this section.
The Director and the administering Secretaries shall ensure (whether through procedures, the establishment of reserve funds, or other mechanisms) that inclusion of such participating eligible beneficiaries under chapter 89 of title 5 will not have an adverse financial effect on Federal employees and annuitants enrolled in health benefits plans under such chapter.
Reporting Requirements.--(1) Not later than November 1 each year, the administering Secretaries and the Director of the Office of Personnel Management shall jointly submit to Congress a report describing the provision of health care services to eligible beneficiaries who were enrolled in FEHBP plans under this section during the preceding fiscal year.
The report shall address or contain the following: ``(A) The number of such eligible beneficiaries, both in terms of total number and as a percentage of all covered beneficiaries who are receiving health care through the health care system of the uniformed services.
The extent to which such eligible beneficiaries used the health care services available to such beneficiaries under such plans.
The cost to such eligible beneficiaries of health care under such plans.
The cost to the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, the Department of Health and Human Services, and any other departments and agencies of the Federal Government of providing care to such eligible beneficiaries.
A comparison of the costs determined under paragraphs (C) and (D) with the costs that would otherwise have been incurred by the United States and such eligible beneficiaries under alternative health care options available to the administering Secretaries.
The effects of the exercise of authority under this section on the cost, access, and utilization rates of other health care options under the health care system of the uniformed services.
An assessment, as of the date of the report, whether or not the health care option under the TRICARE program known as TRICARE Standard offers medical care coverage that is substantially similar to the medical care coverage offered under the fee-for-service health benefits plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program having the most number of subscribers as of such date, and, if not, whether or not that option is being modified in order to offer such coverage.
Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of the Improved Military Medical Plan Act, the administering Secretaries shall jointly submit to Congress a report setting forth-- ``(A) the assessment of such Secretaries as to the advisability of-- ``(i) offering to eligible beneficiaries described in subsection (b)(1) the health care option available under subsection (a) on a permanent basis nationwide; or ``(ii) limiting the availability of that health care option to eligible beneficiaries who are currently enrolled in an FEHBP plan as of the date of the report; ``(B) the recommendation of such Secretaries whether-- ``(i) to expand the availability of the health care option available under subsection (a) to any member or former member of the uniformed services described in section 1074(b) of this title, or any dependent of such member or former member described in section 1076(b) of this title, without regard to whether such member or former member, or dependent, is entitled to benefits under part A of title XVIII of the Social Security Act; or ``(ii) not to expand the availability of that option in accordance with clause (i) because the TRICARE Standard health care option offers medical care coverage that is substantially similar to the medical care coverage offered under the fee-for-service health benefits plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program having the most number of subscribers as of the date of the report; and ``(C) the estimated costs of carrying out each assessment under subparagraph (A) and the recommendation under subparagraph (B).
(A) Not later than 6 months after the submittal of the report required by paragraph (2), the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress an assessment of the recommendation under subparagraph (B) of that paragraph.
If the recommendation is not to expand the availability of the option referred to in clause (i) of such subparagraph (B) in accordance with that clause, the review shall include an evaluation of the validity of any comparison made by the administering Secretaries for purposes of clause (ii) of such subparagraph (B).''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1079a the following: ``1079b.
Health care coverage through Federal Employees Health Benefits program.''.
Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8905 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by redesignating subsections (d), (e), and (f) as subsections (e), (f), and (g), respectively; and (B) by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection (d): ``(d) An individual whom the administering Secretary concerned determines is an eligible beneficiary under subsection (b) of section 1079b of title 10 may enroll in a health benefits plan under this chapter in accordance with the agreement entered into under subsection (a) of such section between such Secretary and the Office and with applicable regulations under this chapter.''.
Section 8906 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subsection (b)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraphs (2) and (3)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2), (3), and (4)''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) In the case of individuals who enroll in a health plan under section 8905(d) of this title, the Government contribution shall be determined under section 1079b(h) of title 10.
''; and (B) in subsection (g)-- (i) in paragraph (1), by striking ``paragraph (2)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``paragraphs (2) and (3)''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) The Government contribution described in subsection (b)(4) for individuals who enroll under section 8905(d) of this title shall be paid as provided in section 1079b(h) of title 10.''.
Implementation.--The administering Secretaries shall begin to offer the health benefits option under section 1079b(a) of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Availability of Funds.--(1) There shall be available to offer the health benefits option under section 1079b of title 10, United States Code (as added by subsection (a)), amounts as follows: (A) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1999.
$125,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
$150,000,000 for fiscal year 2001.
$175,000,000 for fiscal year 2002.
$200,000,000 for fiscal year 2003.
Amounts available under paragraph (1) for a fiscal year for the purpose set forth in that paragraph shall be derived from amounts authorized to be appropriated to the Department of Defense, the Department of Transportation, and the Department of Health and Human Services, respectively, for such fiscal year for payment of personnel costs.
For each fiscal year set forth in paragraph (1), the administering Secretaries shall determine the extent to which the funds of their respective departments under paragraph (2) shall be utilized for the purpose set forth in paragraph (1) within the limitation for such fiscal year specified in paragraph (1).
Plan for Enhancement of TRICARE Standard Option.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the administering Secretaries shall jointly submit to Congress a report that sets forth a plan for any enhancements of the health care option under the TRICARE program known as TRICARE Standard that the administering Secretaries jointly consider necessary so that the medical care coverage offered under that option is substantially similar to the medical care coverage offered under the fee-for-service health benefits plan under the Federal Employees Health Benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code, that has the most number of subscribers as of the date of the report.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) The term ``administering Secretaries'' has the meaning given that term in section 1072(3) of title 10, United States Code.
The term ``TRICARE program'' has the meaning given that term in section 1072(7) of title 10, United States Code.