This Act may be cited as the ``National Center for Research on Domestic Health Disparities Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The United States ranks below most industrialized nations in health status measured by longevity, sickness, and mortality.
The United States ranks 24th among industrialized nations in infant mortality.
This poor rank in health status is attributed in large measure to the lower health status of America's minority populations.
Many minority groups suffer disproportionately from cancer.
Disparities exist in both mortality and incidence rates.
For men and women combined, African Americans have a cancer death rate about 35 percent higher than that for whites.
Paralleling the death rate, the incidence rate for lung cancer in African American men is about 50 percent higher than white men.
Native Hawaiian men also have elevated rates of lung cancer compared with white men.
Alaska Native men and women suffer from higher rates of cancers of the colon and rectum than do whites.
Vietnamese women in the United States have a cervical cancer incidence rate more than five times greater than white women.
Hispanic women also suffer elevated rates of cervical cancer.
Infant death rates among African American, American Indians and Alaska Natives, and Hispanics were well above the national average.
The greatest disparity exists for African Americans.
The overall American Indian rate does not reflect the diversity among Indian communities, some of which have infant mortality rates approaching twice the national rate.
SIDS accounts for approximately 10 percent of all infant deaths in the first year of life.
Minority populations are at greater risk for SIDS.
In addition to the greater risks among African Americans, the rates are three to four times as high for some American Indians and Alaska Native populations.
Cardiovascular disease is the leading cause of death for all racial and ethnic groups.
Major disparities exist among population groups, with a disproportionate burden of death and disability from cardiovascular disease in minority and low- income populations.
Stroke is the only leading cause of death for which mortality is higher for Asian-American males than for white males.
Racial and ethnic minorities have higher rates of hypertension, tend to develop hypertension at an earlier age, and are less likely to undergo treatment to control their high blood pressure.
Diabetes, the seventh leading cause of death in the United States, is a serious public health problem affecting racial and ethnic communities.
The prevalence of diabetes in African Americans is approximately 70 percent higher than whites and the prevalence in Hispanics is nearly double that of whites.
The prevalence rate of diabetes among American Indians and Alaska Natives is more than twice that for the total population and at least one tribe, the Pimas of Arizona, have the highest known prevalence of diabetes of any population in the world.
The human immunodeficiency virus (``HIV''), which causes acquired immune deficiency syndrome (``AIDS''), results in disproportionate suffering in minority populations.
Minority persons represent 25 percent of the total United States population, but 54 percent of all cases of AIDS.
More than 75 percent of AIDS cases reported among women and children occur in minority women and children.
Despite suffering disproportionate rates of illness, death, and disability, minorities have not been proportionately represented in many clinical research trials, except in studies of behavioral risk factors associated with negative stereotypes.
Culturally sensitive approaches to research are needed to encourage minority participation in research studies.
There is a national need for minority scientists in the field of biomedical, clinical, and health services research.
In 1990, only 3.3 percent of all United States medical school faculties were underrepresented minority persons.
Only 1 percent of full professors were underrepresented minority persons in 1990.
The proportion of underrepresented minorities in higher rank academic ranks, such as professors and associated professors, actually decreased from 1980 to 1990.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER FOR RESEARCH ON DOMESTIC HEALTH DISPARITIES.
In General.--Part E of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 287 et sequentes), as amended by section 601 of the Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (as contained in section 101(f) of Public Law 105-277) (112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-387), is amended by adding at the end the following subpart: ``Subpart 6--National Center for Research on Domestic Health Disparities ``Sec.
In General.--The general purpose of the National Center for Research on Domestic Health Disparities (in this subpart referred to as the `Center') is the conduct and support of basic and clinical research, training, the dissemination of health information, and other programs with respect to minority health.
Coordination of Activities.-- ``(1) In general.--The Director of the Center shall coordinate the activities of the Center with related activities of the other agencies of the National Institutes of Health, including the national research institutes.
Agencywide recommendations through comprehensive plan.--The Director of NIH, the Director of the Center, and the directors of the national research institutes shall collaborate for the purpose of developing, and periodically reviewing and as appropriate revising, a comprehensive plan that provides recommendations for the conduct and support by the National Institutes of Health of the activities described in subsection (a) with respect to minority health.
Certain activities.--For purposes of the comprehensive plan under paragraph (2), the Director of the Center shall-- ``(A) identify projects of research on minority health that should be conducted or supported by the Center and the other agencies of the National Institutes of Health, including the national research institutes; ``(B) identify multidisciplinary research relating to research on minority health that should be so conducted or supported; ``(C) promote coordination and collaboration among entities conducting research identified under subparagraph (A) or (B); ``(D) encourage the conduct of such research by entities receiving funds from the national research institutes; ``(E) recommend an agenda for conducting and supporting such research; and ``(F) promote the sufficient allocation of the resources of the national research institutes for conducting and supporting such research.
Clinical Research Equity.--The Director of the Center shall assist in the administration of section 492B with respect to the inclusion of members of minority groups as subjects in clinical research.
Research Endowments.--The Director of the Center may carry out a program to facilitate research on minority health by providing for research endowments at centers of excellence under section 736.
Advisory Council.--The Secretary shall, in accordance with section 406, establish an advisory council to advise, assist, consult with, and make recommendations to the Director of the Center on matters relating to the activities described in subsection (a), and with respect to such activities to carry out any other functions described in section 406 for advisory councils under such section.
Biennial Report.--The Director of the Center shall prepare biennial reports on the activities carried out or to be carried out by the Center, and shall submit each such report to the Director of NIH for inclusion in the biennial report under section 403.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this subpart, there are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2000, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004.
Such authorization of appropriations is in addition to other authorizations of appropriations that are available for the conduct and support of research on minority health by the national research institutes and other agencies of the National Institutes of Health.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Part A of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 281 et sequentes) is amended by striking section 404.
The amendments made by this Act take effect October 1, 1999, or upon the date of the enactment of this Act, whichever occurs later.