This Act may be cited as the ``One Dollar Coin and Community Development Act of 1994''.
Color and Content.--Section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in the 1st sentence, by striking ``dollar,''; and (2) by inserting after the 4th sentence, the following new sentence: ``The dollar coin shall be golden in color, have an unreeded edge, have tactile and visual features that make the denomination of the coin readily discernible, be minted and fabricated in the United States, and have such metallic, anticounterfeiting properties as United States clad coinage in circulation on the date of the enactment of the One Dollar Coin and Community Development Act of 1994.''.
Design of Dollar Coin.--Section 5112(d)(1) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking the 5th and 6th sentences and inserting the following new sentence: ``The Secretary of the Treasury shall select an appropriate design for the obverse side of the dollar.''.
Effective Date.--Not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Treasury shall place into circulation 1 dollar coins authorized under subsection (a)(1) of section 5112 of title 31, United States Code, which comply with the design requirements of subsections (b) and (d)(1) of such section, as amended by subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
The Secretary may include such coins in any numismatic set produced by the United States Mint before the date the coins are placed in circulation.
CEASING ISSUANCE OF ONE DOLLAR NOTES.
In General.--After the date that coins described in section 2(c) are first placed in circulation, no Federal reserve bank may order or place into circulation any $1 Federal reserve note.
Redemption of $1 Notes.-- (1) In general.--Section 5119(b)(1) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(F) Federal reserve notes in the denomination of $1.''.
Effective date.-- (A) In general.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall take effect on the date on which coins minted pursuant to the amendments made by section 2 are first placed in circulation.
Notice of effective date.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall publish a notice in the Federal Register of the date on which the amendment made by paragraph (1) takes effect in accordance with subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
Exception.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall produce only such Federal reserve notes of 1 dollar denomination as are required from time to time to meet the needs of collectors of this series.
Such notes shall be produced in sheets and sold by the Secretary, in whole, or in part, at a price that exceeds the face value of the currency by an amount that, at a minimum, reimburses the Secretary for the cost of production.
RESERVE FUND FOR CIRCULATING COINAGE.
Establishment.--Section 5111(b) of title 31, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Coinage Funds.-- ``(1) Coinage metal fund.--The Secretary of the Treasury-- ``(A) shall maintain a coinage metal fund in the Department of the Treasury; and ``(B) may use the fund to buy metal to mint coins.
Circulating coinage reserve fund.-- ``(A) Establishment.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall maintain a circulating coinage reserve fund in the Department of the Treasury.
Credits and debits.--The Secretary shall-- ``(i) credit the coinage reserve fund with the amount by which the nominal value of the coins minted and placed into circulation under this subchapter (other than numismatic items) exceeds the cost of the metal; and ``(ii) charge the account with-- ``(I) the waste incurred in minting the coins referred to in clause (i); and ``(II) the cost of distributing the coins, including the cost of coin bags and pallets.
Availability of funds for community development.-- ``(i) In general.--Effective for any fiscal year only to the extent and in such amounts as are provided in advance in appropriation Acts, the Secretary may lend excess amounts in the circulating coinage reserve fund to the Community Development Institutions Fund for the provision of financial assistance by such Fund through deposits, credit union shares, and loans in accordance with section 108 of the Community Development Banking and Financial Institutions Act of 1994.
Terms and conditions.--Any loan by the Secretary to the Community Development Institutions Fund in accordance with clause (i) shall bear such rate of interest and be subject to such other terms and conditions as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Investment of balance in account.--Subject to subparagraph (C), the Secretary of the Treasury shall invest excess amounts in the circulating coinage reserve fund in-- ``(i) instruments issued by the Secretary under chapter 31; and ``(ii) other instruments to the extent, and in such amounts, as may be authorized by law.
Payment to general fund.--Interest, dividends, and other earnings on investments of the circulating coinage reserve fund, including interest on loans to the Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, shall be paid into the general fund of the Treasury to assist in reducing the deficit.''.
Termination of Coinage Profit Fund.--The coinage profit fund is hereby abolished and any balance in the account as of such termination shall be transferred by the Secretary to the circulating coinage reserve fund established pursuant to the amendment made by subsection (a) as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act.