This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Contract Equity Act of 2000''.
PROCEDURES FOR BUNDLING CONTRACTS.
Procedures for Bundling of Contracts.--Notwithstanding any other law, the following procedures shall apply to a solicitation that is issued by an executive department or agency for the procurement of goods or services and that the head of the department or agency determines would result in the displacement of small-business concerns: (1) Submission of draft solicitation.--The head of the department or agency shall forward, at least 20 days prior to the publication of any solicitation for goods or services in Commerce Business Daily (or its electronic successor), a draft of such solicitation to the Administrator of the Small Business Administration, for determination by the Administrator whether the draft solicitation would result in a bundled contract.
Determination.--Not later than 10 days after the date of receipt of the draft solicitation, the Administrator shall make the determination described in paragraph (1) and submit such determination to the head of the department or agency.
If the Administrator concludes that the draft solicitation would result in a bundled contract, the head of the department or agency may not publish the solicitation until the department or agency head undertakes market research for the proposed solicitation as described in section 15(e) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 644(e)) and the regulations promulgated thereunder on December 27, 1999.
Study.--Not later than 45 days after the date that the Administrator has made the determination under paragraph (2), the head of the department or agency shall submit to the Administrator a study to support the proposed bundled contract which demonstrates measurable savings as set forth in the regulations implementing the Small Business Reauthorization Act of 1997 (Public Law 105-135; 111 United States Statutes at Large 2592) (including the amendments made by that Act), and that the quality of the goods or services to be procured under the draft solicitation are equal in quality to the goods or services currently obtained by the head of the department or agency.
Review of study.--Not later than 10 days after the submission of the study, the Administrator shall determine whether the study meets the standards set forth in the Small Business Reauthorization Act of 1997 (including the amendments made by that Act) and the regulations promulgated thereunder on December 27, 1999.
The Administrator shall specify in writing any deficiencies in the study and proposed changes to the draft solicitation (including, but not limited to, the reduction in size or scope of the draft solicitation) so as to comply with the requirements in such Act and regulations.
If the head of the agency does not concur in a determination of the Administrator under this paragraph, the head of the agency may appeal the determination to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, who shall either grant or deny the appeal within 5 days.
Any determination by the Director shall be final.
The Director may delegate his duties set forth in this paragraph to a subordinate official within the Office of Management and Budget appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Publication of solicitation.--If the Administrator determines that the study meets the standards set forth in the Small Business Reauthorization Act of 1997 and the regulations promulgated thereunder, and that the goals described in section 15(g)(2) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 644(g)(2)) for the fiscal year prior to the fiscal year in which the draft solicitation was forwarded to the Administrator under paragraph (1) have been met, the head of the department or agency may publish the solicitation in Commerce Business Daily (or its electronic successor).
Revision of solicitation.--If the Administrator determines that the study does not meet such standards, the head of the department or agency shall revise the solicitation and perform a new study pursuant to the procedures set forth in paragraphs (1) through (3).
Waiver.-- (1) In general.--The requirements of subsection (a) may be waived by the Administrator if the Administrator determines that an unusual or unexpected exigency justifies a waiver.
Appeal.--The head of an agency may appeal any waiver request to the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, who shall either grant or deny the appeal within 5 days.
Any determination by the Director shall be final.
The Director may delegate the duties set forth in this paragraph to a subordinate official within the Office of Management and Budget appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Definitions.--In this section, the term-- (1) ``bundled contract'' means any contract, irrespective of benefit or dollar value, that displaces two or more small- business concerns; and (2) ``small-business concern'' has the meaning given that term in section 3(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 632(a)).
Regulations.--The Administrator shall promulgate regulations to implement this section according to the following procedures: (1) Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall publish, for notice and comment, proposed rules to implement this section.
The Administrator shall receive comments on the proposed rules for 45 days.
At the close of the comment period, the Administrator shall consult with the department or agency head on the promulgation of final rules.
If no final rule has been published within 120 days after the effective date of this Act, the regulations published in proposed form pursuant to paragraph (1) shall become final.
PROHIBITION ON BUNDLING OF CONTRACT REQUIREMENTS BY AGENCIES THAT FAIL TO MEET CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESS PROCUREMENT PARTICIPATION GOALS.
Prohibition on Bundling of Contract Requirements.-- (1) In General.--Section 15(e) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 644(e)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Restriction on bundling of contract requirements.--If a report submitted under subsection (h)(2) includes a finding that an agency failed, in any fiscal year covered by the report, to attain any goal described in subsection (g)(2), the agency may not award a contract that is determined by the Administrator to be a bundled contract under section 2 or solicit offers for a bundled contract for the duration of the fiscal year beginning on the first October 1 after the submission of the report.''.
Applicability.--The amendment made by paragraph (1) shall apply only to-- (A) solicitations of offers to contract issued on or after October 1, 2000; and (B) contracts awarded pursuant to such solicitations.
Deadlines Relating to Determination of Goal Attainment.-- Section 15(h) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 644(h)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (2) in the first sentence, by inserting ``by not later than December 31 of each year'' before the period at the end; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) By not later than September 15 of each year, the Administrator of General Services shall transmit to the Administration a preliminary report, for the period beginning on October 1 and ending on August 31 of the previous year, containing data and information, obtained from the Federal Procurement Data System, demonstrating the extent to which each agency met each goal set forth in subsection (g)(2).
Not later than October 15 of each year, the Administrator of General Services shall transmit to the Administration a final report containing such data for the previous year.