This Act may be cited as the ``Historically Women's Public Colleges and Universities Historic Building Preservation and Restoration Act''.
In this Act: (1) Historically women's public college or university.-- (A) In general.--The term ``historically women's public college or university'' means a public institution of higher education established in the United States between 1836 and 1908 to provide industrial education for women.
Inclusions.--The term ``historically women's public college or university'' includes each of the institutions listed in clauses (i) though (viii) of section 3(d)(2)(A).
Historic building or structure.--The term ``historic building or structure'' means a building or structure-- (A) listed, or eligible to be listed, on the National Register of Historic Places; (B) designated as a national historic landmark; or (C) located within a designated historic district.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
PRESERVATION AND RESTORATION GRANTS FOR HISTORIC BUILDINGS AND STRUCTURES AT HISTORICALLY WOMEN'S PUBLIC COLLEGES AND UNIVERSITIES.
Authority To Make Grants.--From amounts appropriated to carry out the National Historic Preservation Act (16 United States Code 470 et sequentes) for fiscal years 2002 through 2006, the Secretary shall award grants in accordance with this section to historically women's public colleges and universities to pay the Federal share of the costs of the preservation and restoration of historic buildings and structures on the campuses of the colleges and universities.
Grant Conditions.--As a condition of the receipt of a grant under subsection (a), a grantee shall agree that, for a period of time specified by the Secretary-- (1) no alteration shall be made to the property preserved or restored using grant funds without the concurrence of the Secretary; and (2) reasonable public access to the property shall be permitted by the grantee for interpretive and educational purposes.
Cost Sharing for Buildings and Structures Listed on the National Register of Historic Places.-- (1) Federal share.--Except as provided by paragraph (2), the Federal share of the cost of a grant for preservation or restoration of a historic building or structure shall be 50 percent.
Non-federal share.--The non-Federal share of the cost of activities under a grant under this subsection may be provided in cash or in the form of in-kind goods or services.
Funding Provisions.-- (1) Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this act $16,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2006.
Allocations for fiscal year 2002.-- (A) In general.--Of the amounts made available under paragraph (1) for fiscal year 2002, $2,000,000 shall be used to make a grant to each of the following historically women's public colleges and universities: (i) University of Montevallo in Montevallo, Alabama.
Georgia College and State University in Milledgeville, Georgia.
Wesleyan College in Macon, Georgia.
Mississippi University for Women in Columbus, Mississippi.
University of North Carolina in Greensboro, North Carolina.
University of Science and Arts of Oklahoma in Chickasha, Oklahoma.
Winthrop University in Rock Hill, South Carolina.
Texas Woman's University in Denton, Texas.
Less than $16,000,000 available.--If less than $16,000,000 is made available under this subsection for fiscal year 2002, each of the institutions specified in subparagraph (A) shall receive \1/8\ of the total amount made available.
Allocations for fiscal years 2003 through 2006.--For each of fiscal years 2003 through 2006, the Secretary shall distribute \1/8\ of the total amount made available for the fiscal year under paragraph (1) to each of the grantees specified in paragraph (2)(A).
Regulations.--The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.