This Act may be cited as the ``San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary Restoration Act of 1993''.
IMPLEMENTATION OF COMPREHENSIVE PLAN FOR SAN FRANCISCO BAY- DELTA ESTUARY.
Title I of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
SAN FRANCISCO BAY-DELTA ESTUARY.
Establishment of Executive Council and Office.--The Administrator shall establish an Executive Council of the San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary Restoration Program (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Executive Council').
Executive Council.-- ``(1) Duties.--The Executive Council shall oversee and coordinate the implementation of the Comprehensive Conservation and Management Plan for the San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary developed pursuant to section 320 of this Act (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Comprehensive Plan').
Membership.--The Executive Council shall be composed of 5 members as follows: ``(A) The Regional Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency for Region IX.
The Regional Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service for Region I.
1 member appointed by the Administrator, in consultation with the San Francisco Estuary Project's Management Committee, from among individuals who are representatives of State agencies responsible for resource management.
1 member appointed by the Administrator, in consultation with the San Francisco Estuary Project's Management Committee, from among individuals who are representatives of State agencies responsible for environmental management.
1 member appointed by the Administrator, in consultation with the San Francisco Estuary Project's Management Committee, from among individuals who are local elected officials for the San Francisco Bay-Delta region.
Powers.-- ``(A) Establishment of restoration program office.--The Executive Council shall establish an Office of the San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary Restoration Program (hereinafter in this section referred to as the `Office') to be located on or near the San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary.
Implementation committee.--The Executive Council shall establish an Implementation Committee to provide assistance to the Council in carrying out its duties and implementing the comprehensive plan referred to in paragraph (1).
The Implementation Committee shall be composed of not to exceed 25 members including the following: ``(i) Members appointed by the Executive Council from among individuals who are representatives of local, State, and Federal agencies involved in implementing the Comprehensive Plan.
3 members appointed by the Executive Council from among individuals recommended by the environmental representatives on the San Francisco Estuary Project's Management Committee to represent the San Francisco Bay- Delta Estuary environmental community.
3 members appointed by the Executive Council from among individuals recommended by the business, water use, and discharger representatives on the San Francisco Estuary Project's Management Committee to represent the San Francisco Bay-Delta business, water use, and discharger communities.
1 member appointed by the Executive Council from among individuals recommended by the fisheries representatives on the San Francisco Estuary Project's Management Committee to represent fisheries.
Additional advisory committees.--The Executive Council may establish such additional advisory committees as the Council determines to be necessary to implement the Comprehensive Plan.
Evaluation and reporting.--Not later than 2 years after the date of approval of the Comprehensive Plan, and biennially thereafter, the Executive Council shall issue a public report to the Administrator, the Governor of California, and Congress which-- ``(i) evaluates the progress made in implementing the Comprehensive Plan; ``(ii) identifies anticipated priorities and needs for future implementation of the Comprehensive Plan; ``(iii) specifies recommendations and justification for potential modifications to the Comprehensive Plan; and ``(iv) summarizes any modifications to the Comprehensive Plan that may have been approved in the 24-month period immediately preceding such report.
The report shall be prepared in a manner consistent with specified review procedures that allow for effective input from the involved agencies and the public.
Office.-- ``(1) Administration and staffing.-- ``(A) In general.--The Office shall be headed by a Director, appointed by the Executive Council, who shall select additional appropriate staff as may be necessary to carry out the duties of the Director under this section.
Applicability of certain civil service laws.--The Director and staff of the Office may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Duties.-- ``(A) In general.--The Director shall-- ``(i) assist the Executive Council and the Implementation Committee in carrying out its goals; ``(ii) be the primary supervisor of the programs and activities of the Office; and ``(iii) be responsible for developing and implementing the Office's work plan and budget.
Specified duties.--The Director's duties shall also include such additional duties as may be specified by the Executive Council and the Implementation Committee.
Such duties shall include, but not be limited to, the following: ``(i) Assisting and supporting the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan to ensure success toward achieving the following vision for the San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary set forth in the Comprehensive Plan: `We, the people of California and the San Francisco Bay- Delta region, believe the San Francisco Bay- Delta Estuary is an international treasure and that our ongoing stewardship is critical to its preservation, restoration, and enhancement.
Acknowledging the importance of the Estuary to our environmental and economic well-being, we pledge to achieve and maintain an ecologically diverse and productive natural estuarine system.'.
Conducting, coordinating, and commissioning research, studies, and activities considered necessary for implementation of the Comprehensive Plan in order to accomplish the mission statements identified in the Comprehensive Plan.
Identifying and pursuing options for long-term financing of actions under the Comprehensive Plan.
Identifying and coordinating the grant, research, and planning programs authorized under this section.
Coordinating activities and implementing responsibilities with-- ``(I) other Federal agencies and State and local agencies which have jurisdiction over the San Francisco Estuary; ``(II) the federally approved State coastal management program for San Francisco Bay; and ``(III) national and regional marine monitoring and research programs.
Providing administrative and technical support to the Executive Council, the Implementation Committee, and any other advisory committees established by the Executive Council.
Assisting the Executive Council to ensure that the Comprehensive Plan's public involvement and education program is carried out.
Assisting the Executive Council to ensure that an estuary-wide monitoring program and a coordinated estuary research program are underway through the coordination of the proposed San Francisco Estuarine Institute.
Assisting the Executive Council with preparation of biennial reports that evaluate the success of the Comprehensive Plan and identify recommendations for improved implementation.
Convening conferences and meetings for legislators from Federal, State, and local governments and political subdivisions thereof for the purpose of making recommendations for coordinating legislative efforts to facilitate the environmental restoration of the San Francisco Bay-Delta Estuary and the implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
Grants.-- ``(1) In general.--The Administrator, acting through the Director, may make grants to eligible recipients described in paragraph (3) for projects and studies which will help in implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
Additional authority.--In addition, the Administrator may make grants to eligible recipients for the purpose of acquiring such remnant habitats, acquiring and restoring such degraded wetlands and uplands, and promoting the reuse of such dredged material as may be necessary for implementation of the Comprehensive Plan.
Eligible recipients.--State, interstate, coastal management, and regional water pollution control agencies and other public and nongovernmental nonprofit agencies, institutions, and organizations shall be eligible for grants under this subsection.
Priority.--In making grants under this subsection, priority consideration shall be given-- ``(A) to establishing the San Francisco Estuarine Institute to coordinate implementation of the Comprehensive Plan's research and monitoring program; ``(B) to activities to conduct the Comprehensive Plan's public involvement and education program; and ``(C) to other activities contained in the Comprehensive Plan that are identified as priority activities by the Implementation Committee and the Executive Council.
Federal share.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraphs (B) and (C), the Federal share of the cost of a project or study receiving amounts from a grant under this subsection shall not exceed 75 percent in the aggregate.
Grants to nongovernmental nonprofit recipients.--Except as provided in subparagraph (C), for grants made to nongovernmental nonprofit recipients, the Federal share of the cost of a project shall not exceed 95 percent in the aggregate.
Grants for restoration projects.--For grants authorized under paragraph (2), the Federal share of the cost of a project shall not exceed 50 percent in the aggregate.
The Administrator, acting through the Director, shall determine the percentage of the required non-Federal match on a case-by-case basis.
Priority shall be given to projects that demonstrate cooperative approaches, including interagency efforts and partnerships between public and private entities.
Non-federal sources.--A grant under this subsection to carry out a project shall be made on the condition that the non-Federal share of the cost of the project will be provided by non-Federal sources.
Authorizations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator-- ``(1) for the implementation of this section, other than subsections (c)(1) and (d), such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998; ``(2) for the implementation of subsection (c)(1) not to exceed $3,000,000 per fiscal year for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998; and ``(3) for the implementation of subsection (d) not to exceed $10,000,000 per fiscal year for each of fiscal years 1994 through 1998.