This Act may be cited as the ``Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Amendment Act of 2004''.
ACQUISITION OF LAND FOR THE YUROK RESERVATION.
Section 2(c) of the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act (25 United States Code 1300i- 1(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(5) Land acquisition.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture shall-- ``(i) in consultation with the Yurok Tribe, identify Federal and private land available from willing sellers within and adjacent to or in close proximity to the Yurok Reservation in the aboriginal territory of the Yurok Tribe (excluding any land within the Hoopa Valley Reservation) as land that may be considered for inclusion in the Yurok Reservation; ``(ii) negotiate with the Yurok Tribe to determine, from the land identified under clause (i), a land base for an expanded Yurok Reservation that will be adequate for economic self-sufficiency and the maintenance of religious and cultural practices; ``(iii) jointly with the Yurok Tribe, provide for consultation with local governments, and other parties whose interests are directly affected, concerning the potential sale or other transfer of land to the Yurok Tribe under this Act; ``(iv) submit to Congress a report identifying any parcels of land within their respective jurisdictions that are determined to be within the land base negotiated under clause (ii); and ``(v) not less than 60 days after the date of submission of the report under clause (iv), convey to the Secretary in trust for the Yurok Tribe the parcels of land within their respective jurisdictions that are within that land base.
Acceptance in trust.--The Secretary shall-- ``(i) accept in trust for the Yurok Tribe the conveyance of such private land as the Yurok Tribe, or the United States on behalf of the Yurok Tribe, may acquire from willing sellers, by exchange or purchase; and ``(ii) provide for the expansion of the Yurok Reservation boundaries to reflect the conveyances.
Funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, from funds made available to carry out this Act, the Secretary may use $2,500,000 to pay the costs of appraisals, surveys, title reports, and other requirements relating to the acquisition by the Yurok Tribe of private land under this Act (excluding land within the boundaries of the Hoopa Valley Reservation).
Report.-- ``(i) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of submission of the report under subparagraph (A)(iv), the Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Agriculture relative to the establishment of an adequate land base for the Yurok Tribe, shall submit to Congress a report that describes-- ``(I) the establishment of an adequate land base for the Yurok Tribe and implementation of subparagraph (A); ``(II) the sources of funds remaining in the Settlement Fund, including the statutory authority for such deposits and the activities, including environmental consequences, if any, that gave rise to those deposits; ``(III) disbursements made from the Settlement Fund; ``(IV) the provision of resources, reservation land, trust land, and income-producing assets including, to the extent data are available (including data available from the Hoopa Valley Tribe and the Yurok Tribe), the environmental condition of the land and income-producing assets, infrastructure, and other valuable assets; and ``(V) to the extent data are available (including data available from the Hoopa Valley Tribe and the Yurok Tribe), the unmet economic, infrastructure, and land needs of each of the Hoopa Valley Tribe and the Yurok Tribe.
Limitation.--No expenditures for any purpose shall be made from the Settlement Fund before the date on which, after receiving the report under clause (i), Congress enacts a law authorizing such expenditures, except as the Hoopa Valley Tribe and Yurok Tribes may agree pursuant to their respective constitutional requirements.
Claims.-- ``(A) In general.--The Court of Federal Claims shall hear and determine all claims of the Yurok Tribe or a member of the Yurok Tribe against the United States asserting that the alienation, transfer, lease, use, or management of land or natural resources located within the Yurok Reservation violates the Constitution, laws, treaties, Executive orders, regulations, or express or implied contracts of the United States.
Conditions.--A claim under subparagraph (A) shall be heard and determined-- ``(i) notwithstanding any statute of limitations (subject to subparagraph (C)) or any claim of laches; and ``(ii) without application of any setoff or other claim reduction based on a judgment or settlement under the Act of May 18, 1928 (25 United States Code 651 et sequentes) or other laws of the United States.
Limitation.--A claim under subparagraph (A) shall be brought not later than 10 years after the date of enactment of this paragraph.''.
Law Enforcement and Tribal Court Funds and Programs.--Section 2(f) of the Hoopla-Yurok Settlement Act (25 United States Code 1300i-1(f)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``The Hoopa'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--The Hoopa''; (2) by striking the semicolon after ``Code'' the first place it appears and inserting a comma; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Law enforcement and tribal court funds and programs.-- ``(A) In general.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), Federal law enforcement and tribal court funds and programs shall be made available to the Hoopa Valley Tribe and Yurok Tribe on the same basis as the funds and programs are available to Indian tribes that are not subject to the provisions of law referred to in paragraph (1).
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated for Yurok law enforcement and tribal court programs $1,000,000 for each fiscal year.''.
Recognition of the Yurok Tribe.--Section 9 of the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act (25 United States Code 1300i-8) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Recognition of the Yurok Tribe.--The authority of the Yurok Tribe over its territories as provided in the constitution of the Yurok Tribe as of the date of enactment of this subsection are ratified and confirmed insofar as that authority relates to the jurisdiction of the Yurok Tribe over persons and land within the boundaries of the Yurok Reservation.''.
Yurok Reservation Resources.--Section 12 of the Hoopa Yurok Settlement Act (102 United States Statutes at Large 2935) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Klamath River Basin Fisheries.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture shall enter into stewardship agreements with the Yurok Tribe with respect to management of Klamath River Basin fisheries and water resources.
Effect of paragraph.--Nothing in paragraph (1) provides the Yurok Tribe with any jurisdiction within the Hoopa Valley Reservation.
Management Authority.-- ``(1) Definition of comanangement authority.--In this subsection, the term `management authority' means the right to make decisions jointly with the Secretary or the Secretary of Agriculture, as the case may be, with respect to the natural resources and sacred and cultural sites described in paragraph (2).
Grant of management authority.--There is granted to the Yurok Tribe management authority over all natural resources, and over all sacred and cultural sites of the Yurok Tribe within their usual and accustomed places, that are on land remaining under the jurisdiction of the National Park Service, Forest Service, or Bureau of Land Management within the aboriginal territory of the Yurok Tribe.
Subsistence.-- ``(1) In general.--There is granted access for subsistence hunting, fishing, and gathering rights for members of the Yurok Tribe over all land and water within the aboriginal territory of the Yurok Tribe that remain under the jurisdiction of the Yurok Tribe or the United States, excluding any land within the Hoopa Valley Reservation.
Condition.--All subsistence-related activities under paragraph (1) shall be conducted in accordance with management plans developed by the Yurok Tribe.''.
From amounts made available to the Secretary for new tribes funding, the Secretary shall make an adjustment in the base funding for the Yurok Tribe based on the enrollment of the Yurok Tribe as of the date of enactment of this Act.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) $20,000,000 for the upgrade and construction of Bureau of Indian Affairs and tribal roads on the Yurok Reservation; (2) for each fiscal year, $500,000 for the operation of a road maintenance program for the Yurok Tribe; (3) $3,500,000 for purchase of equipment and supplies for the Yurok Tribe road maintenance program; (4) $7,600,000 for the electrification of the Yurok Reservation; (5) $2,500,000 for telecommunication needs on the Yurok Reservation; (6) $18,000,000 for the improvement and development of water and wastewater treatment systems on the Yurok Reservation; (7) $6,000,000 for the development and construction of a residential care, drug and alcohol rehabilitation, and recreational complex near Weitchpec; (8) $7,000,000 for the construction of a cultural center for the Yurok Tribe; (9) $4,000,000 for the construction of a tribal court, law enforcement, and detention facility in Klamath; (10) $10,000,000 for the acquisition or construction of at least 50 homes for Yurok Tribe elders; (11) $3,200,000 for the development and initial startup cost for a Yurok School District; and (12) $800,000 to supplement Yurok Tribe higher education need.
Priority.--Congress-- (1) recognizes the unsafe and inadequate condition of roads and major transportation routes on and to the Yurok Reservation; and (2) identifies as a priority that those roads and major transportation routes be upgraded and brought up to the same standards as transportation systems throughout the State of California.
There are authorized to be appropriated-- (1) $20,000,000 for the construction of an ecolodge and associated costs; (2) $1,500,000 for the purchase of equipment to establish a gravel operation; and (3) $6,000,000 for the purchase and improvement of recreational and fishing resorts on the Yurok Reservation.
Conveyance to the Yurok Tribe.--The following parcels of Bureau of Land Management land within the aboriginal territory of the Yurok Tribe are conveyed in trust status to the Yurok Tribe: (1) T.
9N., R. 4E, HUM, sec.
9N., R. 4E, sec.
9, lots 19 and 20.
17, lots 3 through 6.
18, lots 7 and 10.
13, lots 8 and 12.
9N., R. 3E, sec.
Conveyance to the Hoopa Valley Tribe.--The following parcels of Bureau of Land Management land along the western boundaries of the Hoopa Valley Reservation are conveyed in trust status to the Hoopa Valley Tribe: (1) T. 9N, R.
23, lots 7 and 8.
26, lots 1 through 3.
7, lots 1 and 6.
REPEAL OF OBSOLETE PROVISIONS.
Section 2(c)(4) of the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act (25 United States Code 1300i- 1(c)(4)) is amended by striking ``The-- '' and all that follows through ``shall not be'' and inserting ``The apportionment of funds to the Yurok Tribe under sections 4 and 7 shall not be''.
Section 3(c) of the Klamath River Basin Fisheries Restoration Act (16 United States Code 460ss-2(c)) is amended-- (1) by redesignating paragraphs (4) and (5) as paragraphs (5) and (6); and (2) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(3) A representative of the Yurok Tribe who shall be appointed by the Yurok Tribal Council.
A representative of the Department of the Interior who shall be appointed by the Secretary.''.
Section 10 of the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Act (25 United States Code 1300i-9) is amended by striking subsection (a) and inserting the following: ``(a) Plan for Economic Self-Sufficiency.-- ``(1) Negotiations.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the Hoopa-Yurok Settlement Amendment Act of 2004, the Secretary shall enter into negotiations with the Yurok Tribe to establish a plan for the economic self- sufficiency of the Yurok Tribe, which shall be completed not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of the Hoopa- Yurok Settlement Amendment Act of 2004.
Submission to congress.--On the approval of the plan by the Yurok Tribe, the Secretary shall submit the plan to Congress.
Authorization of appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 to establish the Yurok Tribe Self-Sufficiency Plan.''.
Nothing in this Act or any amendment made by this Act limits the existing rights of the Hoopa Valley Tribe or the Yurok Tribe Tribe.