This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Fire and Emergency Services Act of 2000''.
In this Act: (1) Agency.--The term ``Agency'' means the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Burn program.--The term ``burn program'' means the Burn Services Grant Program established by section 3(a).
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the Agency.
Fire program.--The term ``fire program'' means the ``Fire Services Grant Program'' established under section 4(a).
BURN SERVICES GRANT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--There is established within the Agency a grant program to be known as the ``Burn Services Grant Program''.
Competitive Grants.--The Director may make a grant under the burn program, on a competitive basis, to-- (1) a safety organization that has experience in conducting burn safety programs, for the purpose of assisting the organization in conducting or augmenting a burn prevention program; (2) a hospital that serves as a regional burn center, for the purpose of conducting acute burn care research; or (3) a governmental or nongovernmental entity, for the purpose of providing after-burn treatment and counseling to individuals that are burn victims.
Program Office.--The Director shall establish within the Agency an office to-- (1) establish criteria for use by the Director in awarding grants under the burn program; and (2) administer grants awarded under the burn program.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $10,000,000, to remain available until expended.
FIRE SERVICES GRANT PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Director shall establish within the Agency a grant program known as the ``Fire Services Grant Program'' to award grants to volunteer, paid, and combined volunteer-paid departments that provide fire and emergency medical services.
Use of Funds.--A grant awarded under the fire program may be used to-- (1) acquire-- (A) personal protective equipment required for firefighting personnel by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration; and (B) other personal protective equipment for firefighting personnel; (2) acquire additional firefighting equipment, including equipment for communication and monitoring; (3) establish wellness and fitness programs for firefighting personnel to reduce the number of injuries and deaths related to health and conditioning problems; (4) promote professional development of fire code enforcement personnel; (5) integrate computer technology to improve records management and training capabilities; (6) train firefighting personnel in-- (A) firefighting; (B) emergency response; and (C) arson prevention and detection; (7) enforce fire codes; (8) fund fire prevention programs and public education programs on-- (A) arson prevention and detection; and (B) juvenile fire setter intervention; and (9) modify fire stations, fire training facilities, and other facilities to protect the health and safety of firefighting personnel.
Applications.--An applicant for a grant awarded under the fire program shall submit to the Director an application that includes-- (1) a demonstration of the financial need of the applicant; (2) evidence of a commitment by the applicant to provide matching funds from non-Federal sources for the project that is the subject of the application in an amount that is at least equal to the amount of funds requested in the application; (3) a cost-benefit analysis linking the funds requested to improvements in public safety; and (4) a commitment by the applicant to provide information to the National Fire Incident Reporting System for the period for which the grant is received.
Audits.--The Director shall conduct audits of grant recipients to ensure that grant funds are used for the purposes for which the grant is awarded.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $80,000,000, to remain available until expended.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall use the funds, facilities, and authorities of the Commodity Credit Corporation to carry out paragraphs (1) through (3) of section 10(b) of the Cooperative Forestry Assistance Act of 1978 (16 United States Code 2106(b)), not to exceed $10,000,000, to remain available until expended.