This Act may be cited as the ``Servicemembers Health Protection Act of 2001''.
TITLE I--NATIONAL CENTER FOR MILITARY DEPLOYMENT HEALTH RESEARCH SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL CENTER FOR MILITARY DEPLOYMENT HEALTH RESEARCH.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is established in the Department of Health and Human Services a center to be known as the National Center for Military Deployment Health Research (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Center'').
Director.--The Center shall be headed by a Director, who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Purpose.--The Center shall, in accordance with this Act, conduct research on deployment-related health issues of members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and their families and serve as the national center for coordination of private and public research on those issues.
Deployment-Related Health Issues Defined.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``deployment-related health issues'' includes the following: (1) Issues relating to injuries, diseases, disorders, or other health conditions of members of the Armed Forces arising or incurred during deployment and resulting from combat, training, infectious diseases, and environmental exposures.
Conditions that emerge during or following deployment, including-- (A) diagnosable conditions; (B) medically unexplained symptoms (both physical and mental); (C) effects on health-related quality of life; (D) family impacts; and (E) sequelae of combat injuries.
Conditions arising from inoculations before deployment that are intended to provide protection from conditions that could be encountered during deployment.
In General.--The functions of the Center shall be as follows: (1) Development of a coordinated research plan for deployment-related health issues.
Conducting and supporting research relating to deployment-related health issues.
Creation of policies for conducting and supporting such research and making the results of such research available to the public and guidelines for the conduct and dissemination of research by other Federal entities and by non-Federal entities, in matters relating to deployment-related health issues of members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and their families, including policies to minimize research duplication.
Evaluation of the results of research described in paragraph (3).
Development of policy recommendations that emerge from that research.
Communication of the results of the research described in paragraph (3) to the medical community and persons with deployment-related health issues.
Core Functions.--The Center shall carry out the following core functions: (1) Research coordination and setting of priorities.
Synthesis of research for the purpose of developing policy recommendations.
Review and analysis of longitudinal monitoring of deployment-related health of veterans.
Facilitating the use of national data resources for research activities relating to deployment-related health issues.
Communication of the results of such research activities to the medical community and persons with deployment-related health issues.
Consultation.--The Director of the Center shall consult closely with the Advisory Committee on Military Deployment Health Research established under section 104 on all aspects of the activities of the Center.
In General.--The Center shall coordinate and conduct research activities relating to deployment-related health issues of members of the Armed Forces, veterans, and their families.
The Center's research activities shall include (1) activities with respect to research programs by other Federal departments and agencies, and (2) research activities initiated by the Center.
Federal Research Programs.-- (1) Inventory of federal research programs.--The Center shall develop and maintain an inventory of research programs relating to deployment-related health issues carried out by the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and other Federal officials.
Consultation.--The Center shall consult with, and seek the advice of, other federally sponsored researchers in developing the Center's research agenda.
Center-Initiated Research.-- (1) In general.--The Center shall conduct a broad-based research program into deployment-related health issues.
As part of that program, the Center may, from funds appropriated for that purpose, make grants for research into deployment-related health issues.
Any such grant shall be made based upon issuance of a request for applications or a request for proposals.
Applications and proposals shall be assessed through a peer- review process, which shall, to the extent possible, be carried out by the National Institutes of Health.
Solicitation of proposals.--In conducting such research, the Center shall solicit proposals from other Federal agencies, from universities, and from other research entities.
Research network.--In awarding contracts for research, the Center shall seek to establish a network of research sites at academic medical centers, university-wide research facilities, and other appropriate sources.
Core Research Principles.--Center-initiated research shall be conducted using the following core set of principles: (1) Use of a scientific peer-review process for all research.
Dissemination of research results to the scientific community through conventional venues of scientific communication.
Encouragement of interagency, interdepartmental, and Federal-academic collaboration.
Establishment of Advisory Committee.--The Center shall have an Advisory Committee on Military Deployment Health Research.
The Advisory Committee shall advise the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Director of the Center on all aspects of the activities of the Center.
Membership.--The Advisory Committee shall consist of 21 members, appointed as follows: (1) 12 members appointed by the President, of whom-- (A) 6 shall be appointed from persons who, by reason of training, experience, and education, have qualifications in the fields of research to be conducted by the Center; and (B) 6 shall be appointed from the general population, including persons representing the interests of veterans and their families and the general public.
3 members appointed by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs from officers and employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
3 members appointed by the Secretary of Defense from officers and employees of the Department of Defense and members of the Armed Forces.
3 members appointed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services from officers and employees of the Department of Health and Human Services.
Recommendations by Independent Scientific Entity.--The President shall designate an independent scientific entity to make recommendations for appointments under paragraph (1) of subsection (b).
When making such recommendations, the entity shall recommend twice the number of candidates as there are positions available.
Terms.--Persons appointed to the Advisory Committee under paragraph (1) of subsection (b) shall serve for a term of three years, except that-- (1) of the persons initially appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(1)(A), two shall be appointed for a term of one year and two shall be appointed for a term of two years; and (2) of the persons initially appointed pursuant to subsection (b)(1)(B), two shall be appointed for a term of one year and two shall be appointed for a term of two years.
Pay and Travel Expenses.-- (1) Pay.--Persons appointed to the Advisory Committee under paragraph (1) of subsection (b) shall receive pay at the daily equivalent of the rate of basic pay payable for level V of the Executive Schedule for each day engaged in functions for the Advisory Committee.
Persons appointed to the Advisory Committee under paragraph (2), (3), or (4) of subsection (b) shall receive no additional compensation by reason of service on the Advisory Committee.
Travel expenses.--Members of the Advisory Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Chair.--The President shall designate one of the members of the Advisory Committee to chair the Advisory Committee.
Meetings.--The Advisory Committee shall meet on the call of the chair or a majority of the members of the Advisory Board.
Federal Advisory Committee Act.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act shall not apply to the Advisory Committee.
The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall submit to Congress an annual report on the activities of the Center.
The report shall include-- (1) a description of the activities of the Center during the preceding fiscal year and (2) a detailed description of the proposed budget for the Center for the next fiscal year.
In the President's budget for any fiscal year submitted to Congress under section 1105 of title 31, United States Code, amounts requested for the activities of the Center shall be set forth separately and distinctly, with amounts requested for the core functions of the Center and for Center-initiated research identified individually.
TITLE II--CENTERS FOR RESEARCH ON POST-DEPLOYMENT ILLNESSES IN DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS SEC.
In General.--Subchapter II of chapter 73 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Centers for research on post-deployment illnesses ``(a)(1) The Secretary shall establish and operate centers for research, education, and clinical activities related to post-deployment illnesses.
Such centers shall be known as `National Centers for Military Post-Deployment Illness Research'.
Such centers shall be established and operated by collaborating Department facilities as provided in subsection (c)(1).
For purposes of this section, term `post-deployment illness' means any health condition being currently studied or that will be studied that has (or that may have) an association to or relation to a military deployment mission, including a peacekeeping mission.
Each such center shall function as a center for-- ``(A) research on post-deployment illnesses; ``(B) the use by the Department of specific models for furnishing services to treat post-deployment illnesses; ``(C) education and training of health-care professionals of the Department; and ``(D) the development and implementation of innovative clinical activities and systems of care with respect to the delivery of such services by the Department.
The Secretary shall provide for the research conducted by such centers to be compiled and transmitted to a centrally located coordinating center.
(1) The Secretary shall, upon the recommendation of the Under Secretary for Health, the Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of Health and Human Services, designate not more than 25 centers under this section.
In making such designations, the Secretary shall ensure that the centers designated are located in various geographic regions of the United States.
The authority of the Secretary to establish and operate centers under this section is subject to the appropriation of funds for that purpose.
The Secretary may not designate a health-care facility as a location for a center under subsection (a) unless the peer review panel established under subsection (d) has determined under that subsection that the proposal submitted by such facility as a location for a new center under subsection (a) is among those proposals which have met the highest competitive standards of scientific and clinical merit, and the Secretary (upon the recommendation of the Under Secretary for Health) determines that the facility has (or may reasonably be anticipated to develop) each of the following: ``(1) An arrangement with an accredited medical school which provides education and training in post-deployment illnesses and with which such facility is affiliated under which residents receive education and training in post- deployment illnesses.
An arrangement under which nursing or allied health personnel receive training and education in post-deployment illnesses.
The ability to attract the participation of scientists who are capable of ingenuity and creativity in health-care research efforts.
A policymaking advisory committee composed of appropriate health-care and research representatives of the facility and of the affiliated school or schools to advise the directors of such facility and such center on policy matters pertaining to the activities of such center during the period of the operation of such center.
The capability to conduct effectively evaluations of the activities of such center.
(1) In order to provide advice to assist the Secretary and the Under Secretary for Health in carrying out their responsibilities under this section, the Under Secretary shall establish a panel to assess the scientific and clinical merit of proposals that are submitted to the Secretary for the establishment of new centers under this section.
The membership of the panel shall consist of experts in the fields of post-deployment illnesses research, education, and clinical care.
Members of the panel shall serve as consultants to the Department for a period of no longer than six months.
The panel shall review each proposal submitted to the panel by the Under Secretary and shall submit its views on the relative scientific and clinical merit of each such proposal to the Under Secretary.
The panel shall not be subject to the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the support of the research, treatment, and education activities of the centers established pursuant to subsection (a).
The Under Secretary for Health shall allocate to such centers from other funds appropriated generally for the Department medical care account and medical and prosthetics research account, as appropriate, such amounts as the Under Secretary for Health determines appropriate.
Activities of clinical and scientific investigation at each center established under subsection (a) shall be eligible to compete for the award of funding from funds appropriated for the Department medical and prosthetics research account and shall receive priority in the award of funding from such account insofar as funds are awarded to projects for research in post-deployment illnesses.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7323 the following new item: ``7324.
Centers for research on post-deployment illnesses.