This Act may be cited as the ``Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse Outstanding Natural Area Act of 2008''.
In this Act: (1) Commandant.--The term ``Commandant'' means the Commandant of the Coast Guard.
Lighthouse.--The term ``Lighthouse'' means the Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse located in Palm Beach County, Florida.
Local partners.--The term ``Local Partners'' includes-- (A) Palm Beach County, Florida; (B) the Town of Jupiter, Florida; (C) the Village of Tequesta, Florida; and (D) the Loxahatchee River Historical Society.
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan developed under section 4(a).
Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse: Outstanding Natural Area'' and dated October 29, 2007.
Outstanding natural area.--The term ``Outstanding Natural Area'' means the Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse Outstanding Natural Area established by section 3(a).
Public land.--The term ``public land'' has the meaning given the term ``public lands'' in section 103(e) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702(e)).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of Florida.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE JUPITER INLET LIGHTHOUSE OUTSTANDING NATURAL AREA.
Establishment.--Subject to valid existing rights, there is established for the purposes described in subsection (b) the Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse Outstanding Natural Area, the boundaries of which are depicted on the map.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Outstanding Natural Area are to protect, conserve, and enhance the unique and nationally important historic, natural, cultural, scientific, educational, scenic, and recreational values of the Federal land surrounding the Lighthouse for the benefit of present generations and future generations of people in the United States, while-- (1) allowing certain recreational and research activities to continue in the Outstanding Natural Area; and (2) ensuring that Coast Guard operations and activities are unimpeded within the boundaries of the Outstanding Natural Area.
Availability of Map.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in-- (1) the Office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management; and (2) the Eastern States Office of the Bureau of Land Management in the State of Virginia.
Withdrawal.-- (1) In general.--Subject to valid existing rights, section 6, and any existing withdrawals under the Executive orders and public land order described in paragraph (2), the Federal land and any interests in the Federal land included in the Outstanding Natural Area are withdrawn from-- (A) all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; (B) location, entry, and patent under the public land mining laws; and (C) operation of the mineral leasing and geothermal leasing laws and the mineral materials laws.
Description of executive orders.--The Executive orders and public land order described in paragraph (1) are-- (A) the Executive order dated October 22, 1854; (B) Executive Order No.
4254 (June 12, 1925); and (C) Public Land Order No.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in consultation with the Commandant, shall develop a comprehensive management plan in accordance with section 202 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1712) to-- (1) provide long-term management guidance for the public land in the Outstanding Natural Area; and (2) ensure that the Outstanding Natural Area fulfills the purposes for which the Outstanding Natural Area is established.
Consultation; Public Participation.--The management plan shall be developed-- (1) in consultation with appropriate Federal, State, county, and local government agencies, the Commandant, the Local Partners, the Loxahatchee River Historical Society, and other partners; and (2) in a manner that ensures full public participation.
Existing Plans.--The management plan shall, to the maximum extent practicable, be consistent with existing resource plans, policies, and programs.
Inclusions.--The management plan shall include-- (1) objectives and provisions to ensure-- (A) the protection and conservation of the resource values of the Outstanding Natural Area; and (B) the restoration of native plant communities and estuaries in the Outstanding Natural Area, with an emphasis on the conservation and enhancement of healthy, functioning ecological systems in perpetuity; (2) objectives and provisions to maintain or recreate historic structures; (3) an implementation plan for a program of interpretation and public education about the natural and cultural resources of the Lighthouse, the public land surrounding the Lighthouse, and associated structures; (4) a proposal for administrative and public facilities to be developed or improved that-- (A) are compatible with achieving the resource objectives for the Outstanding Natural Area described in section 5(a)(1)(B); and (B) would accommodate visitors to the Outstanding Natural Area; (5) natural and cultural resource management strategies for the Outstanding Natural Area, to be developed in consultation with appropriate departments of the State, the Local Partners, and the Commandant, with an emphasis on resource conservation in the Outstanding Natural Area and the interpretive, educational, and long-term scientific uses of the resources; and (6) recreational use strategies for the Outstanding Natural Area, to be prepared in consultation with the Local Partners, appropriate departments of the State, and the Coast Guard, with an emphasis on passive recreation.
Interim Plan.--Until a management plan is adopted for the Outstanding Natural Area, the Jupiter Inlet Coordinated Resource Management Plan (including any updates or amendments to the Jupiter Inlet Coordinated Resource Management Plan) shall be in effect.
MANAGEMENT OF THE JUPITER INLET LIGHTHOUSE OUTSTANDING NATURAL AREA.
Management.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Local Partners and the Commandant, shall manage the Outstanding Natural Area-- (A) as part of the National Landscape Conservation System; and (B) in a manner that conserves, protects, and enhances the unique and nationally important historical, natural, cultural, scientific, educational, scenic, and recreational values of the Outstanding Natural Area, including an emphasis on the restoration of native ecological systems.
Limitation.--In managing the Outstanding Natural Area, the Secretary shall not take any action that precludes, prohibits, or otherwise affects the conduct of ongoing or future Coast Guard operations or activities on lots 16 and 18, as depicted on the map.
Uses.--Subject to valid existing rights and section 6, the Secretary shall only allow uses of the Outstanding Natural Area that the Secretary, in consultation with the Commandant and Local Partners, determines would likely further-- (1) the purposes for which the Outstanding Natural Area is established; (2) the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1701 et sequentes); and (3) other applicable laws.
Cooperative Agreements.--To facilitate implementation of the management plan and to continue the successful partnerships with local communities and other partners, the Secretary shall, in accordance with section 307(b) of the Federal Land Management Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1737(b)), enter into cooperative agreements with the appropriate Federal, State, county, other local government agencies, and other partners (including the Loxahatchee River Historical Society) for the long-term management of the Outstanding Natural Area.
Research Activities.--To continue successful research partnerships, pursue future research partnerships, and assist in the development and implementation of the management plan, the Secretary may, in accordance with section 307(a) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1737(a)), authorize the conduct of appropriate research activities in the Outstanding Natural Area for the purposes described in section 3(b).
Acquisition of Land.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary may acquire for inclusion in the Outstanding Natural Area any State or private land or any interest in State or private land that is-- (A) adjacent to the Outstanding Natural Area; and (B) identified in the management plan as appropriate for acquisition.
Means of acquisition.--Land or an interest in land may be acquired under paragraph (1) only by-- (A) donation; (B) exchange with a willing party; or (C) purchase from a willing seller.
Additions to the outstanding natural area.--Any land or interest in land adjacent to the Outstanding Natural Area acquired by the United States after the date of enactment of this Act under paragraph (1) shall be added to, and administered as part of, the Outstanding Natural Area.
Law Enforcement Activities.--Nothing in this Act, the management plan, or the Jupiter Inlet Coordinated Resource Management Plan (including any updates or amendments to the Jupiter Inlet Coordinated Resource Management Plan) precludes, prohibits, or otherwise affects-- (1) any maritime security, maritime safety, or environmental protection mission or activity of the Coast Guard; (2) any border security operation or law enforcement activity by the Department of Homeland Security or the Department of Justice; or (3) any law enforcement activity of any Federal, State, or local law enforcement agency in the Outstanding Natural Area.
Future Disposition of Coast Guard Facilities.--If the Commandant determines, after the date of enactment of this Act, that Coast Guard facilities within the Outstanding Natural Area exceed the needs of the Coast Guard, the Commandant may relinquish the facilities to the Secretary without removal, subject only to any environmental remediation that may be required by law.
EFFECT ON ONGOING AND FUTURE COAST GUARD OPERATIONS.
Nothing in this Act, the management plan, or the Jupiter Inlet Coordinated Resource Management Plan (including updates or amendments to the Jupiter Inlet Coordinated Resource Management Plan) precludes, prohibits, or otherwise affects ongoing or future Coast Guard operations or activities in the Outstanding Natural Area, including-- (1) the continued and future operation of, access to, maintenance of, and, as may be necessitated for Coast Guard missions, the expansion, enhancement, or replacement of, the Coast Guard High Frequency antenna site on lot 16; (2) the continued and future operation of, access to, maintenance of, and, as may be necessitated for Coast Guard missions, the expansion, enhancement, or replacement of, the military family housing area on lot 18; (3) the continued and future use of, access to, maintenance of, and, as may be necessitated for Coast Guard missions, the expansion, enhancement, or replacement of, the pier on lot 18; (4) the existing lease of the Jupiter Inlet Lighthouse on lot 18 from the Coast Guard to the Loxahatchee River Historical Society; or (5) any easements or other less-than-fee interests in property appurtenant to existing Coast Guard facilities on lots 16 and 18.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Passed the House of Representatives March 4, 2008.
Attest: LORRAINE C. MILLER, Clerk.
By Deborah M. Spriggs, Deputy Clerk.