This Act may be cited as the ``National African American Museum Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) the presentation and preservation of African American life, art, history, and culture within the National Park System and other Federal entities is inadequate; (2) the inadequate presentation and preservation of African American life, art, history, and culture seriously restricts the ability of the people of the United States, particularly African Americans, to understand themselves and their past; (3) African American life, art, history, and culture includes the varied experiences of Africans in slavery and freedom and the continued struggles for full recognition of citizenship and treatment with human dignity; (4) in enacting Public Law 99-511, the Congress encouraged support for the establishment of a commemorative structure within the National Park System, or on other Federal lands, dedicated to the promotion of understanding, knowledge, opportunity, and equality for all people; (5) the establishment of a national museum and the conducting of interpretive and educational programs, dedicated to the heritage and culture of African Americans, will help to inspire and educate the people of the United States regarding the cultural legacy of African Americans and the contributions made by African Americans to the society of the United States; and (6) the Smithsonian Institution operates 15 museums and galleries, a zoological park, and 5 major research facilities, none of which is a national institution devoted solely to African American life, art, history, or culture.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE NATIONAL AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSEUM.
Establishment.--There is established within the Smithsonian Institution a Museum, which shall be known as the ``National African American Museum''.
Purpose.--The purpose of the Museum is to provide-- (1) a center for scholarship relating to African American life, art, history, and culture; (2) a location for permanent and temporary exhibits documenting African American life, art, history, and culture; (3) a location for the collection and study of artifacts and documents relating to African American life, art, history, and culture; (4) a location for public education programs relating to African American life, art, history, and culture; and (5) a location for training of museum professionals and others in the arts, humanities, and sciences regarding museum practices related to African American life, art, history, and culture.
LOCATION AND CONSTRUCTION OF THE NATIONAL AFRICAN AMERICAN MUSEUM.
The Board of Regents is authorized to plan, design, reconstruct, and renovate the Arts and Industries building of the Smithsonian Institution to house the Museum.
BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF MUSEUM.
Establishment.--There is established in the Smithsonian Institution the Board of Trustees of the National African American Museum.
Composition and Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Board of Trustees shall be composed of 23 members, appointed as follows: (A) The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution who shall serve as an ex officio member of the Board of Trustees.
An Assistant Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, designated by the Board of Regents.
1 Member of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House from among the Speaker, Majority Leader, Minority Leader, Majority Whip or Minority Whip of the House of Representatives.
1 Member of the Senate appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate from among the President pro tempore, Majority Leader, Minority Leader, Majority Whip or Minority Whip of the Senate.
5 individuals appointed by the Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution.
6 individuals appointed by the Smithsonian Board of Regents from among individuals nominated by the Congressional Black Caucus.
4 individuals appointed by the Board of Regents from among individuals nominated by the Board of the African American Museum Association.
4 individuals appointed by the Board of Regents.
Initial appointment special rule.--The Board of Regents shall make the first appointments pursuant to paragraph (1)(H) from among the members of the initial Board of Trustees and pursuant to nominations received from the African American Institutional Study Advisory Committee of the Smithsonian Institution.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Board of Trustees shall be appointed for terms of 3 years.
Members of the Board of Trustees may be reappointed.
Staggered terms.--The terms of 7 of the members initially appointed under subparagraphs (C), (E), and (G) of subsection (b)(1), as determined by the Board of Regents, shall expire at the end of the 1-year period beginning on the date of appointment.
The terms of 7 of the members initially appointed under subparagraphs (D), (F), and (H) of subsection (b)(1), as determined by the Board of Regents, shall expire at the end of the 2-year period beginning on the date of appointment.
The terms of the remaining 7 members initially appointed under subparagraphs (C) through (H) of subsection (b)(1) shall expire at the end of the 3-year period beginning on the date of appointment.
Vacancies.--A vacancy on the Board of Trustees shall not affect its powers and shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which the predecessor of the member was appointed shall be appointed for the remainder of the term.
Noncompensation.--Except as provided in subsection (f), members of the Board of Trustees shall serve without pay.
Expenses.--Members of the Board of Trustees shall receive per diem, travel, and transportation expenses for each day, including traveltime, during which they are engaged in the performance of the duties of the Board of Trustees in accordance with section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, with respect to employees serving intermittently in the Government service.
Chairperson.--The Board of Trustees shall elect a chairperson by a majority vote of the members of the Board of Trustees.
Meetings.--The Board of Trustees shall meet at the call of the chairperson or upon the written request of a majority of its members, but shall meet not less than 2 times each fiscal year.
Quorum.--A majority of the Board of Trustees shall constitute a quorum for purposes of conducting business, but a lesser number may receive information on behalf of the Board of Trustees.
Voluntary Services.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the chairperson of the Board of Trustees may accept for the Board of Trustees voluntary services provided by a member of the Board of Trustees.
DUTIES OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES OF THE MUSEUM.
In General.--The Board of Trustees shall-- (1) recommend annual budgets for the Museum; (2) consistent with the general policy established by the Board of Regents, have the sole authority to-- (A) loan, exchange, sell, or otherwise dispose of any part of the collections of the Museum, but only if the funds generated by such disposition are used for additions to the collections of the Museum or for additions to the endowment of the Museum; (B) subject to the availability of funds and the provisions of annual budgets of the Museum, purchase, accept, borrow, or otherwise acquire artifacts and other property for addition to the collections of the Museum; (C) establish policy with respect to the utilization of the collections of the Museum; and (D) establish policy regarding programming, education, exhibitions, and research, with respect to the life and culture of African Americans, the role of African Americans in the history of the United States, and the contributions of African Americans to society; (3) consistent with the general policy established by the Board of Regents, have authority to-- (A) provide for restoration, preservation, and maintenance of the collections of the Museum; (B) solicit funds for the Museum and determine the purposes to which those funds shall be used; (C) approve expenditures from the endowment of the Museum, or of income generated from the endowment, for any purpose of the Museum; and (D) consult with, advise, and support the Director in the operation of the Museum; (4) establish programs in cooperation with other African American museums, historically black colleges and universities, historical societies, educational institutions, cultural and other organizations for the education and promotion of understanding regarding African American life, art, history, and culture; (5) support the efforts of other African American museums, historically black colleges and universities, cultural and other organizations to educate and promote understanding regarding African American life, art, history, and culture, including-- (A) development of cooperative programs and exhibitions; (B) identification, management, and care of collections; (C) participation in the training of museum professionals; and (D) creating opportunities for-- (i) research fellowships; and (ii) professional and student internships; (6) adopt bylaws to carry out the functions of the Board of Trustees; and (7) report annually to the Board of Regents on the acquisition, disposition, and display of African American objects and artifacts and on other matters the Board of Trustees deems appropriate.
In General.--The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution, in consultation with the Board of Trustees, shall appoint and fix the compensation and duties of a Director, Assistant Director, Secretary, and Chief Curator of the Museum and any other officers and employees necessary for the operation of the Museum and the carrying out of the duties of the Board.
The Director, Assistant Director, Secretary, and Chief Curator shall be qualified through experience and training to perform the duties of their offices.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Secretary of the Smithsonian Institution may-- (1) appoint the Director and 5 employees under subsection (a), without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service; and (2) fix the pay of the Director and such 5 employees, without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Board of Regents'' means the Board of Regents of the Smithsonian Institution.
The term ``Board of Trustees'' means the Board of Trustees of the National African American Museum established in section 5(a).
The term ``Museum'' means the National African American Museum established under section 3(a).
The term ``Arts and Industries building'' means the building located on the Mall at 900 Jefferson Drive, S.W.
in Washington, the District of Columbia.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the succeeding fiscal years.