This Act may be cited as the ``Domestic Oil and Gas Preservation Act''.
ELECTION TO EXPENSE GEOLOGICAL AND GEOPHYSICAL EXPENDITURES.
In General.--Section 263 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to capital expenditures) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Geological and Geophysical Expenditures for Domestic Oil and Gas Wells.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a taxpayer may elect to treat geological and geophysical expenses incurred in connection with the exploration for, or development of, oil or gas within the United States (as defined in section 638) as expenses which are not chargeable to capital account.
Any expenses so treated shall be allowed as a deduction in the taxable year in which paid or incurred.''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 263A(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting ``263(j),'' after ``263(i),''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenses paid or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act.
Transition rule.--In the case of any expenses described in section 263(j) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section, which were paid or incurred on or before the date of enactment of this Act, the taxpayer may elect, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, to amortize the unamortized portion of such expenses over the 36-month period beginning with the month in which the date of enactment of this Act occurs.
For purposes of this paragraph, the unamortized portion of any expense is the amount remaining unamortized as of the first day of the 36- month period.
ELIMINATION OF NET INCOME LIMITATION ON PERCENTAGE DEPLETION FOR OIL AND GAS.
Elimination.-- (1) In general.--Section 613A(d)(1) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the limitation based on taxable income for percentage depletion in the case of oil and gas wells) is repealed.
Other production.--The second sentence of section 613(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to percentage depletion) is amended to read as follows: ``Except in the case of oil and gas wells, such allowance shall not exceed 50 percent of the taxpayer's taxable income from the property (computed without allowance for depletion).''
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
Transition rule.-- (A) Deduction.--To the extent a deduction under section 613A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is disallowed under subsection (d)(1) of such section for any taxable year ending on or before December 31, 1997, the amount so disallowed shall be treated as an amount allowable as a deduction under subsection (c) of such section for the first taxable year beginning after December 31, 1997.
Certain adjustments.--The last sentence of subsection (d)(1) of section 613A of such Code, as in effect immediately before the repeal made by subsection (a)(1) of this section, shall apply with respect to amounts allowable as a deduction under subsection (c) of such section by reason of subparagraph (A) of this paragraph.
ELECTION TO EXPENSE DELAY RENTAL PAYMENTS.
In General.--Section 263 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to capital expenditures), as amended by section 2(a), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Delay Rental Payments for Domestic Oil and Gas Wells.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a taxpayer may elect to treat delay rental payments incurred in connection with the development of oil or gas within the United States (as defined in section 638) as payments which are not chargeable to capital account.
Any payments so treated shall be allowed as a deduction in the taxable year in which paid or incurred.
Delay rental payments.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `delay rental payment' means an amount paid for the privilege of deferring development of an oil or gas well.''
Conforming Amendment.--Section 263A(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended by section 2(b), is amended by inserting ``263(k),'' after ``263(j),''.
Effective Date.-- (1) In general.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments made or incurred after the date of enactment of this Act.
Transition rule.--In the case of any payments described in section 263(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as added by this section, which were made or incurred on or before the date of enactment of this Act, the taxpayer may elect, at such time and in such manner as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, to amortize the unamortized portion of such payments over the 36-month period beginning with the month in which the date of enactment of this Act occurs.
For purposes of this paragraph, the unamortized portion of any payment is the amount remaining unamortized as of the first day of the 36- month period.
EXTENSION OF SPUDDING RULE.
In General.--Section 461(i)(2)(A) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rule for spudding of oil or gas wells) is amended by striking ``90th day'' and inserting ``180th day''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
HYDRO INJECTION INCLUDED AS TERTIARY RECOVERY METHOD.
In General.--Section 43(c)(2) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining qualified enhanced oil recovery project) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Tertiary recovery method.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `tertiary recovery method' shall include hydro injection.''
Effective Date.-- The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to injections commencing after December 31, 1997.