This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Reform Commissions Act of 1995''.
Finding.--The Congress finds that-- (1) excessive and misguided regulations impose enormous economic costs that, like excessive taxes, stifle economic growth and job creation; and (2) the cost of complying with Federal regulations alone is estimated between $300,000,000,000 and $500,000,000,000 per year, which amounts to $4,000 to $6,000 per working man and woman in America.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to demonstrate the need to reexamine the policies and procedures of Federal agencies which impose regulatory burden, to determine what changes are necessary and desirable in those policies and procedures.
REVIEW OF FEDERAL REGULATIONS.
In General.--Each of the commissions established under section 4 by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget (referred to in this Act as the ``Director'') shall review the regulations issued by the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established.
Standards of Review.--In reviewing regulations under this section, each commission shall examine and determine-- (1) whether the regulations are-- (A) within the scope of authority of the statutes under which the regulations were issued; and (B) in accordance with the original intent of the Congress in approving the statutes; (2) whether administrative decisions made under the regulations were based on adequate information concerning the need for and consequences of proposed Governmental action; (3) whether regulatory action was taken only in instances where potential economic benefits to society of taking an action exceed the economic costs to society of taking the action; (4) whether the objectives of regulatory actions were selected to minimize net economic costs to society; (5) whether in selecting among alternative approaches for achieving objectives of regulatory actions, the alternative selected was the alternative involving the least net economic cost to society; (6) whether Federal agencies, in selecting regulatory priorities, have taken into account-- (A) the condition of the particular employers and employees affected by regulatory actions; (B) the condition of the regional and national economy; and (C) other Federal regulatory actions being considered; and (7) whether the regulations are subject to judicial review.
Consultation and Comment.--In carrying out reviews under this section, each commission shall-- (1) consult with the Congress and relevant congressional committees; and (2) solicit and consider views and suggestions of persons affected by the regulations reviewed by the commission.
Reports.-- (1) In general.--Each commission established under section 4 shall submit reports in accordance with this subsection to the Congress, the Director, and the head of the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established.
The reports shall consist of-- (A) an interim report submitted by not later than 1 year after the completion of appointments of the members of the commission; (B) a final report submitted by not later than 2 years after the completion of the appointments.
Contents.--Each report under this subsection shall describe the determinations made by the commission under each of paragraphs (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), and (7) of subsection (b) for the period covered by the report.
In General.--Not later than 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Director shall establish 3 commissions to carry out reviews under section 3.
Of the commissions established under this section, one shall be established with respect to each of-- (1) the Environmental Protection Agency; (2) the Department of Labor; and (3) the Department of the Interior.
Membership.--Each commission established under this section shall be composed of 13 members as follows: (1) 2 Members of the Senate appointed by the Majority Leader of the Senate, who shall be Members of different political parties.
2 Members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, who shall be Members of different political parties.
5 members appointed by the President from among persons affected by regulatory actions of the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established, of whom not more than 3 may be members of the same political party.
4 members appointed by the head of the department or agency with respect to which the commission is established, from among the career employees of the agency.
Compensation.--Each member of the commission shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for such member's services as an officer or employee of the United States.
Expenses.--The head of a Federal department or agency with respect to which a commission is established under this section shall pay the expenses incurred by the commission in carrying out this Act.
Termination.--Each commission established by this section shall terminate on the date the commission submits a final report under section 3(d)(1)(B).