This Act may be cited as the ``Patient Safety Act of 1996''.
Congress finds as follows: (1) There has been increased and growing public concern expressed regarding the quality and safety of services provided by health care facilities and institutions, as such facilities have instituted aggressive efforts to reduce levels of staff who provide direct patient care services as a principal means of decreasing expenses.
A growing body of data suggests a linkage between the number and mix of nursing staff and positive patient care outcomes, including the avoidance of patient death and injury.
Many employees of health care facilities have expressed fear for their employment if they report unsafe conditions, including violations of State or Federal law.
Unprecedented consolidation among health care institutions has led to increasing concern regarding the effect of such activity on the health and safety of communities served by these facilities, yet the Federal Government has little authority to evaluate such effect in deciding whether or not to approve mergers and acquisitions among health care facilities.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Licensed practical nurse or licensed vocational nurse.--The term ``licensed practical nurse or licensed vocational nurse'' means an individual who is entitled under State law or regulation to practice as a licensed practical nurse or a licensed vocational nurse.
Made publicly available.--The term ``made publicly available'' means, with respect to information of a provider, information that is-- (A) provided to the Secretary and to any State agency responsible for licensing or accrediting the provider; (B) provided to any State agency which approves or oversees health care services delivered by the provider directly or through an insuring entity or corporation; and (C) provided to any member of the public which requests such information directly from the provider.
Medicare program.--The term ``medicare program'' means the programs under title XVIII of the Social Security Act.
Provider.--The term ``provider'' means an entity that is-- (A) a psychiatric hospital described in section 1861(f) of the Social Security Act, (B) a provider of services described in section 1861(u) of such Act, (C) a rural health clinic described in section 1861(aa)(2) of such Act, (D) an ambulatory surgical center described in section 1832(a)(2)(F)(i) of such Act, or (E) a renal dialysis facility described in section 1881(b)(1)(A) of such Act.
Registered nurse.--The term ``registered nurse'' means an individual who is entitled under State law or regulation to practice as a registered nurse.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
PUBLIC DISCLOSURE OF STAFFING AND OUTCOMES DATA.
Disclosure of Staffing and Outcomes.--Any provider under the medicare program shall, as a condition of continued participation in such program, make publicly available information regarding nurse staffing and patient outcomes as specified by the Secretary.
Such information shall include at least the following: (1) The number of registered nurses providing direct care.
This information shall be expressed both in raw numbers, in terms of total hours of nursing care per patient (including adjustment for case mix and acuity), and as a percentage of nursing staff, and shall be broken down in terms of the total nursing staff, each unit, and each shift.
The number of licensed practical nurses or licensed vocational nurses providing direct care.
This information shall be expressed both in raw numbers, in terms of total hours of nursing care per patient (including adjustment for case mix and acuity), and as a percentage of nursing staff, and shall be broken down in terms of the total nursing staff, each unit, and each shift.
Numbers of unlicensed personnel utilized to provide direct patient care.
This information shall be expressed both in raw numbers and as a percentage of nursing staff and shall be broken down in terms of the total nursing staff, each unit, and each shift.
The average number of patients per registered nurse providing direct patient care.
This information shall be broken down in terms of the total nursing staff, each unit, and each shift.
Patient mortality rate (in raw numbers and by diagnosis or diagnostic-related group).
Incidence of adverse patient care incidents, including as such incidents at least medication errors, patient injury, decubitus ulcers, nosocomial infections, and nosocomial urinary tract infections.
Methods used for determining and adjusting staffing levels and patient care needs and the provider's compliance with these methods.
Disclosure of Complaints.--Data regarding complaints filed with the State agency, the Health Care Financing Administration, or an accrediting agency, compliance with the standards of which have been deemed to demonstrate compliance with conditions of participation under the medicare program, and data regarding investigations and findings as a result of those complaints and the findings of scheduled inspection visits, shall be made publicly available.
Information on Data.--All data made publicly available under this section shall indicate the source and currency of the data provided.
Waiver for Small Providers.--The Secretary may waive or reduce reporting requirements under this section in the case of a small provider (as defined by the Secretary) for whom the imposition of the requirements would be unduly burdensome.
PROTECTION OF CERTAIN ACTIVITIES BY EMPLOYEES OF MEDICARE PROVIDERS.
In General.--No provider under the medicare program shall terminate or take other adverse action against any employee or groups of employees for actions taken for the purpose of-- (1) notifying the provider of conditions which the employee or group of employees identifies, in communications with the provider, as dangerous or potentially dangerous or injurious to-- (A) patients who currently receive services from the provider; (B) individuals who are likely to receive services from the provider; or (C) employees of the provider; (2) notifying a Federal or State agency or an accreditation agency, compliance with the standards of which have been deemed to demonstrate compliance with conditions of participation under the medicare program, of such conditions as are identified in paragraph (1); (3) notifying other individuals of conditions which the employee or group of employees reasonably believe to be such as are described in paragraph (1); (4) discussing such conditions as are identified in paragraph (1) with other employees for the purposes of initiating action described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3); or (5) other related activities as specified in regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
Sanction.--A determination by the Secretary that a provider has taken such action as described in subsection (a) shall result in termination from participation in the medicare program for a period of time to be specified by the Secretary, such period to be not less than 1 month.
Exception.--The protections of this section shall not apply to any employee who knowingly or recklessly provides substantially false information to the Secretary.
EVALUATION OF HEALTH AND SAFETY OF CERTAIN MERGERS AND ACQUISITIONS BY OR AMONG MEDICARE PROVIDERS.
Impact Report.--Any provider under the medicare program that files with the Department of Justice and the Federal Trade Commission notification of a transaction which is required to be reported pursuant to section 7A of the Clayton Act (15 United States Code 18a) shall, on the same date as such notification is submitted, provide the Secretary with a written report that includes the overall impact of such transaction on the health services available and readily accessible to the community and that includes the impact of such transaction on each of the following: (1) On the availability and accessibility of primary, acute care, and emergency services.
On the availability and accessibility of services for mothers and children.
On the availability and accessibility of services to the elderly.
On the availability and accessibility of services to other specific populations, including the poor, the uninsured, ethnic minorities, women, the disabled, and the lesbian and gay communities.
On the availability and accessibility of specialized services, including services for the prevention, detection, and treatment of the human immunodeficiency virus and related illnesses, mental health services, and substance abuse services.
On the safety and quality of health care services to be provided, including anticipated changes in numbers and mix of nursing and other patient care staff and on other factors related to patient outcomes.
On the availability and accessibility of social services and other services within the community.
On overall employment within the community.
On the provider's workforce, including-- (A) the status of existing collective bargaining contracts, if any; and (B) plans for retraining and redeployment of employees who are displaced as a result of the contemplated transaction.
On the financial stability of the merged entity, taking into account at least projected acquisition costs, related expenses, and planned marketing or advertising campaigns for the new entity.
On other factors to be specified in regulations to be promulgated by the Secretary.
Such report shall be in addition to any documentation required by any other Federal or State agency.
Availability.--A report under subsection (a) shall be made publicly available by the provider and by the Secretary upon request.
In addition, the provider shall make publicly available any documentation submitted to the Department of Justice, the Federal Trade Commission, or other Federal or State agency regarding the contemplated transaction.
Hearings.--The Secretary shall conduct, or arrange for, public hearings on the elements of each report submitted under subsection (a) and any other factors related to the health, safety, and welfare of patients served by the provider and the community involved, including the provider's workforce.
Such hearings shall be held at a time or times and location or locations readily accessible to the public and may be conducted jointly with relevant State agencies.
Review.--The Secretary shall review each such proposed transaction.
Such review shall be based on the written report submitted under subsection (a), a transcript of testimony at the public hearing under subsection (c), and any other factors which the Secretary finds are relevant to the health, safety, and welfare of the patients served by the provider and the community, including the provider's workforce.
Findings.--(1) The Secretary shall, within 45 days of completion of a hearing under subsection (c), issue written findings on the likely impact of the contemplated transaction on the health and safety of the patients and communities served by the provider, including the provider's workforce.
If the Secretary determines that the overall impact of the transaction on the health and safety of patients and the community is a negative one, the Secretary shall issue, as part of the findings, a finding of negative impact on health and safety.
In issuing findings under this subsection, the Secretary may confer with such other agencies (such as the Department of Justice, the Federal Trade Commission, and the Department of Labor) as may have an interest in the impact on the public of the proposed transaction.
Sanctions.--A provider that executes a transaction which is the subject of a finding of negative impact on health and safety under subsection (e)(2) (or a provider which fails to file a report with the Secretary pursuant to subsection (a)) shall be deemed not to be in compliance with the conditions of participation under the medicare program.
Such a determination shall be subject to such procedures and appeal as provided for in regulations promulgated by the Secretary.
In the case of a determination that conditions effected by the transaction in question pose immediate jeopardy or irreparable harm to patient health, safety, and welfare, the Secretary shall (if such transaction is completed) immediately suspend the entity's participation in the medicare program and such suspension shall continue in force during any administrative or judicial review for the transaction sought by the entity.