This Act may be cited as the ``Environmental Professionals Training and Certification Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds: (1) Concern about the environment is growing and environmental issues now affect all aspects of American business and life.
Americans now spend close to $70,000,000,000 annually on environmental-related expenditures.
Business and industry spend approximately $9,000,000,000 annually on various environmental consulting services, including $1,200,000,000 for Phase I Environmental Site Assessments.
There are currently a large number of environmental professionals performing Phase I Environmental Site Assessments who are not properly trained and who do not perform the assessments in a manner consistent with proper environmental standards and guidelines.
Such assessments, therefore, pose a significant danger to the public health, safety, and welfare.
Many organizations issue environmental certifications without properly training or testing the candidates applying for certification.
The Federal Government does not presently have authority to regulate the quality of training and certification programs for environmental professionals and, with very few exceptions, the certification of environmental professionals.
Several organizations provide high quality training in the environmental sciences, and the Federal Government should support these efforts.
Federal oversight is needed to ensure that training and certification of environmental professionals meets certain minimum quality standards which ultimately will serve to protect the public interest.
ENVIRONMENTAL TRAINING AND CERTIFICATION.
Definitions.-- (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The terms ``Phase I Environmental Site Assessment'' and ``ESA'' mean the process by which a person or entity seeks to determine whether a particular parcel of real property is subject to Recognized Environmental Conditions.
These conditions indicate the presence or likely presence of a Hazardous Substance or Petroleum Product on a property under conditions that indicate an existing release, a past release, or a material threat of a release into structures on the property or into the ground, ground water, or surface water of the property.
The term ``Board'' means the Environmental Certification Board'' established under subsection (b).
The term ``Certified Environmental Site Assessor'' means any person receiving certification to perform Phase I ESAs from an Approved Environmental Training and Certification Organization in accordance with this Act.
The term ``Approved Environmental Training and Certification Organization'' means any training and certification organization, public or private, whose curriculum, program, facilities, training, and testing methods have been approved by the Administrator as complying with standards established in accordance with this Act.
The term ``State'' means the 50 States plus the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, Guam, American Samoa, and the United States Virgin Islands.
Establishment of a Program To Regulate Training and Certification of Environmental Site Assessors.--(1) Not later than 60 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall establish a certification advisory board to be known as the ``Environmental Certification Board''.
The Board shall consist of a minimum of 6 members, appointed by the Administrator, with a demonstrated knowledge in the environmental field.
The Board shall include representatives from the Environmental Protection Agency, environmental interest organizations, the chemical/ manufacturing industry, the environmental consulting service industry, the insurance industry, and the banking/investment industry.
All members of the Board shall serve on a voluntary basis, except those members from the Environmental Protection Agency.
The Board shall appoint one member to serve as Chairman who shall exercise the executive and administrative functions of the Board.
Not later than 12 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Board shall issue recommendations to the Administrator which shall include, but not be limited to, recommendations regarding the minimum standards to be established under subsection (c).
Minimum Standards.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall issue regulations, based on the recommendations of the Environmental Certification Board, establishing minimum standards regulating environmental training and certification organizations for environmental professionals performing Phase I Environmental Site Assessments.
The regulations shall include, but not be limited to, minimum standards relating to-- (1) formal environmental training; (2) continuing environmental education; (3) environmental certification and testing procedures; (4) revocation and disciplinary procedures; (5) establishment of a code of ethics; (6) consumer education; (7) certification renewal procedures; and (8) annual reporting of program activities.
Approval and Review of Environmental Training and Certification Organizations.--(1) The Administrator shall review the curriculum, program, facilities, training, and certification methods of each organization desiring to train and certify Phase I Environmental Site Assessors to determine if the curriculum, program, facilities, training, and certification methods are in compliance with the standards set forth in subsection (c).
If an organization's curriculum, program, facilities, training, and certification methods are in compliance with the minimum standards established under subsection (c), the Administrator shall issue a notice that such organization is an Approved Environmental Training and Certification Organization.
This approval shall be valid for a term to be set by the Administrator, but no longer than 5 years.
Enforcement.--(1) No organization may issue a diploma, certification, or any other form of degree signifying that the recipient is a Certified Environmental Site Assessor, or qualified to perform a Phase I Environmental Site Assessment unless that organization has received approval from the Administrator under subsection (d).
The Administrator shall have the power to enjoin any organization found to be in violation of paragraph (1).
Any organization found to be in violation of paragraph (1) shall be liable for civil penalties up to $5,000 per violation.
Any person, corporation, or partnership found to be in violation of paragraph (1) shall be liable for civil penalties up to $1,000 per violation.
The Administrator may periodically, or upon expiration of approval, review the program, curriculum, facilities, and training methods of any Approved Environmental Training and Certification Organization.
If at any time the Administrator finds such organization is no longer in compliance with the standards under subsection (c), the Administrator shall place the organization on probation for a period of 1 year.
If, after the 1-year probationary period, the organization is still not conforming with the standards, the Administrator shall revoke its approval of certification.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to preempt any State from issuing additional or more stringent guidelines and regulations regarding the training of environmental professionals.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Administrator such sums as necessary to carry out the purposes of this Act.