This Act may be cited as the ``Healthy Food for Healthy Lives Act of 2008''.
In this Act: (1) Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means-- (A) an eligible hospital; or (B) an eligible organization.
Eligible hospital.--The term ``eligible hospital'' means-- (A) a medical center or nursing home operated by the Department of Veterans Affairs; or (B) any other nonprofit hospital or other nonprofit inpatient healthcare institution.
Eligible organization.--The term ``eligible organization'' means a social service organization providing nutrition services, including Meals on Wheels.
Eligible product.--The term ``eligible product'' means an agricultural product that-- (A) is offered by a participating vendor; (B) is fresh, dried, frozen, or packaged in a manner that maximizes retention of nutrient density; (C) is grown, stored, or transported in a manner that maximizes retention of nutrient density; and (D) is a locally or regionally produced agricultural food product that is stored and processed locally, and, to the maximum extent practicable, reflects local preferences.
Locally or regionally produced agricultural food product.--The term ``locally or regionally produced agricultural food product'' means any agricultural food product that is raised, produced, and distributed in-- (A) the locality or region in which the final product is marketed, so that the total distance that the product is transported is less than 400 miles from the origin of the product; or (B) the State in which the product is produced.
Participating vendor.-- (A) In general.--The term ``participating vendor'' means a local or regional distributor of eligible products that is approved under section 3(d)(1).
Inclusion.--The term ``participating vendor'' includes an agricultural producer.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
DEMONSTRATION GRANTS FOR HOSPITALS, DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS MEDICAL CENTERS, AND NUTRITION PROGRAMS.
In General.--The Secretary shall establish a program under which the Secretary shall provide demonstration grants to eligible entities to purchase eligible products from participating vendors to improve the availability of nutritious meals from local sources for-- (1) patients of, employees of, and visitors to eligible hospitals; and (2) clients of eligible organizations.
Coordination.--The Secretary shall coordinate the provision of demonstration grants under subsection (a) with-- (1) the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, for purposes of grants to an eligible entity described in section 2(2)(A); and (2) the Secretary of Health and Human Services, for purposes of grants to any other eligible entity.
Agreements.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through any regional procurement offices of the Department of Agriculture that the Secretary determines to be appropriate, shall carry out a program under which the Secretary shall enter into agreements with participating vendors to supply eligible products to eligible entities.
Funds.--Eligible products supplied under an agreement entered into under paragraph (1) shall be purchased by eligible entities using funds that are provided through demonstration grants under this section.
Approval of Participating Vendors.-- (1) In general.--A local or regional distributor of eligible products that seeks to supply eligible products to eligible entities under this section shall apply to the Secretary for approval as a participating vendor.
Conditions for approval.--The Secretary shall approve an application submitted under paragraph (1) if the local or regional distributor of eligible products-- (A) demonstrates the ability to supply eligible products; (B) complies with Federal food safety laws (including regulations); (C) consistently provides products that meet standards of grade, size, freshness, and quality as required by the Secretary or local procurement officer; and (D) demonstrates the ability to supply and purchase eligible products at a fair price from local growers and processors.
Grant Applications.-- (1) Application process.-- (A) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant to purchase eligible products from participating vendors under this section, an eligible entity shall submit to the Secretary an application at such time and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
Priority.--In providing grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible entities with demonstrated commitment to developing organizational food and nutrition policies that incorporate locally or regionally produced agricultural food products.
Additional requirements for eligible organizations.--In addition to the information required under paragraph (1), an eligible organization shall include in a grant application under that paragraph-- (A) certification of the nonprofit status of the eligible organization; and (B) evidence of the demonstrated ability of the eligible organization to provide nutrition services.
Monitoring.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall develop and implement a system for monitoring-- (A) participating vendors; and (B) grants provided under this section.
Certification.--A monitoring system developed under this subsection may include a requirement for a participating vendor to obtain certification in accordance with a program-- (A) that is designed by the Secretary; and (B) under which the Secretary may require payments from participating vendors for the certification process.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated for each of fiscal years 2009 through 2013-- (1) $10,000,000 to provide grants to eligible hospitals described in section 2(2)(A); (2) $10,000,000 to provide grants to eligible hospitals described in section 2(2)(B); and (3) $5,000,000 to provide grants to eligible organizations.
REPORT ON FRESH FOODS IN FEDERALLY FUNDED HEALTH AND SOCIAL SERVICE PROGRAMS.
Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary, in coordination with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the heads of other applicable Federal agencies, shall submit to the appropriate committees of Congress a report that provides recommendations for ways in which-- (1) health care institutions and social service organizations could increase the use of nutritious, local agricultural products in nutrition and food service programs; and (2) the Federal Government could provide technical assistance for and support the activities recommended under paragraph (1).