This Act may be cited as the ``Home and Farm Wind Energy Systems Act of 2006''.
CREDIT FOR WIND ENERGY PROPERTY INSTALLED IN RESIDENCES AND BUSINESSES.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 30A the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to 30 percent (10 percent after December 31, 2015) of the amount paid or incurred by the taxpayer for qualified wind energy property placed in service or installed during such taxable year.
Limitation.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) unless at least 50 percent of the energy produced annually by the qualified wind energy property is consumed on the site on which the property is placed in service or installed.
Qualified Wind Energy Property.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified wind energy property' means a qualifying wind turbine if-- ``(1) such turbine is placed in service or installed on or in connection with property located in the United States, ``(2) in the case of an individual, the property on or in connection with which such turbine is installed is a dwelling unit which is located in the United States, ``(3) the original use of such turbine commences with the taxpayer, and ``(4) such turbine carries at least a 5-year limited warranty covering defects in design, material, or workmanship, and, for property that is not installed by the taxpayer, at least a 5-year limited warranty covering defects in installation.
Other Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualifying wind turbine.--The term `qualifying wind turbine' means a wind turbine of 100 kilowatts of rated capacity or less which meets the latest performance rating standards published by the American Wind Energy Association and which is used to generate electricity.
Principal residence.--The term `principal residence' shall have the same meaning as when used in section 121.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this part (other than under this section and subpart C thereof, relating to refundable credits) and section 1397E.
Carryover of unused credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Tenant-stockholder in cooperative housing corporation.--In the case of an individual who is a tenant- stockholder (as defined in section 216(b)(2)) in a cooperative housing corporation (as defined in section 216(b)(1)), such individual shall be treated as having paid his tenant- stockholder's proportionate share (as defined in section 216(b)(3)) of any expenditures paid or incurred for qualified wind energy property by such corporation, and such credit shall be allocated appropriately to such individual.
Condominiums.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of an individual who is a member of a condominium management association with respect to a condominium which he owns, such individual shall be treated as having paid his proportionate share of expenditures paid or incurred for qualified wind energy property by such association, and such credit shall be allocated appropriately to such individual.
Condominium management association.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `condominium management association' means an organization which meets the requirements of section 528(c)(2) with respect to a condominium project of which substantially all of the units are used by individuals as residences.
Basis Adjustment.--For purposes of this subtitle, if a credit is allowed under this section for any expenditure with respect to a residence or other property, the basis of such residence or other property shall be reduced by the amount of the credit so allowed.
Application of Credit.--The credit allowed under this section shall apply to property placed in service or installed after December 31, 2005.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Subsection (a) of section 1016 of such Code (relating to general rule for adjustments to basis) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (36), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (37) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(38) in the case of a residence or other property with respect to which a credit was allowed under section 30E, to the extent provided in section 30E(g).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 30D the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 2005.