Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to encourage greater cooperation between Department of Defense research and production facilities and United States industry in order to enhance their mutual technological and productive achievements.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Department of Defense research and production facilities possess valuable technological resources that could greatly enhance the innovation and productivity of United States industries.
As leadership in the development of advanced technology increasingly shifts away from the defense sector of the United States economy to the commercial sector, the Department of Defense will have to draw on private sector technical expertise to satisfy defense needs.
Private industry and the Department of Defense have independently identified many of the same technologies as critical for their respective purposes, thereby creating opportunities for the cooperative development and production of dual-use technologies.
Department of Defense production and research facilities currently lack adequate incentives to carry out cooperative development activities with private industry and adequate means of measuring progress toward the goal of developing and producing more dual-use technologies.
Private industry must have more opportunities to provide input into Department of Defense research and production facilities in order for such facilities to undertake more research, development, and production relating to dual-use technologies.
FEDERAL DEFENSE LABORATORY DIVERSIFICATION PROGRAM.
Establishment of Program.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall, as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, establish a program to be known as the Federal Defense Laboratory Diversification Program (in this Act referred to as the ``Program'') for the diversification of Federal defense laboratories.
The laboratories covered by the Program shall include all Department of Defense (including its services and agencies) owned or operated laboratories and Department of Defense federally funded research and development centers that undertake more than $5,000,000 in research (in this Act referred to as the ``Defense laboratories'').
The Program shall be managed by the Director of Defense Research and Engineering.
Nature of Diversification Program Goals.--The Program shall undertake cooperation between Defense laboratories and private industry in order to-- (1) promote the development and application of dual-use manufacturing technologies to improve quality and efficiency in manufacture of both civilian and defense-oriented products; (2) promote the development and commercialization of dual- use product technologies; (3) promote the transfer of defense or dual-use technologies from laboratories to the private sector for the purpose of commercialization, through patent, royalty, and license agreements, cooperative research and development agreements, and other cooperative agreements and through symposia, meetings, and other mechanisms; and (4) promote the efficient adoption and adaptation of civilian manufacturing product and process technologies to defense needs in sectors critical to maintaining defense preparedness.
Development of Benchmarks for Program.--(1) The Director of Research and Engineering, in cooperation with each Defense laboratory and in consultation with private industry, shall develop benchmarks for each category of diversification activity described in subsection (b) for each Defense laboratory covered by this Act.
The benchmarks established shall cover fiscal years 1993 through 1995 and include for each such fiscal year-- (A) the budget resources, manpower, and facilities to be utilized by each laboratory; and (B) the dollar value of patents, royalties, and licenses broken down by product or SIC code to be sought and pursued by each laboratory, in implementing the Program.
In establishing the benchmark under paragraph (1)(A) for all Defense laboratories covered by the Program, the Director shall establish benchmarks concerning the number and value of cooperative research and development agreements and other cooperative agreements to be established and undertaken, allocating, as appropriate, a minimum of two to five percent of budget to such cooperative work within two years of the establishment of the Program.
Program benchmarks shall be established not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Upon establishment of the benchmarks, each Defense laboratory shall promptly proceed to implement same within its overall budget and utilizing other funds that may be available for implementation of this Act.
Benchmarks shall be updated each fiscal year on an ongoing basis.
Industry Cooperation Mechanisms.--Each Defense laboratory participating in the Program shall establish an industry and academic advisory panel to promote cooperation between the laboratory and the private sector in carrying out the Program.
Each laboratory shall utilize its panel to oversee the development of each year's research plan and the implementation of the Program and its benchmarks and to provide advice on how to enhance the dual-use properties of the laboratory's research work on a project-by-project basis.
Reports by Director.--(1) Not later than September 30, 1993, the Director of Research and Engineering shall submit to Congress a report on-- (A) the results of a survey undertaken by the Director delineating the nature of the research being undertaken at each laboratory included in the Program, evaluating the potential of each laboratory included in the Program to achieve the elements specified in subsection (b); and (B) recommendations on how each such laboratory might become better oriented to achieving such Program elements.
Not later than each of September 30 of 1994, 1995, and 1996, the Director shall submit to Congress a report on-- (1) the extent to which each laboratory participating in the Program has effectively implemented the benchmarks established by the Program; (2) the accomplishments under the Program in achieving the elements described in subsection (b); and (3) the steps the Director believes necessary to improve the effectiveness of the Program.
In General.--The Director of the Office of Technology Assessment shall, subject to the approval of the Technology Assessment Board, undertake, in close consultation with industrial firms that have cooperated and worked with Federal laboratories, an evaluation of practices and procedures that have proven effective in promoting the elements of the Program set forth in section 1(b), both in laboratories covered by the Program and elsewhere.
Additional Evaluation.--In addition to the evaluation under subsection (a), the Director shall-- (1) evaluate the effectiveness of the Program in achieving optimal cooperation with private industry in meeting the elements set forth in section 1(b); and (2) make recommendations for any improvements in practices and procedures for cooperating with industry that should be implemented.
Submittal Date.--The evaluations required under this section shall be submitted not later than 24 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Utilization of Report Information.--The Director of Research and Engineering shall utilize the recommendations and results of such study in ongoing implementation of the Program.