DIRECTOR OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS.
Establishment.--Chapter 4 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Director of Criminal Investigations ``(a) Appointment.--There is a Director of Criminal Investigations who is appointed by the Secretary of Defense from among civilians who have a significant level of experience in criminal investigations.
The Director reports directly to the Secretary of Defense.
Senior Executive Service Position.--The position of Director of Criminal Investigations is a Senior Executive Service position.
The Secretary shall designate the position as a career reserved position under section 3132(b) of title 5.
Duties.--Subject to the authority, direction, and control of the Secretary of Defense, the Director of Criminal Investigations shall perform the duties set forth in this section and such other related duties as the Secretary may prescribe.
Data Compilation and Reporting.--(1) The Director shall obtain, compile, store, monitor, and (in accordance with this section) report information on each allegation of sexual misconduct of a member of the armed forces or of a dependent of a member of the armed forces against a member of the armed forces or against a dependent of a member of the armed forces that is received by a member of the armed forces or an officer or employee of the Department of Defense in the official capacity of that member, officer, or employee.
The information compiled pursuant to paragraph (1) shall include the following: ``(A) The number of complaints containing an allegation referred to in paragraph (1) that are received as described in that paragraph.
The number of such complaints that are investigated.
In the case of each complaint-- ``(i) the organization that investigated the complaint (if investigated); ``(ii) the disposition of the complaint upon completion or other termination of the investigation; and ``(iii) the status or results of any judicial action, nonjudicial disciplinary action, or other adverse action taken.
The number of complaints that were disposed of by formal adjudication in a judicial proceeding, including-- ``(i) the number disposed of in a court-martial; ``(ii) the number disposed of in a court of the United States; ``(iii) the number disposed of in a court of a State or territory of the United States or in a court of a political subdivision of a State or territory of the United States; ``(iv) the number disposed of by a plea of guilty; ``(v) the number disposed of by trial on a contested basis; and ``(vi) the number disposed of on any other basis.
The number of complaints that were disposed of by formal adjudication in an administrative proceeding.
The Director shall make the information obtained and compiled under this subsection available to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretaries of the military departments, Congress, any law enforcement agency concerned, and any court concerned.
Direct Investigations.--The Director shall investigate each allegation of sexual misconduct referred to in subsection (d) that-- ``(1) is made directly, or referred, to the Director, including such an allegation that is made or referred to the Director by-- ``(A) a commander of a member of the armed forces alleged to have engaged in the sexual misconduct or to have been the victim of the sexual misconduct; ``(B) an investigative organization of the Department of Defense; or ``(C) a victim of the alleged misconduct who is a member of the armed forces or a dependent of a member of the armed forces; or ``(2) the Secretary directs the Director to investigate.
Oversight and Quality Control of Other Investigations.--(1) The Director shall monitor the conduct of investigations by units, offices, agencies, and other organizations within the Department of Defense regarding allegations of sexual misconduct.
In carrying out paragraph (1), the Director may inspect any investigation conducted or being conducted by any other organization within the Department of Defense, review the records of an investigation, and observe the conduct of an ongoing investigation.
The Director may report to the Secretary on any investigation monitored pursuant to in paragraph (1).
The report may include the status of the investigation, an evaluation of the conduct of the investigation, and an evaluation of each investigator and the investigative organization involved in the investigation.
Powers.--In the performance of the duties set forth or authorized in this section, the Director shall have the following powers: ``(1) To have access to all records, reports, audits, reviews, documents, papers, recommendations, or other material available in the Department of Defense which relate to the duties of the Director.
To request such information or assistance as may be necessary for carrying out the Director's duties from any Federal, State, or local governmental agency or unit thereof.
To require by subpoena the production of all information, documents, reports, answers, records, accounts, papers, and other data and documentary evidence necessary in the performance of the Director's duties, which subpoena, in the case of contumacy or refusal to obey, shall be enforceable by order of any appropriate United States district court.
To serve subpoenas, summons, and any judicial process related to the performance of any of the Director's duties.
To administer to or take from any person an oath, affirmation, or affidavit whenever necessary in the performance of the Director's duties, which oath, affirmation, or affidavit when administered or taken by or before an employee designated by the Director shall have the same force and effect as if administered or taken by or before an officer having a seal.
To have direct and prompt access to the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of a military department, and any commander when necessary for any purpose pertaining to the performance of the Director's duties.
To obtain for any victim of sexual misconduct referred to in subsection (d)(1), from any facility of the uniformed services or any other health care facility of the Federal Government or, by contract, from any other source, medical services and counseling and other mental health services appropriate for treating or investigating-- ``(A) injuries resulting from the sexual misconduct; and ``(B) other mental and physiological results of the sexual misconduct.
Referrals for Prosecution.--(1) The Director may refer any case of sexual misconduct described in subsection (d)(1) to-- ``(A) a United States Attorney, or another appropriate official in the Department of Justice, for prosecution; or ``(B) to an appropriate commander within the armed forces for action under chapter 47 of this title (the Uniform Code of Military Justice) or other appropriate action.
The Director shall report each such referral to the Secretary of Defense.
Staff.--(1) The Director shall have-- ``(A) a staff of investigators who have extensive experience in criminal investigations; ``(B) a staff of attorneys sufficient to provide the Director, the criminal investigators, and the Director's other staff personnel with legal counsel necessary for the performance of the duties of the Director; ``(C) a staff of counseling referral specialists; and ``(D) such other staff as is necessary for the performance of the Director's duties.
To the maximum extent practicable, the staff of the Director shall be generally representative of the population of the United States with regard to race, gender, and cultural diversity.
Reports to Director.--Each Member of the Armed Forces and each officer or employee of the Department of Defense who, in the official capacity of that member, officer, or employee, receives an allegation of sexual misconduct shall submit to the Director a notification of that allegation together with such information as the Director may require for the purpose of carrying out the Director's duties.
Annual Report on Sexual Misconduct.--The Secretary of Defense shall submit to Congress an annual report on the number and disposition of cases of sexual misconduct by members of the Armed Forces and officers and employees of the Department of Defense.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `sexual misconduct' includes the following: ``(A) Sexual harassment, including any conduct involving sexual harassment that-- ``(i) in the case of conduct of a person who is subject to the provisions of chapter 47 of this title (the Uniform Code of Military Justice), comprises a violation of a provision of subchapter X of such chapter (relating to the punitive articles of such Code) or an applicable regulation, directive, or guideline regarding sexual harassment that is prescribed by the Secretary of Defense or the Secretary of a military department; and ``(ii) in the case of an employee of the Department of Defense or a dependent subject to the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Defense or of the Secretary of a military department, comprises a violation of a regulation, directive, or guideline referred to in clause (i) that is applicable to such employee or dependent.
The term `complaint', with respect to an allegation of sexual misconduct, includes a report of such allegation.''.
Table of Sections.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 4 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``142.
Director of Special Investigations.''.
CRIMINAL FAILURE TO REPORT SEXUAL MISCONDUCT.
Offenses.--Chapter 109A of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating section 2245 as section 2246; (2) by inserting after section 2244 the following new section: ``Sec.
Failure to report sexual misconduct ``(a) Failure To Act on Allegation of Criminal Sexual Misconduct.-- An officer or employee of the Department of Defense or a member of the Armed Forces of the United States who, in the official capacity of the officer, employee, or member-- ``(1) receives an allegation of criminal sexual misconduct of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or of a dependent of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States against a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or against a dependent of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States; ``(2) is required by law to initiate an investigation of, or to determine whether to take disciplinary action in the case of, the allegation; and ``(3) fails to submit a notification of the allegation to the Director of Criminal Investigations of the Department of Defense and to the immediate employment supervisor or immediate commander, as the case may be, of the alleged offender, shall be imprisoned not more than 10 years, fined under this title, or both.
Failure To Act on Allegation of Civil Sexual Misconduct.--An officer or employee of the Department of Defense or a member of the Armed Forces of the United States who, in the official capacity of the officer, employee, or member-- ``(1) receives an allegation of civil sexual misconduct of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or of a dependent of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States against a member of the Armed Forces of the United States or against a dependent of a member of the Armed Forces of the United States; ``(2) is required by law to initiate an investigation of, or to determine whether to take disciplinary action in the case of, the allegation; and ``(3) fails to submit a notification of the allegation to the Director of Criminal Investigations of the Department of Defense and to the immediate employment supervisor or immediate commander, as the case may be, of the alleged offender, shall be imprisoned not more than 1 year, fined under this title, or both.
''; and (3) in section 2246, as redesignated by paragraph (1)-- (A) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2); (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting a semicolon; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(6) the term `criminal sexual misconduct' means engaging in a sexual act or sexual contact in circumstances such that the act or conduct constitutes a criminal offense under this chapter, other Federal law, or State law; and ``(7) the term `civil sexual misconduct' means engaging in a sexual act, sexual conduct, or other activity of a sexual nature in violation of a statute, rule, order, or other lawful authority that prohibits the activity but does not authorize imposition of a sentence of imprisonment for a violation.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by striking the item relating to section 2245 and inserting the following: ``2245.
Failure to report sexual misconduct.
Performance Evaluations and Benefits.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe in regulations a requirement that the commitment of an officer or employee of the Department of Defense and a member of the Armed Forces of the United States to the elimination of sexual harassment in the officer's, employee's, or member's place of work or duty and at installations and other facilities of the Department of Defense be one of the factors considered in-- (A) the preparation of the evaluations of the officer's, employee's, or member's performance of work or duties; (B) the determination of the appropriateness of a promotion of the officer, employee, or member; and (C) the determination of the appropriateness of selecting the officer, employee, or member to receive a financial award for performance of work or duties.
The Secretary shall submit to Congress an annual report on the implementation of the regulations required by paragraph (1).
The report shall contain an assessment of the effects of the implementation of such regulations on the number, extent, and seriousness of the cases of sexual harassment in the Department of Defense.
The annual report under this paragraph shall be separate from the annual report required by section 142(k) of title 10, United States Code, as added by section 1.
Eligibility for Promotions and Awards.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of the military department concerned may not approve for presentation of a financial award for performance of work or duties or for promotion any officer or employee of the Department of Defense or any member of the Armed Forces of the United States who-- (1) has been convicted of a criminal offense involving sexual misconduct; or (2) has received any other disciplinary action or adverse personnel action on the basis of having engaged in sexual misconduct.
PROTECTION OF PERSONS REPORTING SEXUAL HARASSMENT.
Regulations of the Secretary of Defense.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe regulations that prohibit officers and employees of the Department of Defense from retaliating or taking any adverse personnel action against any other officer or employee of the Department of Defense or any member of the Armed Forces of the United States for reporting sexual misconduct by an officer or employee of the Department of Defense or a member of the Armed Forces or for providing information in an investigation, disciplinary action, or adverse personnel action in the case of an allegation of sexual misconduct by any other such officer, employee, or member.
The regulations shall include sanctions for violation of the regulations.
Regulations of a Secretary of a Military Department.--(1) The Secretary of each military department shall prescribe regulations that prohibit members of the Armed Forces of the United States under the jurisdiction of that Secretary from retaliating or taking any adverse personnel action against any officer or employee of the Department of Defense or any member of the Armed Forces of the United States for reporting sexual misconduct by any other officer or employee of the Department of Defense or any other member of the Armed Forces or for providing information in an investigation, disciplinary action, or adverse personnel action in the case of an allegation of sexual misconduct by any other such officer, employee, or member.
A violation of the regulations prescribed pursuant to paragraph (1) shall be punishable under section 892 of title 10, United States Code (article 92 of the Uniform Code of Military Justice).
In this Act, the term ``sexual misconduct'' has the meaning given that term in section 142(l) of title 10, United States Code, as added by section 1.