This Act may be cited as the ``Pre-K for USA Act''.
GRANTS FOR IMPROVING EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND EDUCATION.
Subpart 1 of part D of title V of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7243 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
GRANTS FOR IMPROVING EARLY CHILDHOOD CARE AND EDUCATION.
In General.--From the amounts appropriated under subsection (f), the Secretary jointly with the Secretary of Health and Human Services and on such terms as such Secretaries set forth in an interagency agreement, shall make competitive grants to qualified entities for activities that build the capacity to develop, enhance, or expand high-quality preschool programs, including comprehensive services and family engagement, for preschool-aged children.
Applications.--Each qualified entity that desires to receive a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Secretaries at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretaries may require.
Technical Assistance, Evaluation, and Other National Activities.--The Secretaries may use up to 3 percent of the funds appropriated under subsection (f) for technical assistance, evaluation, and other national activities related to awarding grants under this section.
Report.-- ``(1) Initial report.--Not later than 30 days prior to the announcement of a competition under this section, the Secretaries shall submit a report outlining the proposed competition and priorities to the Congress on the activities carried out under this section.
Annual reports.--The Secretaries shall submit a report to Congress on the activities carried out under this section, including, at a minimum, information on the following: ``(A) The progress of each qualified entity in moving toward fulfilling criteria outlined in the entity's application.
The extent to which the qualified entities used grants under this section to expand a high-quality preschool program.
The costs and barriers to such expansion, including building and renovating preschool facilities so that such facilities are high-quality and age and developmentally appropriate.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) High-quality preschool program.--The term `high- quality preschool program' means an early learning program that includes structural elements that are evidence-based and nationally recognized (such as Head Start program performance standards or research published by the National Institute for Early Education) as important for ensuring program quality, including at a minimum: ``(A) High staff qualifications, including a teacher with a bachelor degree in early childhood education or a bachelor degree in any field with a State-approved alternate pathway, which may include coursework, clinical practice, and evidence of knowledge of content and pedagogy relating to early childhood, and teaching assistants with appropriate credentials.
High-quality professional development for all staff.
A staff-child ratio of no more than 1:10.
A class size of no more than 20.
Full inclusion of children with disabilities.
Developmentally appropriate, evidence-based curricula and learning environments that are aligned with the State early learning and development standards, for at least the year prior to kindergarten entry.
Individualized accommodations and supports so that all children can access and participate fully in learning activities.
Instructional staff salaries comparable to kindergarten through grade 12 teaching staff.
Program evaluation to ensure continuous improvement.
Onsite or accessible comprehensive services for children.
Evidence-based health and safety standards.
Qualified entity.--The term `qualified entity' means a local educational agency or a local government entity.
Secretaries.--The term `Secretaries' means the Secretary of Education and the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this section for each of the fiscal years 2015 through 2024.''.
The table of contents in section 2 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 5414 the following: ``Sec.
Grants for improving early childhood care and education.