This Act may be cited as the ``Omnibus Nuclear Power Safety and Security Enhancement Act of 1993''.
Section 206 of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5846) is amended to read as follows: ``noncompliance ``Sec.
Any person constructing, owning, operating, or supplying a component of any facility or activity which is licensed or otherwise regulated by the Commission pursuant to the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (including any facility leased by the United States Enrichment Corporation), or pursuant to this Act, who obtains information reasonably indicating that such facility or activity or basic component supplied to such facility or activity-- ``(1) contains a defect; or ``(2) fails to comply with the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 or any applicable rule, regulation, order, or license of the Commission; shall immediately notify the Commission of such defect or failure to comply if such defect or failure to comply could create a substantial safety hazard as defined by the regulations promulgated by the Commission, unless such person has actual knowledge that the Commission has been informed in writing of such defect or failure to comply.
The Commission may issue such regulations and orders as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with this section, including regulations and orders requiring any person subject to this section to devise and implement procedures to identify, evaluate, and report defects and failures to comply subject to the notification requirements of subsection (a).
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), any person who fails to provide a notification required by subsection (a), or who violates any regulation or order issued under subsection (b), shall be subject to a civil penalty in the same manner and amount as provided for violations subject to a civil penalty under section 234 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2282).
An individual who is subject to the requirements of this section solely because of employment by a person subject to those requirements shall only be assessed a civil penalty for failure to provide notice pursuant to subsection (a) if such individual has actual knowledge of the reporting requirement imposed by subsection (a) and of a defect as provided in subsection (a)(1) or of a failure of compliance as provided in subsection (a)(2).
The requirements of this section shall be preeminently posted on the business premises of any person who is required to notify the Commission of a defect or failure to comply under subsection (a).
The Commission may conduct such reasonable inspections, investigations, and other enforcement activities as it deems necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this section and with any regulations and orders issued thereunder.
For purposes of this section, the term `person' has the same meaning as in section 11 s. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2014(s)), except that-- ``(1) it also includes the Department of Energy with respect to facilities of the Department regulated by the Commission and with respect to any item provided by the Department as a component to a licensee; and ``(2) it does not include an individual unless he or she is-- ``(A) a sole proprietor or partner of a business that constructs, owns, operates, or supplies a component covered by subsection (a) of this section; or ``(B) a director or responsible officer employed by a person subject to that subsection.
This section shall apply to the United States Enrichment Corporation and facilities leased by the Corporation, and to its directors and officers, to the same extent as any other person subject to this section.''.
CIVIL MONETARY PENALTIES FOR VIOLATIONS OF RULES, REGULATIONS, ORDERS, OR LICENSING REQUIREMENTS.
In General.--Section 234 a. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2282(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``a.
Any person who-- ``(1) violates-- ``(A) any licensing provision of section 53, 57, 62, 63, 81, 82, 101, 103, 104, 107, or 109, or any rule, regulation, or order issued thereunder; ``(B) the certification provisions of section 1701, or any rule or regulation issued thereunder; ``(C) any term, condition, or limitation of any license or certification issued under any section referred to in subparagraph (A) or (B); or ``(D) any rule, regulation, or order issued under subsection b., i., or o. of section 161; or ``(2) commits any violation for which a license may be revoked under section 186; shall be subject to a civil penalty, to be imposed by the Commission, of not to exceed $100,000 for each such violation.
If any violation is a continuing one, each day of such violation shall constitute a separate violation for the purpose of computing the applicable civil penalty.
The Commission shall have the power to compromise, mitigate, or remit such penalties.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The heading of section 234 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2282) is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Civil Monetary Penalties for Violations of Rules, Regulations, Orders, or Licensing Requirements.--''.
The table of contents of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2011 prec.)
is amended by striking the item relating to section 234 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Civil monetary penalties for violations of rules, regulations, orders, or licensing requirements.''.
ADVISORY COMMITTEE ON REACTOR SAFEGUARDS.
Section 29 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2039) is amended by striking the last 2 sentences.
CARRYING OF FIREARMS BY LICENSEE EMPLOYEES.
Section 161 k. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2201(k)) is amended-- (1) in the 1st complete sentence, by inserting ``and licensees (including employees of contractors of licensees)'' after ``(at any tier)''; (2) in the 1st complete sentence, by striking ``owned by or contracted to the United States or being transported to or from such facilities'' and inserting the following: ``owned by or contracted to the United States or licensed by the Commission, or being transported to or from such facilities,''; (3) in the 4th complete sentence, by inserting ``or a licensee of the Commission'' after ``or a contractor of the Department of Energy or Nuclear Regulatory Commission''; and (4) in the last sentence, by inserting ``and the Commission'' after ``The Secretary''.
UNAUTHORIZED INTRODUCTION OF DANGEROUS WEAPONS.
Section 229 a. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2278a(a)) is amended by inserting after ``custody of the Commission'' the following: ``or subject to its licensing authority under this Act or any other Act''.
SABOTAGE OF PRODUCTION, UTILIZATION, OR WASTE STORAGE FACILITIES UNDER CONSTRUCTION.
Section 236 a. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2284(a)) is amended to read as follows: ``a.
Any person who intentionally and willfully destroys or causes physical damage to, or who intentionally and willfully attempts to destroy or cause physical damage to-- ``(1) any production facility or utilization facility licensed under this Act; ``(2) any nuclear waste storage facility licensed under this Act; ``(3) any production, utilization, or waste storage facility subject to licensing under this Act during its construction where the destruction or damage caused or attempted to be caused could affect public health and safety during the operation of the facility; ``(4) any nuclear fuel for a utilization facility licensed under this Act, or any spent nuclear fuel from such a facility; or ``(5) any uranium enrichment facility regulated by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission; shall be fined not more than $10,000 or imprisoned for not more than 10 years, or both.''.
Section 161 c. of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2201(c)) is amended to read as follows: ``c. (1) Make such studies and investigations, obtain such information, and hold such meetings or hearings as the Commission may deem necessary or proper to assist it in exercising any authority provided in this Act, or in the administration or enforcement of this Act, or any regulations or orders issued thereunder.
For such purposes the Commission is authorized-- ``(A) to administer oaths and affirmations; ``(B) by subpoena, to require any person to appear and testify or appear and produce documents, or both, at any designated place; ``(C) to conduct searches without a warrant of the premises of applicants, licensees, and other persons subject to section 206 of the Energy Reorganization Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5846); and ``(D) by judicially approved, administrative search warrant, to enter at reasonable times premises under the control of any person not covered by subparagraph (C) who is subject to the Commission's jurisdiction.
Before a warrant is issued pursuant to paragraph (1)(D), the Commission shall establish that it has a reasonable suspicion that a violation of a Federal statute or a Commission regulatory requirement has been or will be committed.
A search pursuant to such a warrant shall be effected only for purposes directly related to the basis for the warrant, and each such search shall be commenced and completed with reasonable promptness.
Witnesses subpoenaed pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) shall be paid the same fees and mileage as are paid witnesses in the district courts of the United States.