This Act may be cited as the ``School Capacity Relief Act''.
TRANSFER OF STUDENTS TO SCHOOLS AT OR ABOVE CAPACITY.
In General.--Paragraph (1) of section 1116(b) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6316(b)(1)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (E)(i), by striking ``In the case of a school'' and inserting ``Subject to clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (F), in the case of a school''; and (2) in subparagraph (F)-- (A) by striking ``(F) Transfer.--Students who use'' and inserting the following: ``(F) Transfer.-- ``(i) In general.--Students who use''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(ii) Transfer to school above capacity.-- Subject to the right of a child who has been transferred to another school under this subsection to remain in that school under paragraph (13), a local educational agency may prohibit the transfer under subparagraph (E), paragraph (5)(A), (7)(C)(i), or (8)(A)(i), or subsection (c)(10)(C)(vii), of any student to a school served by the agency, if the agency determines (for purposes of the school year at issue) that the school is at or above capacity or that the transfer of an additional student would increase the average class size of the school above the average class size prescribed by the State.
No mandatory increase of capacity.--A local educational agency may not be required to increase the capacity of any school served by the agency for the purpose of transferring any student to that school under subparagraph (E), paragraph (5)(A), (7)(C)(i), or (8)(A)(i), or subsection (c)(10)(C)(vii).''.
Cooperative Agreement.--Paragraph (11) of section 1116(b) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6316(b)(11)) is amended to read as follows: ``(11) Cooperative agreement.--In any case described in paragraph (1)(E), (5)(A), (7)(C)(i), or (8)(A)(i), or subsection (c)(10)(C)(vii), if all public schools served by the local educational agency to which a child may transfer are identified for school improvement, corrective action, or restructuring, or are determined by the agency to be at or above capacity or otherwise ineligible for a transfer under paragraph (1)(F)(ii), the agency shall, to the extent practicable, establish a cooperative agreement with other local educational agencies in the area for a transfer.''.
GRANTS FOR INCREASING SCHOOL CAPACITY.
Grants.--Title IV of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7101 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART D--INCREASING SCHOOL CAPACITY ``SEC.
Authority.--The Secretary may award grants to eligible local educational agencies for the purpose of increasing capacity at high- performance schools.
Use of Funds.--The Secretary may not make a grant under this section unless the eligible local educational agency involved agrees that the agency will use the funds received under the grant only for measures to increase the capacity of high-performance schools served by that agency.
Such measures may include renovating or constructing facilities at the high-performance school involved, hiring teachers to teach at such school, or purchasing instructional materials for use at such school.
Application.--To seek a grant under this section, an eligible local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
``For purposes of this part: ``(1) The term `eligible local educational agency' means a local educational agency with a high percentage or number of students at schools identified for school improvement, corrective action, or restructuring under section 1116(b).
The term `high-performance school' means a school that is not identified for school improvement, corrective action, or restructuring under section 1116(b).
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 2004 through 2007.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents at section 2 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 4304 the following: ``Part D--Increasing School Capacity ``Sec.
ESTABLISHMENT OF LIMITS ON DURATION OR DISTANCE OF TRANSPORTATION PROVIDED TO TRANSFERRING STUDENTS.
Paragraph (9) of section 1116(b) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6316(b)(9)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, unless the agency establishes a limit on the duration or distance of transportation to be provided or paid for under this paragraph and determines that transporting the student would exceed such limit.