TITLE I--HOMELESS VETERANS MATTERS SECTION 101.
This Act may be cited as the ``Helping Homeless Heroes Act of 2011''.
ENHANCEMENT OF COMPREHENSIVE SERVICE PROGRAMS.
Enhancement of Grants.--Section 2011 of title 38, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)(1)(A), by striking ``expansion, remodeling, or alteration of existing facilities, or acquisition of facilities,'' and inserting ``new construction of facilities, expansion, remodeling, or alteration of existing facilities, or acquisition of facilities''; and (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) in the first sentence, by striking ``A grant'' and inserting ``(1) A grant''; (B) in the second sentence of paragraph (1), as designated by subparagraph (A), by striking ``The amount'' and inserting the following: ``(2) The amount''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3)(A) The Secretary may not deny an application from an entity that seeks a grant under this section to carry out a project described in subsection (b)(1)(A) solely on the basis that the entity proposes to use funding from other private or public sources, if the entity demonstrates that a private nonprofit organization will provide oversight and site control for the project.
In this paragraph, the term `private nonprofit organization' means the following: ``(i) An incorporated private institution, organization, or foundation-- ``(I) that has received, or has temporary clearance to receive, tax- exempt status under paragraph (2), (3), or (19) of section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; ``(II) for which no part of the net earnings of the institution, organization, or foundation inures to the benefit of any member, founder, or contributor of the institution, organization, or foundation; and ``(III) that the Secretary determines is financially responsible.
A for-profit limited partnership or limited liability company, the sole general partner or manager of which is an organization that is described by subclauses (I) through (III) of clause (i).
A corporation wholly owned and controlled by an organization that is described by subclauses (I) through (III) of clause (i).''.
Grant and Per Diem Payments.-- (1) Study and development of fiscal controls and payment method.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall-- (A) complete a study of all matters relating to the method used by the Secretary to make per diem payments under section 2012(a) of title 38, United States Code; and (B) develop an improved method for adequately reimbursing recipients of grants under section 2011 of such title for services furnished to homeless veterans.
Consideration.--In developing the method required by paragraph (1)(B), the Secretary may consider payments and grants received by recipients of grants described in such paragraph from other departments and agencies of Federal and local governments and from private entities.
Report.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on-- (A) the findings of the Secretary with respect to the study required by subparagraph (A) of paragraph (1); (B) the method developed under subparagraph (B) of such paragraph; and (C) any recommendations of the Secretary for revising the method described in subparagraph (A) of such paragraph and any legislative action the Secretary considers necessary to implement such method.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 2013 of such title is amended by striking ``subchapter'' and all that follows through the period and inserting the following: ``subchapter amounts as follows: ``(1) $150,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2007 through 2009.
$175,100,000 for fiscal year 2010.
$217,700,000 for fiscal year 2011.
$250,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.
$150,000,000 for fiscal year 2013 and each fiscal year thereafter.''.
MODIFICATION OF GRANT PROGRAM FOR HOMELESS VETERANS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS.
Inclusion of Entities Eligible for Comprehensive Service Program Grants and Per Diem Payments for Services to Homeless Veterans.--Subsection (a) of section 2061 of such title is amended-- (1) by striking ``to grant and per diem providers'' and inserting ``to entities eligible for grants and per diem payments under sections 2011 and 2012 of this title''; and (2) by striking ``by those facilities and providers'' and inserting ``by those facilities and entities''.
Inclusion of Male Homeless Veterans With Minor Dependents.-- Subsection (b) of such section is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by striking ``, including women who have care of minor dependents''; (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``or''; (3) in paragraph (4), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; or''; and (4) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) individuals who have care of minor dependents.''.
Authorization of Provision of Services to Dependents.--Such section is further amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); and (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection (c): ``(c) Provision of Services to Dependents.--A recipient of a grant under subsection (a) may use amounts under the grant to provide services directly to a dependent of a homeless veteran with special needs who is under the care of such homeless veteran while such homeless veteran receives services from the grant recipient under this section.''.
MODIFICATION OF AUTHORITY FOR PROVISION OF TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION TO CERTAIN VETERANS TO INCLUDE PROVISION OF TREATMENT AND REHABILITATION TO HOMELESS VETERANS WHO ARE NOT SERIOUSLY MENTALLY ILL.
Section 2031(a) of such title is amended in the matter before paragraph (1) by striking ``, including'' and inserting ``and to''.
PLAN TO END VETERAN HOMELESSNESS.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall submit to Congress a comprehensive plan to end homelessness among veterans.
Elements.--The plan required by subsection (a) shall include the following: (1) An analysis of programs of the Department of Veterans Affairs and other departments and agencies of the Federal Government that are designed to prevent homelessness among veterans and assist veterans who are homeless.
An evaluation of whether and how coordination between the programs described in paragraph (1) would contribute to ending homelessness among veterans.
Recommendations for improving the programs described in paragraph (1), enhancing coordination between such programs, or eliminating programs that are no longer effective.
Recommendations for new programs to prevent and end homelessness among veterans, including an estimate of the cost of such programs.
A timeline for implementing the plan, including milestones to track the implementation of the plan.
Benchmarks to measure the effectiveness of the plan and the efforts of the Secretary to implement the plan.
Such other matters as the Secretary considers necessary.
Consideration of Veterans Located in Rural Areas.--The analysis, evaluation, and recommendations included in the report required by subsection (a) shall include consideration of the circumstances and requirements that are unique to veterans located in rural areas.
EXTENSION OF CERTAIN AUTHORITIES RELATING TO HOMELESS VETERANS.
Health Care for Homeless Veterans.--Section 2031(b) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by striking ``December 31, 2011'' and inserting ``December 31, 2012''.
Centers for Provision of Comprehensive Services to Homeless Veterans.--Section 2033(d) of such title is amended by striking ``December 31, 2011'' and inserting ``December 31, 2014''.
Property Transfers for Housing Assistance for Homeless Veterans.--Section 2041(c) of such title is amended by striking ``December 31, 2011'' and inserting ``December 31, 2014''.
Advisory Committee on Homeless Veterans.--Section 2066(d) of such title is amended by striking ``December 30, 2011'' and inserting ``December 30, 2013''.
REAUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR HOMELESS VETERANS REINTEGRATION PROGRAM.
Section 2021(e)(1) of such title is amended adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(G) $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.''.
REAUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE FOR SUPPORTIVE SERVICES FOR VERY LOW-INCOME VETERAN FAMILIES IN PERMANENT HOUSING.
In General.--Section 2044(e) of such title is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1), by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(D) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2012.
''; and (2) in paragraph (3), by striking ``2011'' and inserting ``2012''.
Technical Amendment.--Paragraph (1) of such subsection is further amended by striking ``carry out subsection (a), (b), and (c)'' and inserting ``carry out subsections (a), (b), and (c)''.
REAUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS FOR GRANT PROGRAM FOR HOMELESS VETERANS WITH SPECIAL NEEDS.
Section 2061(c)(1) of such title is amended by striking ``2011'' and inserting ``2013''.