This Act may be cited as the ``Alcohol Abuse Prevention and Treatment Trust Fund Act of 1999''.
ALCOHOL ABUSE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT TRUST FUND.
General Rule.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to establishment of trust funds) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ALCOHOL ABUSE PREVENTION AND TREATMENT TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Alcohol Abuse Prevention and Treatment Trust Fund' (in this section referred to as `Trust Fund'), consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to the Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the additional taxes received in the Treasury under chapter 51 by reason of the amendments made by section 3 of the Alcohol Abuse Prevention and Treatment Trust Fund Act of 1999 and the additional taxes received in the Treasury by reason of section 3(d) of such Act.
Expenditures From Trust Fund.--Amounts in the Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, for appropriation to the National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism and to the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration for programs for the prevention and treatment of alcoholism and for research on the causes, consequences, prevention, and treatment of the health problems related to alcohol use, including high blood pressure, stroke, heart disease, cancer (including breast cancer), and birth defects.''
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Alcohol Abuse Prevention and Treatment Trust Fund.''
INCREASE IN EXCISE TAXES ON WINE TO ALCOHOLIC EQUIVALENT OF TAXES ON DISTILLED SPIRITS.
In General.-- (1) Wines containing not more than 14 percent alcohol.-- Paragraph (1) of section 5041(b) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to rates of tax on wines) is amended by striking ``$1.07'' and inserting ``$2.97''.
Wines containing more than 14 (but not more than 21) percent alcohol.--Paragraph (2) of section 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``$1.57'' and inserting ``$4.86''.
Wines containing more than 21 (but not more than 24) percent alcohol.--Paragraph (3) of section 5041(b) of such Code is amended by striking ``$3.15'' and inserting ``$6.08''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on October 1, 1999.
Floor Stocks Taxes.-- (1) Imposition of tax.-- (A) In general.--In the case of any tax-increased article-- (i) on which tax was determined under part I of subchapter A of chapter 51 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 or section 7652 of such Code before October 1, 1999, and (ii) which is held on such date for sale by any person, there shall be imposed a tax at the applicable rate on each such article.
Applicable rate.--For purposes of clause (i), the applicable rate is-- (i) $1.90 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph (1) of section 5041(b) of such Code, (ii) $3.29 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph (2) of section 5041(b) of such Code, and (iii) $2.93 per wine gallon in the case of wine described in paragraph (3) of section 5041(b) of such Code.
In the case of a fraction of a gallon, the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be the same fraction of the amount of such tax imposed on a whole gallon.
Tax-increased article.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``tax-increased article'' means wine described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of section 5041(b) of such Code.
Exception for certain small wholesale or retail dealers.--No tax shall be imposed by paragraph (1) on tax- increased articles held on October 1, 1999, by any dealer if-- (A) the aggregate liquid volume of tax-increased articles held by such dealer on such date does not exceed 500 wine gallons, and (B) such dealer submits to the Secretary (at the time and in the manner required by the Secretary) such information as the Secretary shall require for purposes of this subparagraph.
Liability for tax and method of payment.-- (A) Liability for tax.--A person holding any tax- increased article on October 1, 1999, to which the tax imposed by paragraph (1) applies shall be liable for such tax.
Method of payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be paid in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulations.
Time for payment.--The tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall be paid on or before March 31, 2000.
Controlled groups.-- (A) Corporations.--In the case of a controlled group of corporations, the 500 wine gallon amount specified in paragraph (2) shall be apportioned among the dealers who are component members of such group in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the term ``controlled group of corporations'' has the meaning given to such term by subsection (a) of section 1563 of such Code; except that for such purposes the phrase ``more than 50 percent'' shall be substituted for the phrase ``at least 80 percent'' each place it appears in such subsection.
Nonincorporated dealers under common control.-- Under regulations prescribed by the Secretary, principles similar to the principles of subparagraph (A) shall apply to a group of dealers under common control where 1 or more of such dealers is not a corporation.
Other laws applicable.--All provisions of law, including penalties, applicable to the tax imposed by section 5041 of such Code with respect to any tax-increased article shall, insofar as applicable and not inconsistent with the provisions of this section, apply to the floor stocks taxes imposed by paragraph (1) to the same extent as if such taxes were imposed by such section 5041.
Definitions.--For purposes of this subsection-- (A) In general.--Terms used in this paragraph which are also used in subchapter A of chapter 51 of such Code shall have the respective meanings such terms have in such subchapter.
Person.--The term ``person'' includes any State or political subdivision thereof, or any agency or instrumentality of a State or political subdivision thereof.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate.