This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness in Musical Licensing Act of 1994''.
Section 110(5) of title 17, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(5) communication of a transmission embodying a performance or display of a work by electronic players, or by the public reception of a broadcast, cable or satellite transmission on a receiving apparatus, in any commercial establishment, the performance of which is incidental to the main purpose of the commercial establishment, unless-- ``(A) an admission charge is made to see or hear the transmission; or ``(B) any other public performance or display of the works implicated in such transmission are not properly licensed.''.
BINDING ARBITRATION OF RATE DISPUTES INVOLVING PERFORMING RIGHTS SOCIETIES; ACCESS TO REPERTOIRE.
In General.--Section 504 of title 17, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(d) Performing Rights Societies; Binding Arbitration and Repertoire.--(1)(A) If a user of music and a performing rights society are unable to agree on the appropriate fee to be paid for the user's past or future performance of music in the performing rights society's repertory, either party shall be entitled to binding arbitration of such disagreement pursuant to the rules of the American Arbitration Association.
The arbitrator in such binding arbitration shall determine a fair and reasonable fee for the user's past or future performance of the music in such society's repertory.
In any civil action for infringement of the right granted in section 106(4) involving a nondramatic musical work that is licensed by a performing rights society, where the defendant admits prior use of music licensed by the performing rights society but contests the amount of the license fee demanded for such use by such society, the dispute may, if requested by either party, be submitted to court annexed arbitration under section 652(e) of title 28.
In such arbitration proceeding, the arbitrator shall determine the full and entire amount owed by the defendant to the performing rights society for all past use of music licensed by such society.
Such amount shall not exceed what the arbitrator determines would have been a fair and reasonable license fee for performance of the music at issue, at the time such performance was made.
In any arbitration proceeding initiated under this section, the arbitrator may also determine a fair and reasonable license fee for performance by the music using part of the music licensed by the performing rights society for a period not to exceed 5 years after the date of the arbitrator's determination.
Performing rights societies and other organizations authorized to license nondramatic musical works for public performances shall make available, free of charge, online computer access to their respective repertoires.
Such access shall include information regarding-- ``(A) the title of the work; ``(B) the name, address, and telephone number of the author and the copyright owner (if different); ``(C) the date the copyrighted work will enter the public domain; and ``(D) the names of any artists known to have performed the work.''.
Actions That Shall Be Referred to Arbitration.--Section 652 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by adding the following: ``(e) Actions That Shall Be Referred to Arbitration.--In any civil action for infringement of the right granted in section 106(4) of title 17 involving a nondramatic musical work that is licensed by a performing rights society, where the defendant admits prior use of music licensed by the performing rights society but contests the amount of the license fee demanded for such use by such society, the district court may, if requested by either party, refer the dispute to arbitration.
Each district court shall establish procedures by local rule authorizing the use of arbitration under this subsection.''.
PER PROGRAMMING PERIOD LICENSE.
Section 504 of title 17, United States Code, as amended by section 3 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(e) Period Licenses.-- ``(1) In general.--In any case in which a nondramatic musical work is licensed by a performing rights society, the performing rights society shall offer a per programming period license to any radio or television broadcaster that requests such a license.
Such license shall be offered on terms and conditions that provide an economically and administratively viable alternative to blanket licenses.
Price of period license.--(A) The total price of a per programming period license described in paragraph (1) shall-- ``(i) include separate components for incidental and feature performances; ``(ii) be no higher than the fee that would be payable under a blanket license offered to broadcasters in the same industry; and ``(iii) be directly proportional to the broadcaster's actual use of the society's repertoire.
The fee for incidental public performances shall reflect the value of such uses to the broadcaster and the relative value which the performing rights society assigns in its distribution of royalties for such incidental public performances.
Nondramatic musical compositions that have been licensed directly or at the source, or whose performance constitutes fair use, shall not be considered in calculating any per programming period license fee under this subsection.''.
Section 504 of title 17, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Computer Access to Musical Repertoire.--Performing rights societies and other organizations authorized to license nondramatic musical works for public performances shall make available, free of charge, to licenses or those negotiating licenses, online computer access to its entire repertoire.
Such access shall include information regarding the title of the work, the name, address, and telephone number of the author and the copyright owner (if different), and the names of any artists known to have performed the work.''.
No later than March 1 of each year the Antitrust Division of the Department of Justice shall submit a written report to the Congress on the activities of the Department during the preceding calendar year relating to the Department's continuing supervision and enforcement of the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers and the Broadcast Music, Inc. consent decrees.
Such report shall include a description of all issues raised or complaints filed with the Department relating to the operations of performing rights societies, and a summary of the Department's actions or investigations undertaken by the Department in response.
Section 101 of title 17, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the undesignated paragraph relating to the definition of ``perform'' the following new paragraph: ``A `performing rights society' is an association, corporation or other entity that licenses the public performance of nondramatic musical works on behalf of copyright owners of such works, such as the American Society of Composers, Authors, and Publishers; Broadcast Music, Inc.; and SESAC, Inc.''.