This Act may be cited as the ``Microenterprise Act''.
MICRO- AND SMALL ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT CREDITS.
Section 108 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151f) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
MICRO- AND SMALL ENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT CREDITS.
Findings and Policy.--The Congress finds and declares that-- ``(1) the development of micro- and small enterprise, including cooperatives, is a vital factor in the stable growth of developing countries and in the development and stability of a free, open, and equitable international economic system; ``(2) it is, therefore, in the best interests of the United States to assist the development of the private sector in developing countries and to engage the United States private sector in that process; ``(3) the support of private enterprise can be served by programs providing credit, training, and technical assistance for the benefit of micro- and small enterprises; and ``(4) programs that provide credit, training, and technical assistance to private institutions can serve as a valuable complement to grant assistance provided for the purpose of benefiting micro- and small private enterprise.
Program.--To carry out the policy set forth in subsection (a), the President is authorized to provide assistance to increase the availability of credit to micro- and small enterprises lacking full access to credit, including through-- ``(1) loans and guarantees to credit institutions for the purpose of expanding the availability of credit to micro- and small enterprises; ``(2) training programs for lenders in order to enable them to better meet the credit needs of micro- and small entrepreneurs; and ``(3) training programs for micro- and small entrepreneurs in order to enable them to make better use of credit and to better manage their enterprises.''.
MICROENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT GRANT ASSISTANCE.
Chapter 1 of part I of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2151 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
MICROENTERPRISE DEVELOPMENT GRANT ASSISTANCE.
Authorization.--(1) In carrying out this part, the Administrator of the United States Agency for International Development is authorized to provide grant assistance for programs of credit and other assistance for microenterprises in developing countries.
Assistance authorized under paragraph (1) shall be provided through organizations that have a capacity to develop and implement microenterprise programs, including particularly-- ``(A) United States and indigenous private and voluntary organizations; ``(B) United States and indigenous credit unions and cooperative organizations; or ``(C) other indigenous governmental and nongovernmental organizations.
Approximately one-half of the credit assistance authorized under paragraph (1) shall be used for poverty lending programs, including the poverty lending portion of mixed programs.
Such programs-- ``(A) shall meet the needs of the very poor members of society, particularly poor women; and ``(B) should provide loans of $300 or less in 1995 United States dollars to such poor members of society.
The Administrator should continue support for mechanisms that-- ``(A) provide technical support for field missions; ``(B) strengthen the institutional development of the intermediary organizations described in paragraph (2); and ``(C) share information relating to the provision of assistance authorized under paragraph (1) between such field missions and intermediary organizations.
Monitoring System.--In order to maximize the sustainable development impact of the assistance authorized under subsection (a)(1), the Administrator should establish a monitoring system that-- ``(1) establishes performance goals for such assistance and expresses such goals in an objective and quantifiable form, to the extent feasible; ``(2) establishes performance indicators to be used in measuring or assessing the achievement of the goals and objectives of such assistance; and ``(3) provides a basis for recommendations for adjustments to such assistance to enhance the sustainable development impact of such assistance, particularly the impact of such assistance on the very poor, particularly poor women.''.
Passed the House of Representatives July 29, 1996.
Attest: ROBIN H. CARLE, Clerk.