In this Act: (1) Route 66.--The term ``Route 66'' means-- (A) portions of the highway formerly designated as United States Route 66 that remain in existence as of the date of enactment of this Act; and (B) public and private land in the vicinity of the highway.
Preservation office.--The term ``Preservation Office'' means the Office for the Preservation of America's Main Street established by the Secretary under section 3.
Preservation of route 66.--The term ``preservation of Route 66'' means the preservation or restoration of portions of the highway, businesses and sites of interest or potentially of interest to the public along the highway, or other resources of the highway.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service.
State.--The term ``State'' means a State in which a portion of Route 66 is located.
Route 66 is designated as ``America's Main Street''.
Establishment of Office.--The Secretary shall establish an office, to be known as the ``Office for the Preservation of America's Main Street''.
Designation of Officials.--The Secretary shall designate officials of the National Park Service stationed at locations convenient to the States and interested persons in the States, to perform the functions of the Preservation Office under this Act.
General Functions.--The Preservation Office shall-- (1) support efforts of State and local public and private persons and entities in the States to preserve Route 66 by providing technical assistance, participating in cost-sharing programs, and making grants and loans; (2) act as a clearinghouse for communication among Federal, State, and local agencies and private persons and entities interested in the preservation of Route 66; and (3) assist the States in determining the appropriate form of and establishing and supporting a non-Federal entity or entities to perform the functions of the Preservation Office after the Preservation Office is terminated.
Authorities.--In carrying out this Act, the Preservation Office may-- (1) enter into cooperative agreements; (2) accept donations; (3) provide cost-share grants; (4) provide technical assistance in historic preservation and fundraising; and (5) conduct research.
Road Signs.--The Preservation Office shall sponsor a road sign program on Route 66 to be implemented on a cost-sharing basis with State and local organizations.
Preservation Assistance.-- (1) In general.--The Preservation Office shall provide assistance in the preservation of Route 66 in a manner that is compatible with the idiosyncratic nature of the highway.
Planning.--The Preservation Office shall not prepare or require preparation of an overall management plan for Route 66, but shall cooperate with the States and local public and private persons and entities in developing local preservation plans to guide efforts to protect the most important or representative resources of Route 66.
Technical Assistance Program.-- (1) In general.--The Preservation Office shall develop a program of technical assistance in the preservation of Route 66.
Guidelines for preservation needs.-- (A) In general.--As part of the program under paragraph (1), the Preservation Office shall establish guidelines for setting priorities for preservation needs.
Basis.--The guidelines under subparagraph (A) may be based on national register standards, modified as appropriate to meet the needs of Route 66 so as to allow for the preservation of the spirit of Route 66 by including more modern resources that are integral to the evolution of the Route 66 experience.
Program for Coordination of Activities.-- (1) In general.--The Preservation Office shall coordinate a program of historic research, curation, preservation strategies, and the collection of oral and video histories of Route 66.
Design.--The program under paragraph (1) shall be designed for continuing use and implementation by other organizations after the Preservation Office is terminated.
Cost-share Grants.--Cost-share grants for preservation of Route 66 shall be available for resources that meet the guidelines under subsection (a).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
The Preservation Office shall terminate on the date that is 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act.