Amendment of Subtitle D.--Subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
Regulations.--Not later than one year after the enactment of this section, the Administrator shall promulgate regulations to require the preparation of a community information statement as part of the permitting processes under this subtitle for any new off-site hazardous waste treatment or disposal facility.
Each such statement shall be made available for public review.
The final statement for any facility shall be available for public review before the earlier of (1) 60 days before a public hearing is conducted by the permitting authority regarding the proposed issuance of such permit or (2) the date one year after the date on which an independent contractor is selected under subsection (b).
The permitting authority shall take the community information statement into account in making any final decision regarding the issuance of such permit and in establishing any conditions to be imposed in such permit.
Such statement shall be a part of the record on which the permitting decision is based.
Selection of Independent Contractor to Prepare Statement.-- The community information statement required under this section shall be prepared by an independent contractor selected jointly, after consultation with concerned citizens, by the applicant for the permit and the chief elected official of the affected host community.
If the applicant and chief elected official do not agree on the selection of any independent contractor within 30 days after the date on which the application for a permit under this section is filed, the permitting authority shall select the independent contractor to prepare the statement required under this section.
Costs.--The permitting authority shall impose and collect a fee on the submission of each application for a permit for which a statement under this section is required.
The fee shall cover the reasonable costs of preparing the community information statement.
Requirements.--A community information statement meets the requirements of this section if such statement identifies and describes each of the following: ``(1) The effects of such facility on the host community, including the effects on the local economy and employment, housing, public safety and emergency preparedness, transportation systems, and recreational amenities and tourism in the area.
The types of wastes expected to enter the facility and the types of releases expected from the facility and any human health impacts associated with such wastes and with such releases.
The options or alternatives for mitigating any such impacts on the affected community.
The demographic characteristics of the affected host community according to race, ethnic background, and income.
The presence in the affected host community of any-- ``(A) existing solid waste treatment, storage, or disposal facility, or ``(B) site in which a release of hazardous substances (within the meaning of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980) has occurred and the extent to which such site has been remediated.
Permit applicant's record of compliance with State and Federal environmental regulations and laws, and the record of such compliance by any firm engaged to operate the facility or any firm which controls or is affiliated with the applicant, including any serious violations thereof.
The community information statement prepared in connection with any facility shall not be subject to judicial review in any proceeding other than a proceeding brought to challenge the issuance of a permit for such facility.
In any permitting proceeding respecting such facility the permitting authority shall take the statement into account, and in any such proceeding the statement shall be treated as satisfying the requirements of this section unless the statement contained material misstatements or omissions which affected the permitting authority's decision.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- ``(1) The term `new off site hazardous waste treatment or disposal facility' means a hazardous waste treatment or disposal facility which-- ``(A) accepts for treatment or disposal hazardous waste that is not generated at the site of such treatment or disposal, and ``(B) for which a permit is issued by a State agency under this subtitle after the date of promulgation of regulations under this section.
Such term shall not include any facility existing on such date but shall include an expansion of such an existing facility if a new permit is required after such date for such expansion and if such expansion, together with all other expansions constructed after such date (or after the preparation of the last statement under this section with respect to such facility, whichever is later) increases the capacity of the facility by more than 50 percent.
The term `affected host community' means the county, municipality, town, or township or other general purpose unit of local government which has primary jurisdiction over the use of the land on which a facility is located or proposed to be located.
The term `independent contractor' means a person who has no financial or other potential conflict of interest in the outcome of a proceeding to determine whether or not a permit should be issued for a new off site facility for the treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste.''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents for subtitle C of such Act is amended by adding the following new item after the item relating to section 3023: ``Sec.