EXCLUSION FROM FEDERAL EMPLOYERS' LIABILITY ACT AND RAILWAY LABOR ACT.
LIRR police officers shall not be considered employees of a common carrier by railroad for purposes of the Act entitled ``An Act relating to the liability of common carriers by railroad to their employees in certain cases'', enacted April 22, 1908 (popularly known as the Employers' Liability Act) and shall not be considered employees of a carrier for purposes of the Railway Labor Act.
EXCLUSION FROM RAILROAD RETIREMENT ACT OF 1974, RAILROAD UNEMPLOYMENT INSURANCE ACT, AND RELATED TAXES.
Exclusion From Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 and Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act.--For purposes of the Railroad Retirement Act of 1974 and the Railroad Unemployment Insurance Act, a covered LIRR police officer shall not, as such, be considered an employee (as defined therein).
Exclusion From Railroad Retirement Tax Act.--For purposes of the Railroad Retirement Tax Act, a covered LIRR police officer shall not, as such, be considered an employee or employee representative (as defined therein).
Railroad Unemployment Repayment Tax.--For purposes of chapter 23A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, remuneration paid by the LIRR or any employee organization to any covered LIRR police officer as such shall not be treated as rail wages (as defined therein).
CLARIFICATION OF TAX TREATMENT.
In General.-- (1) In general.--No amount shall be includible in the gross income of any covered LIRR police officer (or any beneficiary thereof) by reason of-- (A) any transfer of assets in furtherance of the controlling agreement to the N.Y. System from any pension plan maintained by the LIRR, or (B) any payment by the LIRR to the N.Y. System pursuant to such agreement, in connection with the cancellation of such officer's rights under the Additional Plan.
Limitation.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to a covered LIRR police officer to the extent that the aggregate of the transfers and payments referred to in paragraph (1) with respect to such officer exceeds the amount deemed necessary under the N.Y. System to fund such officer's accrued benefit under the N.Y. System attributable to service performed while a participant in the Additional Plan.
Benefits Accruing Under N.Y.
System.--For purposes of determining the Federal taxation of benefits accrued by a covered LIRR police officer under the N.Y. System by reason of the performance of services after ceasing to accrue benefits under the Additional Plan, the choice which such officer has of coverage under the N.Y. System rather than the Additional Plan shall not be treated as a cash or deferred election under a cash or deferred arrangement for purposes of section 401(k) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Controlling Agreement.--For purposes of this section, the term ``controlling agreement'' means the collective bargaining agreement made June 30, 1989, by and between the LIRR and The Long Island Rail Road Company Police Benevolent Association, including the agreement made October 10, 1990, by and between such parties to further the implementation of Article XXXVI of such collective bargaining agreement.
Additional Plan.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Additional Plan'' means The Long Island Rail Road Company Plan for Additional Pensions.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``covered LIRR police officer'' means an LIRR police officer who is accruing or entitled to benefits under the N.Y. System, based on service as an LIRR police officer; (2) the term ``LIRR'' means The Long Island Rail Road Company, a public benefit corporation of the State of New York; (3) the term ``LIRR police officer'' means-- (A) any person who on or after the effective date of section 389 of the Retirement and Social Security Law of the State of New York holds an appointment as a police officer in the LIRR police department pursuant to section 88 of the Railroad Law of the State of New York; and (B) any probationary police officer in that department who is expected to hold such an appointment after completing the requisite training, whose initial employment with that department was in the position of such a probationary officer or as a patrolman, policewoman, sergeant, lieutenant, or detective, or any successor title to any of the foregoing positions; and (4) the term ``N.Y. System'' means the New York State and local Police and Fire retirement system.
This Act shall take effect on the first day of the first calendar month following receipt by the comptroller of the State of New York of the election by the LIRR, pursuant to subdivision b of section 331 of the Retirement and Social Security Law of the State of New York, to participate in the N.Y. System.