This Act may be cited as the ``Citizens' Tax Relief Act of 1994''.
REDUCTION OF LOWEST RATE OF INCOME TAX IMPOSED ON TAXPAYERS OTHER THAN CORPORATIONS.
In General.--Each of the tables contained in subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``15%'' and inserting ``12.5%''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1994.
Section 15 Not To Apply.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall not be treated as a change in the rate of a tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for purposes of section 15 of such Code.
REPEAL OF INCREASE IN BASIS OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED FROM A DECEDENT.
In General.--Section 1014 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis of property acquired from a decedent) is hereby repealed.
Basis To Be Determined Under Rules Applicable to Gifts.-- Section 1015 of such Code (relating to basis of property acquired by gifts and transfers in trusts) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Property Acquired From or Passing From a Decedent.-- ``(1) In general.--Property acquired from a decedent dying after December 31, 1994, or passed from such a decedent shall be treated for purposes of subsection (a) as acquired by gift for purposes of this section.
Property acquired from a decedent.--Section 1014(b) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Citizens' Tax Relief Act of 1994) shall apply for purposes of whether property is considered to have been acquired from or to have passed from the decedent.
Increase in basis for estate tax paid.-- ``(A) In general.--The basis of any property which this subsection applies shall be the basis determined under subsection (a) increased by the portion of the aggregate death tax adjustment which is allocated to the property pursuant to this paragraph.
Limitation.--The death tax adjustment for any property shall not exceed-- ``(i) the net appreciation in such property, multiplied by ``(ii) the Federal marginal estate tax rate.
Net appreciation.--For purposes of this paragraph, the net appreciation in value of any property is the amount by which-- ``(i) the fair market value of such property, exceeds ``(ii) the initial basis of such property increased by the minimum basis adjustment of such property.
Aggregate death tax adjustment.--In the case of any estate-- ``(A) In general.--The aggregate death tax adjustment is the product of-- ``(i) the aggregate net appreciation of all properties which have net appreciation, and ``(ii) the Federal marginal estate tax rate.
Limitation.--The amount taken into account under subparagraph (A)(i) shall not exceed the taxable estate.
Federal marginal estate tax rate.--The term `Federal marginal estate tax rate' means the highest rate in the rate schedule set forth in section 2001(c)-- ``(i) which is used in determining the tentative tax under section 2001(b)(1) with respect to the estate of the decedent, and ``(ii) the amount subject to which is at least $50,000.
In no event shall the Federal marginal estate tax rate be less than 30 percent.
Allocation rules.--The executor shall allocate the adjustments under this subsection among the properties on the return of the tax imposed by chapter 11.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 1014.
The heading of section 1015 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
BASIS OF PROPERTY ACQUIRED BY GIFT, FROM A DECEDENT, OR TRANSFERRED IN TRUST.''.
The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 1015 and inserting the following new item: ``Sec.
Basis of property acquired by gift, from a decedent, or transferred in trust.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to decedents dying after December 31, 1994.
PHASEIN OF CAPITAL GAINS TAX ON INHERITED PROPERTY.
In General.--Subsection (h) of section 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to maximum capital gains rate) is amended to read as follows: ``(h) Maximum Capital Gains Rate.-- ``(1) In general.--If a taxpayer has a net capital gain for any taxable year, then the tax imposed by this section shall not exceed the sum of-- ``(A) a tax computed at the rates and in the same manner as if this subsection had not been enacted on the greater of-- ``(i) taxable income reduced by the amount of the net capital gain, or ``(ii) the amount of taxable income taxed at a rate below 28 percent, plus ``(B) a tax equal to the sum of-- ``(i) the applicable percentage of so much of such net capital gain as is attributable to property acquired by the taxpayer from a decedent dying after December 31, 1994 (or passed to the taxpayer from such a decedent), and ``(ii) 28 percent of the amount of the taxable income in excess of the sum of the amount determined under subparagraph (A) and the net capital gain described in clause (i) of this subparagraph.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `applicable percentage' means-- ``(A) 10 percent in the case of taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993, and before January 1, 1996, ``(B) 15 percent in the case of taxable years beginning during 1996, ``(C) 20 percent in the case of taxable years beginning during 1997, and ``(D) 25 percent in the case of taxable years beginning during 1998.
Election to mark-to-market property acquired from a decedent.--If the taxpayer elects this paragraph with respect to any property described in paragraph (1)(B)(i), such property shall be treated as sold (for its fair market value as of the first day of the taxpayer year) and any gain or loss shall be treated as received or accrued on such day.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 1994.
ADDITIONAL EXCLUSION OF GAIN ON SALE OF PRINCIPAL RESIDENCE ACQUIRED FROM A DECEDENT.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 121 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to one-time exclusion of gain from sale of principal residence by individual who has attained age 55) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(10) Special rules for residence acquired from decedent.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a residence which was acquired by the taxpayer from a decedent dying after December 31, 1994, or to whom such residence passed from such a decedent (within the meaning of section 1015(f)(2))-- ``(i) subsection (a)(1) shall not apply, and ``(ii) the requirement of subsection (a)(2) shall be treated as met if the decedent satisfied such requirement as of the date of death or the taxpayer satisfies such requirement.
Additional election.--Any election under this section with respect to any residence to which subparagraph (A) applies shall not be taken into account in determining whether any other election may be made under this section.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply to sales and exchanges after December 31, 1994, in taxable years ending after such date.