This Act may be cited as the ``Ronald Reagan Commemorative Coin Act of 2001''.
Denominations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins: (1) $5 gold coins.--Not more than 100,000 $5 coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 8.359 grams; (B) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
$1 silver coins.--Not more than 500,000 $1 coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Bimetallic Coins.--The Secretary may mint and issue not more than 200,000 $10 bimetallic coins of gold and platinum instead of the gold coins required under subsection (a)(1), in accordance with such specifications as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Platinum and Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain platinum and gold for minting coins under this Act from available sources.
Silver.--The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this Act from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act and from other available sources.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this Act shall-- (A) be emblematic of the presidency and life of former President Ronald Reagan; (B) bear the likeness of former President Ronald Reagan on the obverse side; and (C) bear a design on the reverse side that is similar to the depiction of an American eagle carrying an olive branch, flying above a nest containing another eagle and hatchlings, as depicted on the 2001 American Eagle Gold Proof coins.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act, there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2005''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Design Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this Act shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this Act.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 2005 and ending on December 31, 2005.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins issued under this Act shall include a surcharge established by the Secretary, in an amount equal to not more than-- (1) $50 per coin for the $10 coin or $35 per coin for the $5 coin; and (2) $10 per coin for the $1 coin.
In General.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, the proceeds from the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be paid promptly by the Secretary to the Department of Health and Human Services to be used by the Secretary of Health and Human Services for the purposes of-- (1) providing grants to charitable organizations that assist families in their efforts to provide care at home to a family member with Alzheimer's disease; and (2) increasing awareness and educational outreach regarding Alzheimer's disease.
Audits.--Any organization or entity that receives funds from the Secretary of Health and Human Services under subsection (a) shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to such funds.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution, the deposits of which are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.