This Act may be cited as the ``Cost-of-Living Board Act of 1997''.
Title XI of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1301 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: Part D--Cost-of-Living Adjustments ``determination of inflation adjustment ``Sec.
In General.--The Cost-of-Living Board established under section 1181 shall each calendar year after 1996 attempt to determine a single percentage increase or decrease in the cost-of- living which shall apply to any cost-of-living adjustment taking effect during the next calendar year.
Adoption or Rejection of Percentage.-- ``(1) Adoption.-- ``(A) In general.--If the Cost-of-Living Board adopts by majority vote a single percentage increase or decrease under subsection (a), then, notwithstanding any other provision of law, any cost-of-living adjustment to take effect during the following calendar year shall be made by using such percentage and not by using the change in the Consumer Price Index (or any component thereof).
Appropriate modifications.--The Cost-of- Living Board shall make appropriate modifications to the single percentage applied to any cost-of-living adjustment if-- ``(i) the period during which the change in the cost-of-living is measured for such adjustment is different than the period used by the Cost-of-Living Board; or ``(ii) the adjustment is based on a component of an index rather than the entire index.
Rejection.--If the Cost-of-Living Board fails by majority vote to adopt a single percentage increase or decrease under subsection (a) for any calendar year, then any cost-of- living adjustment to take effect during the following calendar year shall be determined without regard to this part.
Report.--Not later than November 1 of each year, the Cost-of- Living Board shall submit a report to the President and Congress containing a detailed statement with respect to-- ``(1) the percentage (if any) agreed to by the Board under subsection (a); and ``(2) the decision of the Board on whether or not to adopt such a percentage.
Judicial Review.--Any determination by the Cost-of Living Board under subsection (a) or (b)(1)(B) shall not be subject to judicial review.
Definition of Cost-of-Living Adjustment.--In this part, the term `cost-of-living adjustment' means any adjustment under any of the following which is determined by reference to any Consumer Price Index (or any component thereof): ``(1) The Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Titles II, XVI, XVIII, and XIX of this Act.
Any other Federal program.
Establishment of Board.-- ``(1) Establishment.--There is established a board to be known as the Cost-of-Living Board (in this section referred to as the `Board').
Membership.-- ``(A) Composition.--The Board shall be composed of 5 members of whom-- ``(i) 1 shall be the Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; ``(ii) 1 shall be the Chairman of the President's Council of Economic Advisers; and ``(iii) 3 shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The President shall consult with the leadership of the House of Representatives and the Senate in the appointment of the Board members under clause (iii).
Expertise.--The members of the Board appointed under subparagraph (A)(iii) shall be experts in the field of economics and should be familiar with the issues related to the calculation of changes in the cost of living.
In appointing members under subparagraph (A)(iii), the President shall consider appointing-- ``(i) former members of the President's Council of Economic Advisers; ``(ii) former Treasury department officials; ``(iii) former members of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System; ``(iv) other individuals with relevant prior government experience in positions requiring appointment by the President and Senate confirmation; and ``(v) academic experts in the field of price statistics.
Date.-- ``(i) Nominations.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of the Cost of Living Board Act of 1997, the President shall submit the nominations of the members of the Board described in subparagraph (A)(iii) to the Senate.
Senate action.--Not later than 60 days after the Senate receives the nominations under clause (i), the Senate shall vote on confirmation of the nominations.
Terms and vacancies.-- ``(A) Terms.--A member of the Board appointed under paragraph (2)(A)(iii) shall be appointed for a term of 5 years, except that of the members first appointed under that paragraph-- ``(i) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 1 year; ``(ii) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 3 years; and ``(iii) 1 member shall be appointed for a term of 5 years.
Vacancies.-- ``(i) In general.--A vacancy on the Board shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made and shall be subject to any conditions which applied with respect to the original appointment.
Filling unexpired term.--An individual chosen to fill a vacancy shall be appointed for the unexpired term of the member replaced.
Expiration of terms.--The term of any member appointed under paragraph (2)(A)(iii) shall not expire before the date on which the member's successor takes office.
Initial meeting.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which all members of the Board have been appointed, the Board shall hold its first meeting.
Subsequent meetings shall be determined by the Board by majority vote.
Open meetings.--Notwithstanding section 552b of title 5, United States Code, or section 10 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), the Board may, by majority vote, close any meeting of the Board to the public otherwise required to be open under that section.
The Board shall make the records of any such closed meeting available to the public not later than 30 days of that meeting.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Chairperson and vice chairperson.--The Board shall select a Chairperson and Vice Chairperson from among the members appointed under paragraph (2)(A)(iii).
Powers of the Board.-- ``(1) Hearings.--The Board may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Board considers advisable to carry out the purposes of this part.
Information from federal agencies.--The Board may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Board considers necessary to carry out the provisions of this part, including the published and unpublished data and analytical products of the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Board, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Board.
Postal services.--The Board may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the Federal Government.
Gifts.--The Board may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Board Personnel Matters.-- ``(1) Compensation of members.--Each member of the Board who is not otherwise an officer or employee of the Federal Government shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which such member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Board.
All members of the Board who otherwise are officers or employees of the United States shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for their services as officers or employees of the United States.
Travel expenses.--The members of the Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Board.
Staff.-- ``(A) In general.--The Chairperson of the Board may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Board to perform its duties.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Board.
Compensation.--The Chairperson of the Board may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Board without additional reimbursement (other than the employee's regular compensation), and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of temporary and intermittent services.-- The Chairperson of the Board may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Termination.--Section 14 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Board.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Board such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this part.