In general.--No lobbyist who is registered under section 4 may provide any gift to a Member of the House of Representatives, a Senator, or an officer or employee of the House of Representatives or the Senate unless the lobbyist is related to the Member, Senator, or officer or employee.
Definition.-- (1) For the purpose of subsection (a), the term ``gift'' means any gratuity, favor, discount, entertainment, hospitality, loan, forbearance, or other item having monetary value.
The term includes gifts of services, training, transportation, lodging, and meals, whether provided in kind, by purchase of a ticket, payment in advance, or reimbursement after the expense has been incurred.
A gift to a family member of a Member, a Senator, officer, or employee, or a gift to any other individual based on that individual's relationship with the Member, Senator, officer, or employee, shall be considered a gift to the Member, Senator, officer, or employee if it is given with the knowledge and acquiescence of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee and the Member, Senator, officer, or employee has reason to believe the gift was given because of the official position of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee.
If food or refreshment is provided at the same time and place to both a Member, Senator, officer, or employee and the spouse or dependent thereof, only the food or refreshment provided to the Member, Senator, officer, or employee shall be treated as a gift for purposes of subsection (a).
Exception.--The restrictions in subsection (a) shall not apply to the following: (1) Anything for which the Member, Senator, officer, or employee pays the market value, or does not use and promptly returns to the donor.
A contribution, as defined in section 301(8) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) that is lawfully made under that Act, a lawful contribution for election to a State or local government office, or attendance at a fundraising event sponsored by a political organization described in section 527(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
A gift from a relative as described in section 109(16) of title I of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-521).
(A) Anything provided by an individual on the basis of a personal friendship unless the Member, Senator, officer, or employee has reason to believe that, under the circumstances, the gift was provided because of the official position of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee and not because of the personal friendship.
In determining whether a gift is provided on the basis of personal friendship, the Member, Senator, officer, or employee shall consider the circumstances under which the gift was offered, such as: (i) The history of the relationship between the individual giving the gift and the recipient of the gift, including any previous exchange of gifts between such individuals.
Whether to the actual knowledge of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee the individual who gave the gift personally paid for the gift or sought a tax deduction or business reimbursement for the gift.
Whether to the actual knowledge of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee the individual who gave the gift also at the same time gave the same or similar gifts to other Members, officers, or employees.
A contribution or other payment to a legal expense fund established for the benefit of a Member, Senator, officer, or employee that is otherwise lawfully made in accordance with the restrictions and disclosure requirements of the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives and the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate.
Any gift from another Member, Senator, officer, or employee of the Senate or the House of Representatives.
Food, refreshments, lodging, transportation, and other benefits-- (A) resulting from the outside business or employment activities (or other outside activities that are not connected to the duties of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee as an officeholder) of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee, or the spouse of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee, if such benefits have not been offered or enhanced because of the official position of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee and are customarily provided to others in similar circumstances; (B) customarily provided by a prospective employer in connection with bona fide employment discussions; or (C) provided by a political organization described in section 527(e) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 in connection with a fundraising or campaign event sponsored by such an organization.
Pension and other benefits resulting from continued participation in an employee welfare and benefits plan maintained by a former employer.
Informational materials that are sent to the office of the Member, Senator, officer, or employee in the form of books, articles, periodicals, other written materials, audiotapes, videotapes, or other forms of communication.
Awards or prizes which are given to competitors in contests or events open to the public, including random drawings.
Honorary degrees (and associated travel, food, refreshments, and entertainment) and other bona fide, nonmonetary awards presented in recognition of public service (and associated food, refreshments, and entertainment provided in the presentation of such degrees and awards).
Training (including food and refreshments furnished to all attendees as an integral part of the training) provided to a Member, Senator, officer, or employee, if such training is in the interest of the House of Representatives or the Senate.
Bequests, inheritances, and other transfers at death.
Any item, the receipt of which is authorized by the Foreign Gifts and Decorations Act, the Mutual Educational and Cultural Exchange Act, or any other statute.
Anything which is paid for by the Federal Government, by a State or local government, or secured by the Government under a Government contract.
A gift of personal hospitality (as defined in section 109(14) of the Ethics in Government Act of 1978) of an individual other than a registered lobbyist or agent of a foreign principal.
Free attendance at a widely attended event.
Opportunities and benefits which are-- (A) available to the public or to a class consisting of all Federal employees, whether or not restricted on the basis of geographic consideration; (B) offered to members of a group or class in which membership is unrelated to congressional employment; (C) offered to members of an organization, such as an employees' association or congressional credit union, in which membership is related to congressional employment and similar opportunities are available to large segments of the public through organizations of similar size; (D) offered to any group or class that is not defined in a manner that specifically discriminates among Government employees on the basis of branch of Government or type of responsibility, or on a basis that favors those of higher rank or rate of pay; (E) in the form of loans from banks and other financial institutions on terms generally available to the public; or (F) in the form of reduced membership or other fees for participation in organization activities offered to all Government employees by professional organizations if the only restrictions on membership relate to professional qualifications.
A plaque, trophy, or other item that is substantially commemorative in nature and which is intended for presentation.
Anything for which, in an unusual case, a waiver is granted by the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct of the House of Representatives or the Select Committee on Ethics of the Senate.
Food or refreshments of a nominal value offered other than as a part of a meal.