Any concurrent resolution on the budget introduced under subsection (a) shall be in compliance with section 301.
Effect of Concurrent Resolution on the Budget.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, whenever a concurrent resolution on the budget described in subsection (a) is agreed to, then the aggregates, allocations, and reconciliation directives (if any) contained in the report accompanying such concurrent resolution or in such concurrent resolution shall be considered to be the aggregates, allocations, and reconciliation directives for all purposes of sections 302, 303, and 311 for the applicable fiscal years and such concurrent resolution shall be deemed to be a joint resolution for all purposes of this title and the Rules of the House of Representatives and any reference to the date of enactment of a joint resolution on the budget shall be deemed to be a reference to the date agreed to when applied to such concurrent resolution.''.
The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 315 the following new item: ``Sec.
Discretionary Deficit Reduction Account.''.
AMENDMENTS TO JOINT RESOLUTIONS ON THE BUDGET.
Definition.--Paragraph (4) of section 3 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended to read as follows: ``(4) the term `joint resolution on the budget' means-- ``(A) a joint resolution setting forth the budget for the United States Government for a fiscal year as provided in section 301; and ``(B) any other joint resolution revising the budget for the United States Government for a fiscal year as described in section 304.''.
Additional Amendments to the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974.--(1)(A) Sections 301, 302, 303, 305, 308, 310, 311, 312, 314, 405, and 904 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 621 et sequentes) are amended by striking ``concurrent'' each place it appears and inserting ``joint''.
Section 301 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is further amended by striking the last sentence.
(i) Sections 302(d), 302(g), 308(a)(1)(A), and 310(d)(1) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 are amended by striking ``most recently agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget'' each place it occurs and inserting ``most recently enacted joint resolution on the budget or agreed to concurrent resolution on the budget (as applicable)''.
The section heading of section 301 is amended by striking ``annual adoption of concurrent resolution'' and inserting ``joint resolutions''; and (iii) Section 304 of such Act is amended to read as follows: ``permissible revisions of budget resolutions ``Sec.
At any time after the joint resolution on the budget for a fiscal year has been enacted pursuant to section 301, and before the end of such fiscal year, the two Houses and the President may enact a joint resolution on the budget which revises or reaffirms the joint resolution on the budget for such fiscal year most recently enacted, and for purposes of the enforcement of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the chairman of the Budget Committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as applicable, may adjust levels as needed for the enforcement off of the budget resolution.''.
Sections 302, 303, 310, and 311, of such Act are amended by striking ``agreed to'' each place it appears and by inserting ``enacted''.
(A) Paragraph (4) of section 3 of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by striking ``concurrent'' each place it appears and by inserting ``joint''.
The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of such Act is amended-- (i) in the item relating to section 301, by striking ``Annual adoption of concurrent resolution'' and inserting ``Joint resolutions''; (ii) by striking the item relating to section 303 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Consideration of budget-related legislation before budget becomes law.''.
by striking ``concurrent'' and inserting ``joint'' in the item relating to section 305.
Conforming Amendments to the Rules of the House of Representatives.--Clauses 1(d)(1), 4(a)(4), 4(b)(2), 4(f)(1)(A), and 4(f)(2) of rule X, clause 10 of rule XVIII, clause 10 of rule XX, and clauses 7 and 10 of rule XXI of the Rules of the House of Representatives are amended by striking ``concurrent'' each place it appears and inserting ``joint''.
Conforming Amendments to the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.--Section 258C(b)(1) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 907d(b)(1)) is amended by striking ``concurrent'' and inserting ``joint''.
Conforming Amendments to Section 310 Regarding Reconciliation Directives.--(1) The side heading of section 310(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by section 105(b)) is further amended by inserting ``Joint Explanatory Statement Accompanying Conference Report on'' before ``Joint''.
Section 310(a) of such Act is amended by striking ``A'' and inserting ``The joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report on a''.
The first sentence of section 310(b) of such Act is amended by striking ``If'' and inserting ``If the joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report on''.
Section 310(c)(1) of such Act is amended by inserting ``the joint explanatory statement accompanying the conference report on'' after ``pursuant to''.
Conforming Amendments to Section 3 Regarding Direct Spending.-- Section 3 of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) The term `direct spending' has the meaning given to such term in section 250(c)(8) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.''.
TITLE III--FISCAL DISCIPLINE, EARMARK REFORM, AND ACCOUNTABILITY ACT SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Fiscal Discipline, Earmark Reform, and Accountability Act''.
REFORM OF CONSIDERATION OF APPROPRIATIONS BILLS IN THE SENATE.
In General.--Rule XVI of the Standing Rules of the Senate is amended by adding at the end the following: ``9.
On a point of order made by any Senator: ``(1) No new or general legislation nor any unauthorized appropriation may be included in any general appropriation bill.
No amendment may be received to any general appropriation bill the effect of which will be to add an unauthorized appropriation to the bill.
No unauthorized appropriation may be included in any amendment between the Houses, or any amendment thereto, in relation to a general appropriation bill.
(1) If a point of order under subparagraph (a)(1) against a Senate bill or amendment is sustained-- ``(A) the new or general legislation or unauthorized appropriation shall be struck from the bill or amendment; and ``(B) any modification of total amounts appropriated necessary to reflect the deletion of the matter struck from the bill or amendment shall be made.
If a point of order under subparagraph (a)(1) against an Act of the House of Representatives is sustained when the Senate is not considering an amendment in the nature of a substitute, an amendment to the House bill is deemed to have been adopted that-- ``(A) strikes the new or general legislation or unauthorized appropriation from the bill; and ``(B) modifies, if necessary, the total amounts appropriated by the bill to reflect the deletion of the matter struck from the bill; ``(c) If the point of order against an amendment under subparagraph (a)(2) is sustained, the amendment shall be out of order and may not be considered.
(1) If a point of order under subparagraph (a)(3) against a Senate amendment is sustained-- ``(A) the unauthorized appropriation shall be struck from the amendment; ``(B) any modification of total amounts appropriated necessary to reflect the deletion of the matter struck from the amendment shall be made; and ``(C) after all other points of order under this paragraph have been disposed of, the Senate shall proceed to consider the amendment as so modified.
If a point of order under subparagraph (a)(3) against a House of Representatives amendment is sustained-- ``(A) an amendment to the House amendment is deemed to have been adopted that-- ``(i) strikes the new or general legislation or unauthorized appropriation from the House amendment; and ``(ii) modifies, if necessary, the total amounts appropriated by the bill to reflect the deletion of the matter struck from the House amendment; and ``(B) after all other points of order under this paragraph have been disposed of, the Senate shall proceed to consider the question of whether to concur with further amendment.
The disposition of a point of order made under any other paragraph of this rule, or under any other Standing Rule of the Senate, that is not sustained, or is waived, does not preclude, or affect, a point of order made under subparagraph (a) with respect to the same matter.
A point of order under subparagraph (a) may be waived only by a motion agreed to by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn.
If an appeal is taken from the ruling of the Presiding Officer with respect to such a point of order, the ruling of the Presiding Officer shall be sustained absent an affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn.
Notwithstanding any other rule of the Senate, it shall be in order for a Senator to raise a single point of order that several provisions of a general appropriation bill or an amendment between the Houses on a general appropriation bill violate subparagraph (a).
The Presiding Officer may sustain the point of order as to some or all of the provisions against which the Senator raised the point of order.
If the Presiding Officer so sustains the point of order as to some or all of the provisions against which the Senator raised the point of order, then only those provisions against which the Presiding Officer sustains the point of order shall be deemed stricken pursuant to this paragraph.
Before the Presiding Officer rules on such a point of order, any Senator may move to waive such a point of order, in accordance with subparagraph (f), as it applies to some or all of the provisions against which the point of order was raised.
Such a motion to waive is amendable in accordance with the rules and precedents of the Senate.
After the Presiding Officer rules on such a point of order, any Senator may appeal the ruling of the Presiding Officer on such a point of order as it applies to some or all of the provisions on which the Presiding Officer ruled.
For purposes of this paragraph: ``(1) The term `new or general legislation' has the meaning given that term when it is used in paragraph 2 of this rule.
The term `new matter' means matter not committed to conference by either House of Congress.
(A) The term `unauthorized appropriation' means a `congressionally directed spending item' as defined in rule XLIV-- ``(i) that is not specifically authorized by law or Treaty stipulation (unless the appropriation has been specifically authorized by an Act or resolution previously passed by the Senate during the same session or proposed in pursuance of an estimate submitted in accordance with law); or ``(ii) the amount of which exceeds the amount specifically authorized by law or Treaty stipulation (or specifically authorized by an Act or resolution previously passed by the Senate during the same session or proposed in pursuance of an estimate submitted in accordance with law) to be appropriated.
An appropriation is not specifically authorized if it is restricted or directed to, or authorized to be obligated or expended for the benefit of, an identifiable person, program, project, entity, or jurisdiction by earmarking or other specification, whether by name or description, in a manner that is so restricted, directed, or authorized that it applies only to a single identifiable person, program, project, entity, or jurisdiction, unless the identifiable person, program, project, entity, or jurisdiction to which the restriction, direction, or authorization applies is described or otherwise clearly identified in a law or Treaty stipulation (or an Act or resolution previously passed by the Senate during the same session or in the estimate submitted in accordance with law) that specifically provides for the restriction, direction, or authorization of appropriation for such person, program, project, entity, or jurisdiction.
On a point of order made by any Senator, no new or general legislation, nor any unauthorized appropriation, new matter, or nongermane matter may be included in any conference report on a general appropriation bill.
If the point of order against a conference report under subparagraph (a) is sustained-- ``(1) the new or general legislation, unauthorized appropriation, new matter, or nongermane matter in such conference report shall be deemed to have been struck; ``(2) any modification of total amounts appropriated necessary to reflect the deletion of the matter struck shall be deemed to have been made; ``(3) when all other points of order under this paragraph have been disposed of-- ``(A) the Senate shall proceed to consider the question of whether the Senate should recede from its amendment to the House bill, or its disagreement to the amendment of the House, and concur with a further amendment, which further amendment shall consist of only that portion of the conference report not deemed to have been struck (together with any modification of total amounts appropriated); ``(B) the question shall be debatable; and ``(C) no further amendment shall be in order; and ``(4) if the Senate agrees to the amendment, then the bill and the Senate amendment thereto shall be returned to the House for its concurrence in the amendment of the Senate.
The disposition of a point of order made under any other paragraph of this rule, or under any other Standing Rule of the Senate, that is not sustained, or is waived, does not preclude, or affect, a point of order made under subparagraph (a) with respect to the same matter.
A point of order under subparagraph (a) may be waived only by a motion agreed to by the affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn.
If an appeal is taken from the ruling of the Presiding Officer with respect to such a point of order, the ruling of the Presiding Officer shall be sustained absent an affirmative vote of three-fifths of the Senators duly chosen and sworn.
Notwithstanding any other rule of the Senate, it shall be in order for a Senator to raise a single point of order that several provisions of a conference report on a general appropriation bill violate subparagraph (a).
The Presiding Officer may sustain the point of order as to some or all of the provisions against which the Senator raised the point of order.
If the Presiding Officer so sustains the point of order as to some or all of the provisions against which the Senator raised the point of order, then only those provisions against which the Presiding Officer sustains the point of order shall be deemed stricken pursuant to this paragraph.
Before the Presiding Officer rules on such a point of order, any Senator may move to waive such a point of order, in accordance with subparagraph (d), as it applies to some or all of the provisions against which the point of order was raised.
Such a motion to waive is amendable in accordance with the rules and precedents of the Senate.
After the Presiding Officer rules on such a point of order, any Senator may appeal the ruling of the Presiding Officer on such a point of order as it applies to some or all of the provisions on which the Presiding Officer ruled.
For purposes of this paragraph: ``(1) The terms `new or general legislation', `new matter', and `unauthorized appropriation' have the same meaning as in paragraph 9.
The term `nongermane matter' has the same meaning as in rule XXII and under the precedents attendant thereto, as of the beginning of the 110th Congress.''.
Requiring Conference Reports To Be Searchable Online.-- Paragraph 3(a)(2) of rule XLIV of the Standing Rules of the Senate is amended by inserting ``in an searchable format'' after ``available''.
LOBBYING ON BEHALF OF RECIPIENTS OF FEDERAL FUNDS.
The Lobbying Disclosure Act of 1995 is amended by adding after section 5 the following: ``SEC.
REPORTS BY RECIPIENTS OF FEDERAL FUNDS.
In General.--A recipient of Federal funds shall file a report as required by section 5(a) containing-- ``(1) the name of any lobbyist registered under this Act to whom the recipient paid money to lobby on behalf of the Federal funding received by the recipient; and ``(2) the amount of money paid as described in paragraph (1).
Definition.--In this section, the term `recipient of Federal funds' means the recipient of Federal funds constituting an award, grant, or loan.