This Act may be cited as the ``Business Checking Modernization Act''.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO DEMAND DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS AT DEPOSITORY INSTITUTIONS.
Interest-Bearing Transaction Accounts Authorized.-- (1) Federal reserve act.--Section 19(i) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 371a) is amended by inserting at the end the following: ``Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a member bank may permit the owner of any deposit, any account which is a deposit, or any account on which interest or dividends are paid to make up to 24 transfers per month (or such greater number as the Board may determine by rule or order), for any purpose, to a demand deposit account of the owner in the same institution.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent an account offered pursuant to this subsection from being considered a transaction account for purposes of this Act.''.
Home owners' loan act.-- (A) In general.--Section 5(b)(1) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 United States Code 1464 (b)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(G) Transfers.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this paragraph, a Federal savings association may permit the owner of any deposit or share, any account which is a deposit or share, or any account on which interest or dividends are paid to make up to 24 transfers per month (or such greater number as the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may determine by rule or order under section 19(i) to be permissible for member banks), for any purpose, to a demand deposit account of the owner in the same institution.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent an account offered pursuant to this subsection from being considered a transaction account (as defined in section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act) for purposes of the Federal Reserve Act.''.
Repeal.--Effective at the end of the 3-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, section 5(b)(1) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 United States Code 1464 (b)(1)) is amended by striking subparagraph (G).
Federal deposit insurance act.--Section 18(g) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1828(g)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Transfers.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this subsection, an insured nonmember bank or insured State savings association may permit the owner of any deposit or share, any account which is a deposit or share, or any account on which interest or dividends are paid to make up to 24 transfers per month (or such greater number as the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System may determine by rule or order under section 19(i) to be permissible for member banks), for any purpose, to a demand deposit account of the owner in the same institution.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prevent an account offered pursuant to this subsection from being considered a transaction account (as defined in section 19(b) of the Federal Reserve Act) for purposes of the Federal Reserve Act.''.
Repeal of Prohibition on Payment of Interest on Demand Deposits.-- (1) Federal reserve act.--Section 19(i) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 371a) is amended to read as follows: ``(i) [Repealed]''.
Home owners' loan act.--The 1st sentence of section 5(b)(1)(B) of the Home Owners' Loan Act (12 United States Code 1464(b)(1)(B)) is amended by striking ``savings association may not--'' and all that follows through ``(ii) permit any'' and inserting ``savings association may not permit any''.
Federal deposit insurance act.--Section 18(g) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1828(g)) is amended to read as follows: ``(g) [Repealed]''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (b) shall take effect at the end of the 3-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASED FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD FLEXIBILITY IN SETTING RESERVE REQUIREMENTS.
Section 19(b)(2) of the Federal Reserve Act (12 United States Code 461(b)(2)) is amended-- (1) in clause (i), by striking ``the ratio of 3 per centum'' and inserting ``a ratio not greater than 3 percent''; and (2) in clause (ii), by striking ``and not less than 8 per centum''.
Passed the House of Representatives April 11, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.