This Act may be cited as the ``National Resilience Development Act of 2003''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) According to the New England Journal of Medicine, after September 11, 2001, Americans across the country, including children, had substantial symptoms of stress.
Even clinicians who practice in regions that are far from the sites of the attacks should be prepared to assist people with trauma-related symptoms of stress.
According to Military Medicine, experiences from the 1995 chemical weapons attack by terrorists in the Tokyo subway system suggest that psychological casualties from a chemical attack will outnumber physical casualties by approximately 4 to 1.
According to Military Medicine, victims from the 1995 Tokyo attack continued to suffer from psychological symptoms 5 years later.
According to the Journal of the American Medical Association, the lessons learned from the 2001 anthrax attacks should motivate local health departments, health care organizations, and clinicians to engage in collaborative programs to enhance their communications and local preparedness and response capabilities.
According to the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences, the Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of Homeland Security should analyze terrorism preparedness to ensure that the public health infrastructure is prepared to respond to the psychological consequences of terrorism, and Federal, State, and local disaster planers should address these psychological consequences in their planning and preparedness for terrorist attacks.
According to a national study by leading health care foundations, in this time of growing threats of terrorism, many doctors and other primary care providers are increasingly being confronted with patients who complain of aches and pains, or more serious symptoms, which mask serious anxiety or depression.
Substantial effort and funding are still needed to adequately understand and prepare for the psychological consequences associated with bioterrorism.
The integration of mental health into public health efforts, including integration and cooperation across Federal agencies and State public health and mental health authorities, is critical in addressing the psychological needs of the Nation with regard to terrorism.
The goals of this Act are as follows: (1) To coordinate the efforts of different government agencies in researching, developing, and implementing programs and protocols designed to increase the psychological resilience and mitigate distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors of the American public as they relate to terrorism.
To facilitate the work of the Department of Homeland Security by incorporating programs and protocols designed to increase the psychological resilience, and mitigate distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors, of the American public into the Department's efforts in reducing the vulnerability of the United States to terrorism.
To identify effective interventions to the harmful psychosocial consequences of disasters and to integrate these interventions into the United States' plans to mitigate, plan for, respond to, and recover from potential and actual terrorist attacks.
To enable the States and localities to effectively respond to the psychosocial consequences of terrorism.
To integrate mental health and public health emergency preparedness and response efforts in the United States.
INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON NATIONAL RESILIENCE.
Title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 241 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 319K the following: ``SEC.
INTERAGENCY TASK FORCE ON NATIONAL RESILIENCE.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall convene and lead an interagency task force for the purpose of increasing the psychological resilience and mitigating distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors of the American public in preparation for, and in response to, a conventional, biological, chemical, or radiological attack on the United States.
Members.--The task force convened under this section shall include the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Director of the National Institute of Mental Health, the Administrator of the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Director of the Office of Public Health Emergency Preparedness, the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service, and such other members as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Duties.--The duties of the task force convened under this section shall include the following: ``(1) Coordinating and facilitating the efforts of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the National Institute of Mental Health, the Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration, the Health Resources and Services Administration, the Office of Public Health Emergency Preparedness, and the Office of the Surgeon General of the Public Health Service in their endeavors to develop programs and protocols designed to increase the psychological resilience and mitigate distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors of the American public in preparation for, and in response to, a conventional, biological, chemical, or radiological attack on the United States.
Consulting with, and providing guidance to, the Department of Homeland Security in its efforts to integrate into its efforts in reducing the vulnerability of the United States to terrorism, programs and protocols designed to increase the psychological resilience and mitigate distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors of the American public in preparation for, and in response to, a conventional, biological, chemical, or radiological attack on the United States.
Consulting with the Department of Defense, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the American Red Cross, national organizations of health care and health care providers, and such other organizations and agencies as the task force deems appropriate.
Consulting with and providing guidance to the States for the purpose of enabling them to effectively respond to the psychosocial consequences of terrorism.
Developing strategies for encouraging State public health and mental health agencies to closely collaborate in the development of integrated, science-based programs and protocols designed to increase the psychological resilience and mitigate distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors of the public in preparation for, and in response to, a conventional, biological, chemical, or radiological attack on the United States.
Preparing and presenting to the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Homeland Security specific recommendations on how their respective departments, agencies, and offices can strengthen existing and planned terrorism preparedness, response, recovery, and mitigation initiatives by integrating programs and protocols designed to increase the psychological resilience and mitigate distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors of the American public.
Meetings.--The task force convened under this section shall meet not less than 4 times each year.
Staff.--The Secretary shall staff the task force as necessary to ensure it meets the goals set forth in section 3 of the National Resilience Development Act of 2003.''.
MENTAL HEALTH ACTIVITIES OF STATES, DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA, AND TERRITORIES REGARDING NATIONAL RESILIENCE.
Public Health Service Act.-- (1) Authorization.--Subsection (d) of section 319C-1 of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247d-3a) is amended by inserting after paragraph (18) the following: ``(19) To enable State mental health authorities, in close collaboration with the respective State public health authorities and the interagency task force convened under section 319L, to better understand and manage human emotional, behavioral, and cognitive responses to disasters, including by increasing the psychological resilience of the public and mitigating distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors that could occur in response to a conventional, biological, chemical, or radiological attack on the United States.''.
Funding.--Subparagraph (B) of section 319C-1(j)(1) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 247d-3a(j)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Not less than 1 percent of the amounts appropriated pursuant to this subparagraph shall be used for the purpose of carrying out subsection (d)(19).''.
USA Patriot Act.-- (1) Authorization.--Subsection (b) of section 1014 of the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT ACT) Act of 2001 (42 United States Code 3714) is amended-- (A) by striking ``may be used to purchase'' and inserting ``may be used for the following: ``(1) To purchase''; (B) by striking ``In addition, grants under this section may be used to construct'' and inserting the following: ``(2) To construct''; and (C) by inserting at the end the following: ``(3) To enable State mental health authorities, in close collaboration with the respective State public health authorities and the interagency task force convened under section 319L of the Public Health Service Act, to better understand and manage human emotional, behavioral, and cognitive responses to disasters, including by increasing the psychological resilience of the public and mitigating distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors that could occur in response to a conventional, biological, chemical, or radiological attack on the United States.''.
Funding.--Subsection (c) of section 1014 of the Uniting and Strengthening America by Providing Appropriate Tools Required to Intercept and Obstruct Terrorism (USA PATRIOT ACT) Act of 2001 (42 United States Code 3714) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Mental health preparedness.--Not less than 1 percent of the amounts appropriated pursuant to this subsection shall be used for the purpose of carrying out subsection (b)(3).''.
EFFORTS BY FEMA REGARDING NATIONAL RESILIENCE.
Paragraph (2) of section 507(a) of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 (6 United States Code 317(a)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``; and'' at the end and inserting a semicolon; (2) in subparagraph (E), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(F) of integrating into each of the Federal Emergency Management Agency's functions of mitigation, planning, response, and recovery, efforts to increase communities' psychological resilience and decrease distress reactions and maladaptive behaviors in individuals, and of coordinating such efforts with efforts by the interagency task force convened under section 319L of the Public Health Service Act and other efforts by the Department of Homeland Security.''.
ANNUAL REPORT BY SECRETARIES OF HHS AND HOMELAND SECURITY.
Not less than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act and annually thereafter, the Secretary of Health and Human Services and the Secretary of Homeland Security, acting jointly, shall submit a report to the Congress that includes the following: (1) The recommendations of the interagency task force convened under section 319L of the Public Health Service Act (as amended by section 4 of this Act) that are relevant to the Department of Health and Human Services or the Department of Homeland Security.
A description of the steps that have or have not been taken by each Federal department to implement the recommendations described in paragraph (1).
Thorough explanations for rejection of any recommendations made by the interagency task force convened under section 319L.
Other steps undertaken to meet the goals of this Act.