As used in this Act: (1) Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site as established by section 3.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Tuskegee airmen.--The term ``Tuskegee Airmen'' means the thousands of men and women who served in America's African- American Air Force units of World War II and shared in the Tuskegee Experience.
Tuskegee university.--The term ``Tuskegee University'' means the institution of higher education by that name located in the State of Alabama and founded by Booker T. Washington in 1881, formerly named Tuskegee Institute.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The struggle of African-Americans for greater roles in North American military conflicts spans the 17th, 18th, 19th, and 20th centuries.
Opportunities for African-American participation in the United States military were always very limited and controversial.
Quotas, exclusion, and racial discrimination were based on the prevailing attitude in the United States, particularly on the part of the United States military, that African-Americans did not possess the intellectual capacity, aptitude, and skills to be successful fighters.
By the early 1940's these perceptions continued within the United States military.
Key leaders within the United States Army Air Corps did not believe that African-Americans possessed the capacity to become successful military pilots.
After succumbing to pressure exerted by civil rights groups and the black press, the Army decided to train a small number of African-American pilot cadets under special conditions.
Although prejudice and discrimination against African-Americans was a national phenomenon, not just a southern trait, it was more intense in the South where it had hardened into rigidly enforced patterns of segregation.
Such was the environment where the military chose to locate the training of the Tuskegee Airmen.
The military selected Tuskegee Institute (now known as Tuskegee University) as a civilian contractor for a variety of reasons.
These included the school's existing facilities, engineering and technical instructors, and a climate with ideal flying conditions year round.
Tuskegee Institute's strong interest in providing aeronautical training for African- American youths was also an important factor.
Students from the school's civilian pilot training program had some of the best test scores when compared to other students from programs across the Southeast.
In 1941 the United States Army Air Corps awarded a contract to Tuskegee Institute to operate a primary flight school at Moton Field.
Tuskegee Institute (now known as Tuskegee University) chose an African-American contractor who designed and constructed Moton Field, with the assistance of its faculty and students, as the site for its military pilot training program.
The field was named for the school's second president, Robert Russa Moton.
Consequently, Tuskegee Institute was one of a very few American institutions (and the only African-American institution) to own, develop, and control facilities for military flight instruction.
Moton Field, also known as the Primary Flying Field or Airport Number 2, was the only primary flight training facility for African-American pilot candidates in the United States Army Air Corps during World War II.
The facility symbolizes the entrance of African-American pilots into the United States Army Air Corps, although on the basis of a policy of segregation that was mandated by the military and institutionalized in the South.
The facility also symbolizes the singular role of Tuskegee Institute (Tuskegee University) in providing leadership as well as economic and educational resources to make that entry possible.
The Tuskegee Airmen were the first African-American soldiers to complete their training successfully and to enter the United States Army Air Corps.
Almost 1,000 aviators were trained as America's first African-American military pilots.
In addition, more than 10,000 military and civilian African- American men and women served as flight instructors, officers, bombardiers, navigators, radio technicians, mechanics, air traffic controllers, parachute riggers, electrical and communications specialists, medical professionals, laboratory assistants, cooks, musicians, supply, firefighting, and transportation personnel.
Although military leaders were hesitant to use the Tuskegee Airmen in combat, the Airmen eventually saw considerable action in North Africa and Europe.
Acceptance from United States Army Air Corps units came slowly, but their courageous and, in many cases, heroic performance earned them increased combat opportunities and respect.
The successes of the Tuskegee Airmen proved to the American public that African-Americans, when given the opportunity, could become effective military leaders and pilots.
This helped pave the way for desegregation of the military, beginning with President Harry S Truman's Executive Order 9981 in 1948.
The Tuskegee Airmen's success also helped set the stage for civil rights advocates to continue the struggle to end racial discrimination during the civil rights movement of the 1950's and 1960's.
The story of the Tuskegee Airmen also reflects the struggle of African-Americans to achieve equal rights, not only through legal attacks on the system of segregation, but also through the techniques of nonviolent direct action.
The members of the 477th Bombardment Group, who staged a nonviolent demonstration to desegregate the officer's club at Freeman Field, Indiana, helped set the pattern for direct action protests popularized by civil rights activists in later decades.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are the following: (1) To benefit and inspire present and future generations to understand and appreciate the heroic legacy of the Tuskegee Airmen, through interpretation and education, and the preservation of cultural resources at Moton Field, which was the site of primary flight training.
To commemorate and interpret the impact of the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II; the training process for the Tuskegee Airmen including the roles played by Moton Field, other training facilities, and related sites; the strategic role of Tuskegee Institute (Tuskegee University) in the training; the African-American struggle for greater participation in the United States military and more significant roles in defending their country; the significance of successes of the Tuskegee Airmen in leading to desegregation of the United States military shortly after World War II; and the impacts of Tuskegee Airmen accomplishments on subsequent civil rights advances of the 1950's and 1960's.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE TUSKEGEE AIRMEN NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--There is hereby established as a unit of the National Park System the Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site, in association with Tuskegee University, in the State of Alabama.
Description.--The total historic site, after the conditions are met for its full development and management, and subsequent to agreements to donate land by Tuskegee University and the city of Tuskegee, shall consist of approximately 90 acres, known as Moton Field, in Macon County, Alabama, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Alternative C, Living History: Tuskegee Airmen Experience'', dated June 1998.
Such map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
The Secretary may acquire by donation, exchange, or purchase with donated or appropriated funds the real property described in section 3(b), except that any property owned by the State of Alabama or any political subdivision thereof or Tuskegee University may be acquired only by donation.
It is understood that property donated by Tuskegee University shall be used only for purposes consistent with this Act in commemorating the Tuskegee Airmen.
The initial donation of land by Tuskegee University shall consist of approximately 35 acres with the remainder of the acreage to be donated by Tuskegee University after agreement is reached regarding the development and management of the Tuskegee Airmen National Center.
The Secretary may also acquire by the same methods personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic site.
ADMINISTRATION OF HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666).
Role of Tuskegee Institute National Historic Site.--Tuskegee Institute National Historic Site shall serve as the principal administrative facility for the historic site.
Role of Tuskegee University.--Tuskegee University shall serve as the principal partner with the National Park Service, and other Federal agencies mutually agreed upon, for the leadership, organization, development, and management of the historic site.
Role of Tuskegee Airmen.--The Tuskegee Airmen shall assist the principal partners for the historic site in fundraising for the development of visitor facilities and programs, and provide artifacts, memorabilia, and historical research for interpretive exhibits.
Development.--The general management plan for the operation and development of the historic site shall reflect Alternative C, Living History: The Tuskegee Airmen Experience, as expressed in the draft special resource study entitled ``Moton Field/Tuskegee Airmen Special Resource Study'', dated June 1998.
Subsequent development of the historic site, with the approval of Tuskegee University, shall reflect Alternative D. (f) Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with Tuskegee University, other nonhigher educational institutions, the Tuskegee Airmen, individuals, private and public organizations, and other Federal agencies in furtherance of the purposes of this Act.
The Secretary shall recognize the concern of Tuskegee University for the wise management, use, and development of the historic site, and shall consult with Tuskegee University in the formulation of any cooperative agreement that may affect the historic site.
Tuskegee airmen national center.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with Tuskegee University to define and implement the public/private partnership needed to develop the historic site, including the Tuskegee Airmen National Center on the grounds of the historic site.
The purpose of the center shall be to extend the ability to relate more fully the story of the Tuskegee Airmen at Moton Field.
The center shall house a Tuskegee Airmen Memorial and provide large exhibit space for the display of period aircraft and equipment used by the Tuskegee Airmen and a Tuskegee University Department of Aviation Science.
It is the intent of the Congress that interpretive programs for visitors benefit from the school's active pilot training instruction program, and that the training program will provide a historical continuum of flight training in the tradition of the Tuskegee Airmen.
The Tuskegee University Department of Aviation Science may be located in historic buildings within the Moton Field complex until the Tuskegee Airmen National Center has been completed.
Report.--Within one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary and Tuskegee University, in consultation with the Tuskegee Airmen, shall prepare a report on the partnership needed to develop and operate the Tuskegee Airmen National Center, and submit the report to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Subject to the approval of the Congress, the Secretary and Tuskegee University may enter into a cooperative agreement to permit the development of the Center.
Before the balance of the land is donated and before the development of the Tuskegee Airmen National Center can proceed, a cooperative agreement acceptable to the Secretary and Tuskegee University must be executed.
General Management Plan.--Within 2 complete fiscal years after funds are first made available to carry out this Act, the Secretary shall prepare, with the full participation of Tuskegee University, a general management plan for the historic site and submit the plan to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.