This Act may be cited as the ``Tongass Transfer and Transition Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) It is in the public interest to provide a mechanism to transfer ownership of the Tongass National Forest to the State of Alaska to be managed and operated under the laws of the State of Alaska.
The State of Alaska is the level of government that is most sensitive to the ecologic and economic needs of the people of the Tongass and other Alaskans.
The State of Alaska is committed to policies in connection with the Tongass that include informed decisionmaking, prudent management of Tongass resources with sound science, multiple, balanced, and sustainable use of Tongass resources, an inclusive planning process for the diverse interests associated with the Tongass, and planning that fosters consensus.
It is appropriate for the State level of government to own and manage the land area now comprising Tongass National Forest and to provide the best ecologic and economic balance in the Southeast Alaska area that comprises the Tongass National Forest.
Without Federal constraints and costs, the State of Alaska is in a better position to balance the diverse needs and interests of those concerned with the future of the Tongass.
It is necessary to provide a smooth transition between Federal and State ownership and control and to resolve as many issues as possible prior to State ownership and control.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
The term ``Tongass National Forest'' means the Tongass National Forest, as depicted on the map numbered ____ and dated ____.
The term ``Federal obligation'' means any obligation or duty of the United States Forest Service arising out of any lease, permit, license, contract, and other legal instruments issued by or with the Forest Service relating to the Tongass National Forest.
The term ``Federal obligation'' does not include any obligation with respect to a Federal law, regulation, or policy.
The term ``Tongass National Forest lands'' includes all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to all real property located in the Tongass National Forest, and all structures (permanent and temporary) owned by the United States Forest Service located on such land.
The term ``transfer-transition period'' means the period beginning when the State of Alaska elects to receive the lands pursuant to this Act and ending one year thereafter.
The term ``transfer date'' means the date on which the State of Alaska elects to receive the lands pursuant to this Act and notifies the Secretary of such election.
The term ``patent date'' means the last day of the transfer-transition period.
Terms used in section 6(c) shall be accorded the meaning given to such terms under the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act.
TRANSFER OF TONGASS LANDS AND PROPERTY TO THE STATE OF ALASKA.
Automatic Transfer of Lands.--If, within 10 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the State of Alaska elects to receive all Tongass National Forest lands in conformance with subsection (b), and so notifies the Secretary, all Tongass National Forest lands shall be conveyed, by operation of law, to the State of Alaska, subject only to valid existing rights.
Such transfer shall occur in accordance with this Act.
Form of Election.--The election by the State of Alaska to receive lands pursuant to subsection (a) shall be in the form of a bill approved by the House and Senate of the Alaska State Legislature and signed by the Governor of the State of Alaska.
Such law shall state that-- (1) the State of Alaska elects to receive all Tongass National Forest lands; (2) the Tongass National Forest lands received shall be received subject to valid existing rights; (3) the procedures specified in this Act and the transition provisions of this Act shall apply to the transfer; and (4) the rights and obligations of the United States under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act with respect to lands, rights in lands, and use of lands transferred by the Tongass Transfer and Transition Act shall not be infringed by the State of Alaska.
Procedure.--Upon receipt by the Secretary of Agriculture of a copy of the law specified under subsection (b), the Secretary of Agriculture shall prepare a patent conveying all Tongass National Forest lands to the State of Alaska and shall deliver such patent to the State of Alaska on the patent date.
The duty of the Secretary to prepare and deliver such patent pursuant to this Act shall be purely ministerial and delivery of the patent on the patent date shall not be withheld or conditioned.
The United States Supreme Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to issue such writs and compel such actions as may be necessary to accomplish the conveyance made under this Act.
Other Property.--Upon the election pursuant to subsection (a) and concurrent with the transfer of lands pursuant to this Act, the Secretary shall also transfer the right and title to and interest in all other types of property (including real and personal property) used for purposes of operating, administering, and managing the Tongass National Forest.
Such property shall be transferred on the patent date and include only that which is owned by the United States and used by the United States Forest Service within the Tongass National Forest and that which is directly associated with the management of such Forest.
All vehicles transferred shall be painted the official colors of State of Alaska vehicles prior to transfer.
TRANSITION PROVISIONS DURING THE TRANSITION PERIOD.
Existing Obligations of the United States.--The United States shall remain obligated for Federal obligations during the transfer- transition period.
Employees.--During the transfer-transition period, to the extent practicable, the State of Alaska shall interview each person employed on the date of the enactment of this Act in the Tongass National Forest by the United States Forest Service for purposes of reemployment by the State of Alaska for a comparable function within the new State administrative system for the Tongass Forest.
Employees who do not secure employment with the State of Alaska shall be given preferential treatment for purposes of other available positions with the United States Government.
Alaska Pulp Corporation Contract.--The State of Alaska shall enter into discussions with the Alaska Pulp Corporation during the transition-transfer period and conclude an agreement which reinstates the Alaska Pulp Corporation Contract (Contract No.
12-11-010-1545) within six months of the patent date.
Such agreement shall provide for dismissal with prejudice of a lawsuit styled as Alaska Pulp Corporation against the United States of America, No.
Such reinstatement shall include an additional provision which requires sale or assignment of such contract to a third party who agrees to construct a manufacturing facility in Southeast Alaska that utilizes pulp-grade logs.
The State of Alaska shall assume the obligations of the Forest Service under such reinstated contract, except that the State of Alaska shall assume no obligation for any claim relating to such contract which arose from an occurrence before the transfer date.
Timber Road Program Fund.--From amounts remaining after making payments for the benefit of public schools and roads under the Act of May 23, 1908 (16 United States Code 500), the Secretary shall, notwithstanding any other provision of law, provide the gross receipts from the Tongass National Forest derived from timber sale stumpage fees due during the transfer-transition period to the State of Alaska as seed money for purposes of establishing a timber roads revolving fund.
TRANSITION PROVISIONS OUTSIDE THE TRANSITION PERIOD.
Management of Transferred Lands.--(1) Beginning on the patent date, the lands transferred pursuant to this Act shall be administered and managed under applicable State of Alaska law, except as otherwise provided in this Act for the period provided by this Act.
During the transfer-transition period and until the patent date, the lands subject to transfer pursuant to this Act shall be administered and managed under Federal law and the Tongass Land Management Plan.
Land Designations.--Land use designations in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act under the Tongass Land Management Plan shall continue in effect for a period of up to one year after the patent date, but shall cease to be applicable when the State of Alaska adopts a land use designation system for the transferred lands during such one-year period.
Subsistence Use After the Patent Date.--The Secretary of the Interior shall retain continuing authority to manage subsistence uses of fish and wildlife on lands transferred under this Act until such time as the State of Alaska law is in compliance with title VIII of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act.
Mining Claims.--(1) For a period of 15 years after the patent date, Federal mining claims located before the patent date pursuant to the General Mining Law of 1872 (30 United States Code 22 and following) in the Tongass National Forest shall remain subject to the laws, rules, regulations, and policies of the United States, but such laws, rules, regulations, and policies shall be administered by the State of Alaska.
During such period, the right and ability of a claimholder to patent such a mining claim shall not be infringed.
An application to patent a Federal mining claim located in the area comprising the Tongass National Forest may be made by the claimholder with the State of Alaska and shall constitute an election by the claim holder to be subject to Federal mining claim patent procedures administered by the State of Alaska.
At any time during the 15-year period referred to in paragraph (1), the holder of a Federal mining claim may elect to convert the claim into a mining claim to be administered under the laws of the State of Alaska.
An election to convert such a claim must be in writing, include such information as the Commissioner may request, and be sent to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Alaska.
The State of Alaska shall convert each Federal claim into one or more State claims covering the area of the Federal claim.
Upon the expiration of the 15-year period referred to in paragraph (1), each Federal mining claim for which a mining patent application has not been filed and which is located within the Tongass National Forest shall be converted by operation of law into a mining claim or claims to be administered under the laws of the State of Alaska.
During the transfer-transition period the Federal Government shall maintain the right to receive fees and revenues, if any, due on Federal mining claims.
After the patent date, the State of Alaska shall have the right to receive any fees or revenues due on Federal claims that are not converted under paragraph (2) or (3).
Land Grants to Native People.--The State of Alaska shall negotiate in good faith to obtain an agreement with the native people of the communities of Haines, Ketchikan, Petersburg, Tenakee, and Wrangell, Alaska who did not receive a land claim settlement under the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act.
Under such agreement, the State of Alaska shall convey not less than 23,040 acres of surface estate and not more than 46,080 acres of surface estate to each community within the boundary of the land transferred for purposes of historical, cultural, economic (including timber, tourism, and recreation) development and subsistence use in settlement of such claims.
Upon the conveyance of such surface estate, the State of Alaska shall convey the subsurface estate of such lands to Sealaska Corporation.
Unprocessed timber (as defined in section 493 of Public Law 101-382) may not be exported from Alaska.
Negotiations shall conclude as soon as practicable after the patent date, but in no case later than two years after the transfer date.
If an agreement is not reached, then the matter shall be submitted to binding arbitration.
Timber Receipts to Local Governments.--In each year, beginning with the fiscal year of the State of Alaska beginning after the transfer date and ending with the tenth fiscal year thereafter, the State of Alaska shall allocate 25 percent of the net timber stumpage receipts for all timber sold on the lands transferred under authority of this Act directly to boroughs, municipalities, and local governments for purposes of schools, educational materials, and community roads.
Timber Receipts to the United States.--For a period of 10 calendar years, beginning with the fiscal year of the State of Alaska beginning after the patent date, the State of Alaska shall pay to the United States, 25 percent of the net receipts for all timber sold on the lands transferred under authority of this Act.
Ketchikan Pulp Contract.--On the patent date, the State of Alaska shall assume all the obligations of the United States and be entitled to all the benefits due to the United States under Contract No.
A10fs-1042 with the Ketchikan Pulp Corporation beginning on the patent date.
Timber Exports.--The State of Alaska shall prohibit by law export of unprocessed saw, utility, and pulp logs originating from lands transferred under this Act for a minimum period of ten years.
Existing Obligations After Patent Date.--On the patent date, the State of Alaska shall assume all Federal obligations and duties and receive all rights of the United States Forest Service, except that the State of Alaska shall assume no obligation for any claim for damages or specific performance relating to a contract if such claim arose before the patent date, unless the State of Alaska receives the benefit from such an obligation.
MISCELLANEOUS DUTIES OF THE PARTIES AND OTHER PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE TRANSFER.
Map and Legal Description.--The Secretary shall provide the State of Alaska with a map and other legal descriptions of the land to be transferred under section 4.
The map and the legal descriptions provided under this subsection shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Secretary in Washington, District of Columbia, and in two readily accessible locations in Alaska, at least one of which is in Southeast Alaska.
Hazardous Materials.--As promptly as practicable after the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall make available to the State of Alaska for review and inspection, all pertinent records relating to hazardous materials, if any, on lands to be transferred under this section.
The responsibility for costs of remedial action related to such materials shall be borne by those entities responsible under existing law.
Judicial Review.--Transfer of land pursuant to this Act shall not be subject to judicial review in any court of the United States, except-- (1) to the extent a right of judicial review is conferred specifically by the United States Constitution; (2) otherwise conferred by this Act; or (3) when sought by the State of Alaska on matters pertaining to rights conferred by this Act.
Rulemaking.--No formal rules under section 553 of title 5, United States Code, are required to implement this Act.
Survey.--The patent for lands conveyed pursuant to this Act shall not be subject to completion of a field survey and may be issued based on a protraction survey.
Repeal.--Sections 503, 508, 703, 704, 705, and 706 of the Alaska National Lands Interest Conservation Act are repealed on the patent date.
Title III of the Tongass Timber Reform Act is repealed on the transfer date.
Encumbrances.--For purposes of an orderly transfer of the Tongass National Forest to State ownership and transition to State management, the Secretary shall provide a list of encumbrances of record and otherwise known in the Tongass National Forest to the Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources of the State of Alaska during the transfer-transition period.
The transfer under this Act shall be subject to all existing encumbrances.