This Act may be cited as the ``United States Peace Tax Fund Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that for a significant minority of Americans sincere conscientious objection to participation in war in any form means that such Americans cannot in conscience pay the portion of their taxes that would support military expenditures.
Policy.--It is the policy of the Congress-- (1) to improve revenue collections and to allow conscientious objectors to pay their full tax liability without violating their moral, ethical, or religious beliefs; (2) to reduce the present administrative and judicial burden created by conscientious objectors who violate tax laws rather than violate their consciences; (3) to recognize conscientious objector status with regard to the payment of taxes for military purposes; and (4) to provide a mechanism for congressional appropriations of such funds for nonmilitary purposes.
UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is hereby established within the Treasury of the United States a special trust fund to be known as the ``United States Peace Tax Fund'' (hereinafter referred to as the ``Fund'').
The Fund shall consist of such amounts as may be transferred to the Fund as provided in this section.
Transfer to Fund of Amounts Equivalent to Certain Taxes.-- (1) In general.--There are hereby transferred to the Fund amounts equivalent to the sum of the amounts designated during the fiscal year by individuals under sections 2210, 2506, and 6099 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 for payment into the Fund.
Such amounts shall be deposited into the Fund and shall be available only for the purposes provided in this Act.
Method of transfer.--The amounts transferred by paragraph (1) shall be transferred at least monthly from the general fund of the Treasury to the Fund on the basis of estimates by the Secretary of the Treasury of the amounts, referred to in paragraph (1), received in the Treasury.
Proper adjustments shall be made in the amounts subsequently transferred to the extent that prior estimates were in excess of or less than the amounts required to be transferred.
Report.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall report to the Committees on Appropriations of the House of Representatives and the Senate each year on the total amount transferred into the Fund during the preceding fiscal year.
Such report shall be printed in the Congressional Record upon receipt by the committees.
INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information and returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS FOR TRANSFER TO UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND ``Sec.
In General.--Every eligible individual (other than a nonresident alien) whose income tax liability for any taxable year is $1 or more may designate that such individual's income tax payment for such year shall be paid into the United States Peace Tax Fund established by section 3 of the United States Peace Tax Fund Act.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible individual.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible individual' means an individual who by reason of religious training and belief is conscientiously opposed to participation in war in any form, and who-- ``(i) has been exempted or discharged from combatant training and service in the Armed Forces of the United States as a conscientious objector under section 6(j) of the Military Selective Service Act (50 United States Code App.
456(j)), or corresponding law, or ``(ii) certified in a statement in a questionnaire return made under section 6039F that such individual is conscientiously opposed to participation in war in any form within the meaning of section 6(j) of such Act.
Verification.-- ``(i) Questionnaire return receipt.--Any taxpayer who makes a designation under subsection (a) shall attach the questionnaire return receipt provided under section 6039F(b) to such taxpayer's return of tax.
Additional information may be required.--The Secretary may require any taxpayer who makes a designation under subsection (a) to provide such additional information as may be necessary to verify such taxpayer's status as an eligible individual.
Denial of designation.--If the Secretary determines that a taxpayer who makes the designation provided for by subsection (a) is not an eligible individual and is not entitled to make such designation, then the Secretary, upon written notice to the taxpayer stating the reasons for denial, may deny the designation.
The taxpayer may challenge the Secretary's ruling by bringing an action in the United States Tax Court, or in the United States district court for the district of such taxpayer's residence, for a declaratory judgment as to whether the taxpayer is an eligible individual and entitled to make such a designation.
Income tax liability.--The term `income tax liability' means the amount of the tax imposed by chapter 1 on a taxpayer for any taxable year (as shown on such taxpayer's tax return) reduced by the sum of-- ``(A) the credits (as shown in such return) allowable under part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 (other than subpart C thereof), and ``(B) the amount designated under section 6096.
Income tax payment.--The term `income tax payment' means the amount of taxes imposed by chapter 1 and paid by or withheld from a taxpayer for any taxable year not in excess of such taxpayer's income tax liability.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year either-- ``(1) at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, or ``(2) at any other time (after the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year) specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that, if such designation is made at the time described in paragraph (1), such designation shall be made on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Special Rule in the Case of Joint Return.--In the case of an eligible individual filing a joint return, upon the consent of such individual's spouse, the joint income tax payment may be designated pursuant to subsection (a).
Explanation of United States Peace Tax Fund Purposes.--Each publication of general instructions accompanying an income tax return or a questionnaire return described in section 6039F shall include-- ``(1) an explanation of the purpose of the United States Peace Tax Fund, ``(2) the criteria for determining whether an individual meets the requirements of section 6(j) of the Military Selective Service Act (50 United States Code App.
456(j)), and ``(3) an explanation of the process for making the designation provided by this section.''.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of parts of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX--Designation of income tax payments for transfer to United States Peace Tax Fund.''.
Designation Information.-- (1) Subpart A of part III of subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information and returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND DESIGNATION INFORMATION.
Questionnaire Return.--Every taxpayer who makes a designation described in section 6099(a) for any taxable year shall make a questionnaire return during such year as described in this section.
The questionnaire return shall request the taxpayer to certify such taxpayer's beliefs about participation in war, the source or genesis of such beliefs, and how the beliefs affect the taxpayer's life.
Questionnaire Return Receipt.--Upon receipt of a questionnaire return that is timely filed, the Secretary shall issue a receipt to the taxpayer indicating timely filing of such return.''.
The table of sections for such subpart is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
United States Peace Tax Fund designation information.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to-- (1) taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996, and (2) any taxable year ending before January 1, 1997, for which the time for filing a claim for refund or credit of an overpayment of tax has not expired on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Rules Applicable to Returns of Tax for Taxable Years Ending Before Date of Enactment.-- (1) Penalties for failure to pay tax.--Notwithstanding any other law, any person's failure or refusal, before the date of the enactment of this Act, to pay all or a part of the tax imposed by chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 shall not be a violation of Federal law if the person-- (A) pays the tax due (with interest), and (B) establishes to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Treasury that the failure or refusal to pay was based upon such person's conscientious objection to participation in war in any form within the meaning of section 6099(b)(1)(A) of such Code (defining eligible individual).
Disposition of amounts collected.--There are hereby transferred to the Fund amounts equivalent to the sum of the amounts paid into the Treasury by persons under the provisions of paragraph (1).
Such amounts shall be deposited into the Fund and shall be available only for the purposes provided in this Act.
ESTATE TAX PAYMENTS TO UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND.
In General.--Subchapter C of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
DESIGNATION OF ESTATE TAX PAYMENTS FOR TRANSFER TO UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND.
``An eligible individual (within the meaning of section 6099(b)(1)) may elect that the tax imposed by section 2001 on the taxable estate of such individual shall be transferred when paid to the United States Peace Tax Fund established by section 3 of the United States Peace Tax Fund Act.
The election may be made by the executor or administrator of the estate under written authority of the decedent.
Such election shall be made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter C of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Designation of estate tax payments for transfer to United States Peace Tax Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to the estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1996.
GIFT TAX PAYMENTS TO UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 12 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
DESIGNATION OF GIFT TAX PAYMENTS FOR TRANSFER TO UNITED STATES PEACE TAX FUND.
``Any eligible individual (within the meaning of section 6099(b)(1)) may elect that the tax imposed by section 2501 shall be transferred when paid to the United States Peace Tax Fund established by section 3 of the United States Peace Tax Fund Act.
The election shall be made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 12 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Designation of gift tax payments for transfer to United States Peace Tax Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to gifts made after December 31, 1996.
Certification by Comptroller General.--As soon after the close of each fiscal year as may be practicable, the Comptroller General shall determine and certify to the Congress and to the President the percentage of actual appropriations made for a military purpose with respect to such fiscal year.
The certification shall be published in the Congressional Record upon receipt by the Congress.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is hereby authorized to be appropriated for each fiscal year a certain portion of the Fund for obligation and expenditure in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
Such portion is equal to an amount which is the sum of-- (1) the product of-- (A) all funds transferred to the Fund in the previous fiscal year, times (B) the percentage determined under subsection (a) for such previous fiscal year, plus (2) all funds in the Fund previously authorized to be appropriated under this subsection but not yet appropriated pursuant to this Act.
Funds remaining in the Fund shall accrue interest according to the prevailing rate in long-term Government bonds.
Surplus Covered Into General Fund.--For each fiscal year, the portion of the Fund which is attributable to funds transferred to the Fund in the previous fiscal year and which is not authorized to be appropriated under subsection (b) is hereby covered into the general fund of the Treasury of the United States.
No part of the funds transferred to the general fund under this subsection shall be appropriated for any expenditures, or otherwise obligated, for a military purpose.
Payments.--Funds appropriated pursuant to the authorization under section 7(b) shall be available, subject to appropriation, to make grants, loans, or other arrangements for eligible activities described in subsection (b).
Eligible Activities.--The following activities are eligible to receive funds under subsection (a): (1) Special Supplemental Food Program for Women, Infants and Children (WIC).
Displacement of Other Funds.--It is the intent of this Act that the Fund shall not operate to release funds for military expenditures which, were it not for the existence of the Fund, would otherwise have been appropriated for nonmilitary expenditures.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) The term ``military purpose'' means any activity or program which any agency of the Government conducts, administers, or sponsors and which effects an augmentation of military forces or of defensive and offensive intelligence activities, or enhances the capability of any person or nation to wage war.
The term ``actual appropriations made for a military purpose'' includes, but is not limited to, amounts appropriated by the United States in connection with-- (A) the Department of Defense; (B) the Central Intelligence Agency; (C) the National Security Council; (D) the Selective Service System; (E) activities of the Department of Energy that have a military purpose; (F) activities of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration that have a military purpose; (G) foreign military aid; and (H) the training, supplying, or maintaining of military personnel, or the manufacture, construction, maintenance, or development of military weapons, installations, or strategies.
The term ``agency'' means each authority of the Government of the United States, whether or not it is within or subject to review by another agency, but does not include-- (A) the Congress; or (B) the courts of the United States.
The term ``person'' includes an individual, partnership, corporation, association, or public or private organization other than an agency.
If any section, subsection, or other provision of this Act, or the application thereof to any person or circumstance, is held invalid, the remainder of this Act and the application of such section, subsection, or other provision to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected thereby.