This Act may be cited as the ``Chemical Security Act of 1999''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The term ``Off-site Consequence Analysis Submission'' means only the off-site consequence portion of a risk management plan submitted to the Administrator under section 68.165 of title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as in effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
The term ``covered stationary source'' means a stationary source of any air pollutant that is required to submit a risk management plan under section 112(r)(7)(B) of the Clean Air Act.
The term ``official use'' means any action that is intended to carry out a function of a Federal, State, or local agency or entity having responsibility for planning for or responding to chemical releases at a stationary source.
Such term includes disclosing the results of an Off-site Consequence Analysis Submission in any format different than that used in the Submission.
The term ``authorized contractor'' means a person having responsibility for handling risk management plans under subparagraph (B) of section 112(r)(7) of the Clean Air Act under contract with the Administrator, the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board, a State, or a local agency or entity referred to in clause (iii) of such subparagraph (B).
ONE-YEAR MORATORIUM FOR CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION.
Prohibition.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of any Federal, State, or local law that provides for freedom of information or public disclosure of governmental information, in order to provide for Congressional consideration of the effects of the public disclosure required under clause (iii) of section 112(r)(7)(B) of the Clean Air Act and for consideration of the reports under section 4 of this Act, no Off-site Consequence Analysis Submission shall be disclosed, or made available, to the public or to any person or entity by the Administrator, the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board, a State, a local agency or an entity referred to in such clause (iii), or any authorized contractor.
One-year period.--The prohibition set forth in paragraph (1) shall apply only for a period ending 1-year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Permitted disclosure.--The prohibition set forth in paragraph (1) shall not apply to disclosure of an Off-site Consequence Analysis Submission for official use only pursuant to clause (iii) of section 112(r)(7)(B) of the Clean Air Act to the Administrator, the Chemical Safety and Hazard Investigation Board, a State, a local agency or an entity referred to in such clause (iii), or any authorized contractor.
Penalty.--The violation of the prohibition set forth in subsection (a) shall be an infraction punishable under section 3571 of title 18 of the United States Code.
In any case in which more than one Off-site Consequence Analysis Submission has been disclosed or made available in violation of subsection (a), the violation with respect to each such Submission shall be considered a separate violation for purposes of such section 3571.
The total of all penalties imposed on a single person or organization for violations of subsection (a) shall not exceed $100,000.
Disclosure without Facility Identification.--Notwithstanding the moratorium under subsection (a), after June 21, 1999, the Administrator shall make information from risk management plans, including information from the Off-site Consequence Analysis Submissions, available to the public in accordance with section 112(r)(7)(B)(iii) of the Clean Air Act in a form which does not include any information concerning the identity or location of the covered stationary sources for which such plans were prepared.
Emergency Planning Meetings.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, each owner or operator of a covered stationary source shall convene a meeting with community representatives, employees and contractors working at the covered stationary source and with local emergency planning committees and other appropriate emergency responders to discuss the measures necessary to prevent, and protect the source from, attacks by terrorists and other criminals.
Not later than 10 months after the date of enactment of this Act, each such owner or operator shall send a certification to the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation stating that such meeting has been held within one year prior to, or within 10 months after, the date of the enactment of this Act.
SITE SECURITY STUDY AND REPORTS TO CONGRESS.
Site Security.--The Attorney General, using available data to the extent possible, and analyzing a sampling of covered stationary sources selected at the discretion of the Attorney General, and in consultation with appropriate State, local, and Federal governmental agencies, affected industry and the public, shall review the vulnerability of covered stationary sources to criminal and terrorist activity, current industry practices regarding site security, security of transportation of extremely hazardous substances, and the effectiveness of this Act.
Six months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall submit a report to the Congress containing the results of the review, together with recommendations for reducing vulnerability to criminal and terrorist activity through inherently safer practices and site security, and the need for additional legislation.
If the report recommends information security measures, it shall describe the means by which any individual shall be guaranteed access to risk management information without a geographical restriction.
The Attorney General shall submit updates of such report biennially after the submission of the first report.
Comptroller General Report.--Not later than 180 days after the enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit a report to the Congress on the health and environmental effects of public disclosure of information.
In preparing such report the Comptroller General shall consult with the Administrator and appropriate representatives of the States, local governments, affected industries, emergency responders, and public interest groups and shall undertake a specific examination of the reduction in toxic chemical releases associated with the reporting requirements of section 313 of the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986 (Toxics Release Inventory).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.