This Act may be cited as the ``Promoting Antiterrorism Capabilities Through International Cooperation Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The development and implementation of technology is critical to combating terrorism and other high consequence events and implementing a comprehensive homeland security strategy.
The United States and its allies in the global war on terrorism share a common interest in facilitating research, development, testing, and evaluation of technologies that will aid in detecting, preventing, responding to, recovering from, and mitigating against acts of terrorism.
Certain United States allies in the global war on terrorism, including Israel, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, and Singapore have extensive experience with, and technological expertise in, homeland security.
The United States and certain of its allies in the global war on terrorism have a history of successful collaboration in developing mutually beneficial technologies in the areas of defense, agriculture, and telecommunications.
The United States and its allies in the global war on terrorism will mutually benefit from the sharing of technological expertise to combat domestic and international terrorism.
The establishment of a program to facilitate and support cooperative endeavors between and among government agencies, for-profit business entities, academic institutions, and nonprofit entities of the United States and its allies will safeguard lives and property worldwide against acts of terrorism and other high consequence events.
PROMOTING ANTITERRORISM THROUGH INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION ACT.
In General.--The Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by inserting after section 313 (6 United States Code 193) the following new section: ``SEC.
PROMOTING ANTITERRORISM THROUGH INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION PROGRAM.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Director.--The term `Director' means the Director selected under subsection (c)(1).
International cooperative activities.--The term `international cooperative activities' includes-- ``(A) coordinated research projects, joint research projects, or joint ventures; ``(B) joint studies or technical demonstrations; ``(C) coordinated field exercises, scientific seminars, conferences, symposia, and workshops; ``(D) training of scientists and engineers; ``(E) visits and exchanges of scientists, engineers, or other appropriate personnel; ``(F) exchanges or sharing of scientific and technological information; and ``(G) joint use of laboratory facilities and equipment.
Under secretary.--The term `Under Secretary' means the Under Secretary for Science and Technology of the Department of Homeland Security.
Institution of higher education.--The term `institution of higher education' has the meaning given such term in section 101(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001(a)).
International Cooperative Activities.-- ``(1) Authorization.--The Under Secretary is authorized to carry out international cooperative activities to support the responsibilities specified under section 302.
Mechanisms and equitability.--In carrying out this section, the Under Secretary may award grants to and enter into cooperative agreements or contracts with United States governmental organizations, businesses, federally funded research and development centers, institutions of higher education, and foreign public or private entities.
The Under Secretary shall ensure that funding and resources expended in international cooperative activities will be equitably matched by the foreign partner organization through direct funding or funding of complementary activities, or through provision of staff, facilities, materials, or equipment.
Cooperation.--The Under Secretary is authorized to conduct international cooperative activities jointly with other agencies.
Foreign partners.--Under this section, the Under Secretary may form partnerships with United States allies in the global war on terrorism, including Israel, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, Singapore, and other countries as appropriate.
Exotic diseases.--As part of the international cooperative activities authorized in this section, the Under Secretary may facilitate the development of information sharing and other types of cooperative mechanisms with foreign countries, including nations in Africa, to strengthen American preparedness against threats to the Nation's agricultural and public health sectors from exotic diseases.
Program and Director.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Under Secretary shall establish the Science and Technology Homeland Security International Cooperative Program to facilitate international cooperative activities throughout the Science and Technology Directorate.
The Program shall be headed by a Director, who shall be selected by and shall report to the Under Secretary.
Responsibilities of the director.-- ``(A) Development of mechanisms.--The Director shall be responsible for developing, in consultation with the Department of State and in coordination with other Federal agencies, mechanisms and legal frameworks to allow and to support international cooperative activities in support of homeland security research.
Identification of partners.--The Director shall facilitate the matching of United States entities engaged in homeland security research with non-United States entities engaged in homeland security research so that they may partner in homeland security research activities.
Coordination.--The Director shall ensure that the activities under this subsection are coordinated with those of other components of the Department and of other relevant research agencies.
Conferences and workshops.--The Director, periodically, shall support the planning and execution of international homeland security technology workshops and conferences to improve contact among the international community of technology developers and to help establish direction for future technology goals.
Program manager authority.--This subsection shall not be construed to limit the ability of a program manager to initiate or carry out international cooperative activities provided that such activities are appropriately coordinated with the Program established under this subsection.
Budget Allocation.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, to be derived from amounts otherwise authorized for the Directorate of Science and Technology, $25,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2010 for activities under this section.
Report to Congress on International Cooperative Activities.-- ``(1) Initial report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Under Secretary, acting through the Director, shall transmit to the Congress a report containing-- ``(A) a brief description of each partnership formed under subsection (b)(4), including the participants, goals, and amount and sources of funding; and ``(B) a list of international cooperative activities underway, including the participants, goals, expected duration, and amount and sources of funding, including resources provided to support the activities in lieu of direct funding.
Updates.--At the end of the fiscal year that occurs 5 years after the transmittal of the report under subsection (a), and every 5 years thereafter, the Under Secretary, acting through the Director, shall transmit to the Congress an update of the report required under subsection (a).''.
Table of Contents Amendment.--The table of contents of the Homeland Security Act of 2002 is amended by adding after the item relating to section 313 the following new item: ``Sec.
Promoting antiterrorism through international cooperation program.''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 26, 2006.
Attest: KAREN L. HAAS, Clerk.