Certifications Regarding Environmental Agreement.-- (1) Annual certifications.--The President shall, on the basis of the reports prepared under paragraph (2), submit to the Congress, not later than May 31 of each year, a report that certifies whether or not each NAFTA country is meeting commitments made in the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation-- (A) to ensure that the regulations of that country establish and enforce levels of environmental protection that meet the requirements of its constitution and other laws setting forth the country's policy on environmental protection; and (B) to effectively enforce the laws referred to in paragraph (1).
Basis of certification.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency shall prepare for the President an annual report on the enforcement by each NAFTA country of its laws governing environmental protection, and its progress in protecting the environment in accordance with its development.
In doing so, the Administrator shall consider the country's-- (A) air quality standards; (B) water effluent standards; and (C) hazardous waste disposal standards.
Each report under this paragraph shall be transmitted to the President not later than 30 days before the date on which the President is required to submit his report under paragraph (1).
Certifications Regarding Labor Agreement.-- (1) Annual certifications.--The President shall, on the basis of the reports prepared under paragraph (2), submit to the Congress, not later than May 31 of each year, a report that certifies whether or not each NAFTA country is meeting commitments made in the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation to comply with the objectives of that Agreement to promote and improve laws protecting worker rights and to promote compliance with these laws by using appropriate methods such as-- (A) monitoring and on-site inspection by trained; (B) encouragement of voluntary compliance by employers; (C) mandatory reporting by employers to appropriate governmental authorities; and (E) enforcement actions.
Basis of certification.--The Secretary of Labor shall prepare for the President an annual report on the enforcement by each NAFTA country of its laws protecting worker rights.
In doing so, the Secretary shall consider the country's enforcement of such laws in accordance with the following labor principles (as stated in the Preamble of the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation): (A) Freedom of association.
The right to bargain collectively.
The right to strike.
Prohibition on forced labor.
Restrictions on labor by children and young people.
Elimination of employment discrimination.
Equal pay for men and women.
Prevention of occupational accidents and diseases.
Compensation in cases of work accidents and occupational diseases.
Each report under this paragraph shall be transmitted to the President not later than 30 days before the date on which the President is required to submit his report under paragraph (1).
DENIAL OF CERTAIN BENEFITS.
In General.--In any case in which the President certifies in a report submitted under section 1 that a NAFTA country is not meeting commitments made in the North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation or the North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation, then the following shall apply, beginning 30 days after the report is submitted, until the next report is submitted under section 1: (1) Denial of united states assistance.--That country may not receive any United States assistance (other than humanitarian assistance), including any loans or other extensions of credit or credit guarantees by the United States.
Opposition to assistance by international financial institutions.--The President shall direct the United States Representative to each international financial institution to use the voice and vote of the United States to oppose any loan or other extension of credit to that country.
Imposition of tariffs.--The President may impose on products of that country, notwithstanding any other provision of law, tariffs, in addition to those that would otherwise apply, on products in those sectors of the economy directly related to the failure of the country to meet the commitments made in the applicable agreement.
Waiver.--The President may waive the application of any provision of subsection (a) with respect to a country if the President determines that it is in the national security interests of the United States to do so and the President submits that determination, and the rationale for the determination, to the Congress at least 30 days before the waiver would take effect.
As used in this Act: (1) International financial institution.--The term ``international financial institution'' has the meaning given that term in section 1701(c)(2) of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262r(c)(2)).
Nafta country.--The term ``NAFTA country'' has the meaning given that term in section 2(4) of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 United States Code 3301(4)).
North american agreement on environmental cooperation.--The term ``North American Agreement on Environmental Cooperation'' has the meaning given that term in section 532(b)(2) of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 United States Code 3472(b)(2)).
North american agreement on labor cooperation.--The term ``North American Agreement on Labor Cooperation'' has the meaning given that term in section 531(b)(2) of the North American Free Trade Agreement Implementation Act (19 United States Code 3471(b)(2)).
United states assistance.--The term ``United States assistance'' means any program of assistance or credits provided by the United States to other countries under any provision of law.