This Act may be cited as the ``Support for Military Reserve Families Act of 2004''.
LOAN PROGRAM FOR MEMBERS OF THE SELECTED RESERVE.
In General.--Part II of subtitle E of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 1215 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 1216--READY RESERVE MOBILIZATION LOAN PROGRAM ``12591.
Establishment of loan program.
Members eligible for loans.
Definitions ``In this chapter: ``(1) The term `eligible member' means a member of the Ready Reserve who has one or more dependents enrolled in the Department of Defense program Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS).
The term `covered service' means active duty performed by a member of a reserve component under an involuntary call or order to active duty in support of a contingency operation.
Establishment of loan program ``(a) Establishment.--The Secretary of Defense shall establish for members of the Ready Reserve (including the Coast Guard Reserve) a loan program to be known as the `Ready Reserve Mobilization Loan Program'.
Administration.--The loan program shall be administered by the Secretary under such regulations as the Secretary considers appropriate for carrying out the program.
Agreement With Secretary of Homeland Security.--The Secretary and the Secretary of Homeland Security shall enter into an agreement with respect to the administration of the program for the Coast Guard Reserve.
Members eligible for loans ``(a) In General.--The Secretary of Defense shall make a loan under the program under this chapter to an eligible member, upon receipt of an application for such loan from such member, for any period during which the member performs covered service if, as determined by the Secretary-- ``(1) the income of the member during such service is less than the member's income before being called or ordered to such service; and ``(2) the member incurs a financial hardship by reason of such service.
Determination of Income.--The Secretary shall make a determination under paragraph (1) of subsection (a) by comparing-- ``(1) the member's regular military compensation (as defined in section 101 of title 37), stated as an annualized amount; with ``(2) the amount of income of the member over the 52 weeks preceding the beginning of such service derived from sources that will not be available to the member while performing such service.
Use of Loan Amounts.--The Secretary shall take such steps as the Secretary considers necessary to ensure that a loan under the program is not used for investment purposes (other than deposit in a demand account).
Loan amounts ``(a) Amount of Loan.--The amount of a loan to an eligible member under this chapter may be in any amount specified by the eligible member up to $500 for each full month of covered service performed by the member.
Disbursement of Loan Amount.--The Secretary of Defense shall disburse a loan under the program under this chapter in such manner as may be directed by the member taking out the loan.
The Secretary shall provide means to assist the member in facilitating the making of the amount of such loan available for the use or benefit of dependents of the member.
A member may designate in writing another person to receive the amount of a loan under the program, and the member may direct that such an amount for a person so designated be deposited with a bank or other financial institution to the credit of the designated person.
Interest ``(a) Interest Free Period.--Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), a loan under this chapter for any month of covered service shall bear no interest for the period beginning on the date of the loan and ending at the end of-- ``(1) five years from the end of the period of covered service including that month, if that period of covered service is a period of less than 12 consecutive months; and ``(2) ten years from the end of the period of covered service including that month, if that period of covered service is a period of 12 consecutive months or more.
5 Percent Interest.--A loan under this chapter shall bear interest at the rate of 5 percent per year commencing to accrue-- ``(1) as of the date that is the end of the interest-free period specified in subsection (a); or ``(2) if the service of the member in the Selected Reserve ends before the date referred to in paragraph (1), as of the date such service in the Selected Reserve ends.
Payment ``(a) Period of Payment.--(1) Repayment of a loan under this chapter shall commence when the member to whom the loan is made is released from the period of active duty that includes the covered service for which the loan is made.
Unless the member enters into an alternative repayment agreement with the Secretary, the loan shall be repaid over the period beginning on the date of the loan and ending at the end of-- ``(1) five years, if the period of covered service is a period of less than 12 consecutive months; and ``(2) ten years, if that period of covered service is a period of 12 consecutive months or more.
Method of Payment.--Unless the member enters into an alternative repayment agreement with the Secretary, payment on a loan under this chapter shall be by deduction from the amount of basic pay or inactive-duty pay earned by the member while in an active status but not on active duty (other than for training).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of subtitle E, and at the beginning of part II of subtitle E, of title 10, United States Code, are amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 1215 the following new item: ``1216.
Ready Reserve Mobilization Loan Program............. 12591''.