This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Loan Revitalization Act''.
In General.--Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(31) Combination financing.-- ``(A) Definitions.--In this paragraph-- ``(i) the term `combination financing' means financing comprised of a loan guaranteed under this subsection and a commercial loan; and ``(ii) the term `commercial loan' means a loan of which no portion is guaranteed by the Federal government.
Application.--A loan guarantee under this subsection on behalf of a small business concern, which is approved within 120 days of the date on which a commercial loan is obtained by the same small business concern, shall be subject to the provisions of this paragraph.
Commercial loan amount.--A small business concern shall not be eligible to receive combination financing under this paragraph unless the commercial loan obtained by the small business concern does not exceed $2,000,000.
Commercial loan provisions.--The commercial loan obtained by the small business concern-- ``(i) may be made by the participating lender that is providing financing under this subsection or by a different lender; ``(ii) may be secured by a senior lien; and ``(iii) may be made by a lender in the Preferred Lenders Program, if applicable.
Commercial loan fee.--A one-time fee in an amount equal to 0.5 percent of the amount of the commercial loan shall be paid by the lender to the Administration if the commercial loan has a senior credit position to that of the loan guaranteed under this subsection.
All proceeds from the loan guaranteed under this subsection shall be used to offset the cost (as defined in section 502 of the Credit Reform Act of 1990) to the Administration of guaranteeing loans under this subsection.
Deferred participation loan eligibility.-- ``(i) Maximum amount.--A small business concern may not receive combination financing under this paragraph in an amount greater than $4,000,000.
Net amount.--The net amount of the deferred participation share shall not exceed the maximum amount of a net guarantee provided under paragraph (3)(A).
Deferred participation loan security.--A loan guaranteed under this subsection may be secured by a subordinated lien.
Availability.--Combination financing shall be available under this paragraph notwithstanding any maximum limitation on loans imposed by the Administration.''.
Sunset Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the first day after the date of enactment of this Act and is repealed on October 1, 2004.
In General.--Section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (18)(B), by adding at the end the following: ``This subparagraph shall not apply to any loan approved during the period beginning on the first day after the date of enactment of paragraph (23)(A)(iii) and ending on September 30, 2004.
''; and (2) in paragraph (23), by amending subparagraph (A) to read as follows: ``(A) Percentage.-- ``(i) In general.--With respect to each loan guaranteed under this subsection, the Administrator shall, in accordance with such terms and procedures as the Administrator shall establish by regulation, assess and collect an annual fee in an amount equal to 0.5 percent of the outstanding balance of the deferred participation share of the loan.
First temporary percentage.--With respect to loans approved during the period beginning on October 1, 2002 and ending on the date of enactment of this clause, the annual fee assessed and collected under clause (i) shall be equal to 0.25 percent of the outstanding balance of the deferred participation share of the loan.
Second temporary percentage.-- During the period beginning on the first day after the date of enactment of this clause and ending on September 30, 2004, the annual fee assessed and collected under clause (i) shall be equal to 0.35 percent of the outstanding balance of the deferred participation share of the loan.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the first day after the date of enactment of this Act and are repealed on October 1, 2004.
RECONSIDERATION OF LOAN APPLICATIONS REJECTED BASED ON LOAN AMOUNT.
Consideration of Loan Application Submitted Before January 8, 2004.--Beginning on the first day after the date of enactment of this Act, the Small Business Administration shall reconsider any application submitted on or after December 23, 2003 and before January 8, 2004, under section 7(a) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)) that was rejected based on the loan amount requested before considering any other application if the applicant is otherwise eligible for financial assistance under that section.
Export Working Capital.--Any small business that received financing under section 7(a)(14) of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636(a)(14)) before January 1, 2004, and requests a renewal of such financing, shall have their request approved regardless of the size of such financing (subject to the limitations in section 7(a)(3) of such Act) if the small business is otherwise eligible for such financing under that section.
Maximum Loan Amount.--Ten days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Small Business Administration shall allow loans under section 7 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 636) up to the maximum amount permitted under the Small Business Act.