In General.--Section 203(d) of the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970 (26 United States Code 3304 note) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (B) of paragraph (1), by striking ``5 per centum'' and inserting ``4 per centum'', and (2) in the first flush sentence following paragraph (2), by striking ``5'' and inserting ``4''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to weeks of unemployment beginning 6 months or more after the date of the enactment of this Act.
INCREASE AND DECREASE IN EARNINGS CREDITED TO STATE ACCOUNTS WHEN STATES MEET OR FAIL TO MEET FUNDING GOALS.
In General.--Section 904 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1104) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Increase and Decrease in Amount of Earnings Allocated to State Accounts When States Meet or Fail to Meet Funding Goals ``(h)(1) If the average daily balance in a State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund for any calendar quarter exceeds the funding goal of such State, the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e) for such quarter shall be increased by the interest premium on such excess.
If the average daily balance in such a State account for any calendar quarter is less than the funding goal of such State, the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e) for such quarter shall be decreased by the interest penalty.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to any interest premium or interest penalty to the extent that such application would result in an increase or decrease of more than $2,500,000 in the amount creditable to any State account for any calendar quarter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `interest premium' means, for any calendar quarter-- ``(A) with respect to the State with the largest percentage value of excess of the average daily balance in the State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund over the funding goal of such State, one-half of one percent of the amount of such excess, and ``(B) with respect to each other State, the product of-- ``(i) the amount of the excess of the average daily balance in the State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund over the funding goal of such State, and ``(ii) the percentage which bears the same ratio to one-half of one percent as-- ``(I) the percentage value of such excess, bears to ``(II) the percentage value of the excess of the State referred to in subparagraph (A).
The Secretary shall make appropriate adjustments in the interest premium for any calendar quarter if the aggregate interest premiums payable for such quarter exceed the aggregate interest penalties for such quarter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `interest penalty' means, for any calendar quarter-- ``(A) with respect to the State with the largest percentage value of excess of the funding goal of such State over the average daily balance in the State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund, one-half of one percent of the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e), and ``(B) with respect to each other State, the product of-- ``(i) the amount otherwise creditable to such account under subsection (e), and ``(ii) the percentage which bears the same ratio to one-half of one percent as-- ``(I) the percentage value of the excess of the funding goal of the State over such average daily balance of such State, bears to; or ``(II) the percentage value of such excess of the State referred to in subparagraph (A).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `funding goal' means, for any State for any calendar quarter, the average of the unemployment insurance benefits paid by such State during each of the 3 years, in the 20-year period ending with the calendar year containing such calendar quarter, during which the State paid the greatest amount of unemployment benefits.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `percentage value' means-- ``(A) with respect to any excess of the average daily balance in a State account in the Unemployment Trust Fund over the funding goal of such State, the percentage which such excess bears to such funding goal, and ``(B) with respect to any excess of such funding goal over such average daily balance, the percentage which such excess bears to such funding goal.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Amounts credited to state accounts.--Subsection (e) of section 904 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1104(e)) is amended in the first sentence by inserting ``(as modified by subsection (h))'' after ``a proportionate part''.
Interest rate on repayment of advances determined without regard to interest premiums or penalties on amounts credited to state accounts.--Subparagraph (A) of section 1202(b)(4) of such Act (42 United States Code 1322(b)(4)) is amended by inserting ``(determined without regard to section 904(h))'' after ``preceding calendar year''.
Report.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Labor shall submit to the Congress a report recommending sources of funding for the crediting of interest premiums under subsection (h) of section 904 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1104), as added by this section, in the event that the imposition of interest penalties under such subsection is insufficient to fund such premiums.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to calendar years beginning after December 31, 1999.
INTEREST-FREE ADVANCES TO STATE ACCOUNTS IN UNEMPLOYMENT TRUST FUND RESTRICTED TO STATES WHICH MEET FUNDING GOALS.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 1202(b) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1322(b)) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (A), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (B) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) the average daily balance in the account of such State in the Unemployment Trust Fund for each of 4 of the 5 calendar quarters preceding the calendar quarter in which such advances were made exceeds the funding goal of such State (as defined in section 904(h)).''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to calendar years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
STATE COLLECTION OF FEDERAL UNEMPLOYMENT TAX.
In General.--Chapter 23 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to Federal Unemployment Tax Act) is amended by redesignating section 3311 as section 3312 and by inserting after section 3310 the following new section: ``SEC.
STATE COLLECTION OF TAX.
In General.--At the election of any State which is certified as provided in section 3304, each employer who pays contributions, with respect to any wages, into an unemployment fund maintained under the unemployment compensation law of such State shall submit the tax imposed by this chapter with respect to such wages to such State rather than to the Secretary.
Coordination With Depositary Requirements.--Payment under subsection (a) of the tax imposed by this chapter with respect to any wages shall be treated as timely paid for purposes of this title if paid by the employer to the State at the same time as a timely paid payment, with respect to such wages, of contributions into an unemployment fund maintained under the unemployment compensation law of such State.
Exception for Payments Not Timely Paid.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to any payment of the tax imposed by this chapter which is not paid by an employer on or before the last date on which such payment would be treated as timely paid under subsection (b).
Federal Tax Transferred to Secretary.--Each State making an election under subsection (a) shall transmit to the Secretary, at the time and in the manner prescribed by the Secretary, the amount of the tax imposed by this chapter which is submitted to such State under subsection (a) and a copy of the State tax return of each employer making such a submission.
The Secretary may, after consultation with the Interstate Conference of Employment Security Administrators, prescribe regulations requiring that additional information be submitted by such State with respect to the amount of such tax payable by such employer.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 23 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 3311 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
State collection of tax.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.
REQUIRED DISTRIBUTION OF STATE-SPECIFIC INFORMATION PACKETS.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 3304 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to approval of State laws) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (18), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (19) and inserting ``; and'', and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(20) the State will distribute to unemployed individuals State-specific information packets explaining unemployment insurance eligibility conditions.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to certifications of States for 2000, except that section 3304(a)(20) of such Code, as added by subsection (a), shall not be a requirement for the State law of any State prior to July 1, 2001, if the legislature of such State does not meet in a regular session which closes during the calendar year 2000.