LIMITATION ON DISPOSAL OF FORMER NAVAL VESSELS AND MARITIME ADMINISTRATION VESSELS FOR SCRAPPING ABROAD.
Limitation.--Except as provided in subsection (b), the Secretary concerned may not dispose of a vessel under the jurisdiction of that Secretary that is otherwise available for disposal if the disposal will result in the scrapping of the vessel outside the United States.
Exception.--The prohibition in subsection (a) does not apply in the case of a particular vessel if-- (1) the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency certifies to Congress and the Secretary concerned that the environmental standards imposed by law and enforced in the country in which the vessel is to be scrapped are similar to the environmental standards imposed under United States law; and (2) the Secretary of Labor certifies to Congress and the Secretary concerned that the country in which the vessel is to be scrapped recognizes internationally recognized worker rights (as that term is defined in section 507(4) of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2467(4)).
Covered Secretaries.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``Secretary concerned'' means-- (1) the Secretary of the Navy, in the case of vessels under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of the Navy; and (2) the Secretary of Transportation, in the case of vessels under the jurisdiction of the Maritime Administration.
Scrapping.--For the purposes of this section, the term ``scrapping'', with respect to a vessel, includes dismantling the vessel and breaking up the vessel.
NAVY SHIP SCRAPPING PILOT PROGRAM.
In General.--(1) During fiscal years 1999 and 2000, the Secretary of the Navy shall carry out a pilot program-- (A) to gather data on the cost of scrapping United States vessels at locations within the United States; and (B) to demonstrate cost effective technologies and techniques to scrap such vessels in a manner that is protective of worker safety and health and the environment.
The Secretary, in carrying out the pilot program, shall provide for the scrapping at locations within the United States of vessels in such number or tonnage as the Secretary determines to be sufficient for the purposes of the pilot program specified in subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1).
Contract Award.--(1) In selecting the contractor for any contract under the pilot program for the scrapping of a vessel, the Secretary shall award the contract to the offeror that the Secretary determines will provide the best value to the United States, taking into account such factors as the Secretary considers appropriate.
In making a best value determination under this subsection, the Secretary shall give a greater weight to technical and performance- related factors than to cost and price-related factors.
In evaluating an offer for such a contract, the Secretary shall give significant weight to the technical qualifications and past performance of the offeror, and the major subcontractors or team members of the offeror, in the following areas: (A) Compliance with applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations for environmental and worker protection.
Ability to safely remove, handle, and abate hazardous materials such as polychlorinated biphenyls, asbestos, and lead.
Experience with ship construction, conversion, repair, or scrapping.
Ability to manage workers safely in the following processes and procedures: (i) Metal cutting and heating.
Working in confined and enclosed spaces.
Fire prevention and protection.
Handling and control of polychlorinated biphenyls, asbestos, lead, and other hazardous materials.
Operation and use of magnetic cranes or heavy lift cranes.
Use of personal protection equipment.
Emergency spill and containment capability.
Ability to provide an overall plan and schedule to remove, tow, moor, demilitarize, dismantle, transport, and sell salvage materials and scrap in a safe and cost effective manner in compliance with applicable Federal, State, and local laws and regulations.
Ability to provide an effective scrap site spill containment prevention and emergency response plan.
Ability to ensure that subcontractors adhere to applicable Federal, State and local laws and regulations for environmental and worker safety.
Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require the Secretary to disclose the specific weight of evaluation factors to potential offerors or to the public.
Contract Terms and Conditions.--Any contract awarded by the Secretary for the scrapping of a vessel for the purposes of the pilot program shall provide for the following: (1) The transfer of the vessel to the contractor.
The sharing (by any appropriate contracting method) of the costs of scrapping the vessel between the Government and the contractor.
A performance incentive to the contractor for a successful record of environmental and worker protection under the contract.
Access by the United States to records of the contractor in accordance with the requirements of section 2313 of title 10, United States Code.
Reports.--(1) Not later than September 30, 1999, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate and the Committee on National Security of the House of Representatives an interim report on the pilot program.
That report shall include the following: (A) The procedures used for the solicitation and award of each contract awarded under the program.
A description of each contract awarded under the program.
Not later than September 30, 2000, the Secretary of the Navy shall submit to those committees a final report on the pilot program.
That report shall include the following: (A) The results of the program and the performance of each contractor under the program.
The procurement strategy of the Secretary for future ship scrapping activities.