PAY AND RETIREMENT OF A FEDERAL JUSTICE OR JUDGE CONVICTED OF A FELONY.
Suspension Without Pay.-- (1) Supreme court justices.-- (A) In general.--Section 3 of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (i) by inserting ``(a)'' before ``Whenever the''; and (ii) by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(b) Justices of the Supreme Court shall hold office during good behavior.
(1) For purposes of the tenure or appointment of a justice, the term `good behavior' shall not include any offense committed by a justice if the conviction of such offense is a felony that-- ``(A) is punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year; and ``(B) involves moral turpitude.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), a justice convicted of a felony described under paragraph (1) shall be suspended from office without pay.
Such suspension shall be effective on and after the date on which the verdict of guilt of such felony is entered.
(i) In the event of reversal of the conviction upon final appeal, the justice shall be reinstated with back pay, unless impeached.
If articles of impeachment of the justice are reported to the House of Representatives and the final disposition of the articles is not a conviction in the Senate, the justice shall be reinstated without back pay.''.
Technical and conforming amendments.-- (i) The section heading for section 3 of title 28, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Vacancy in office of Chief Justice; disability; service by justices during good behavior''.
The table of sections for chapter 1 of title 28, United States Code, is amended by amending the item relating to section 3 to read as follows: ``3.
Vacancy in office of Chief Justice; disability; service of justices during good behavior.''.
Circuit judges.--Section 44(b) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``Circuit judges''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) For purposes of the tenure or appointment of a circuit judge, the term `good behavior' shall not include any offense committed by a circuit judge if the conviction of such offense is a felony that-- ``(i) is punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year; and ``(ii) involves moral turpitude.
Subject to subparagraph (C), a circuit judge convicted of a felony described under subparagraph (A) shall be suspended from office without pay.
Such suspension shall be effective on and after the date on which the verdict of guilt of such felony is entered.
(i) In the event of reversal of the conviction upon final appeal, the circuit judge shall be reinstated with back pay, unless impeached.
If articles of impeachment of the judge are reported to the House of Representatives and the final disposition of the articles is not a conviction in the Senate, the circuit judge shall be reinstated without back pay.''.
District judges.--Section 134(a) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by inserting ``(1)'' before ``The district judges''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) For purposes of the tenure or appointment of a district judge, the term `good behavior' shall not include any offense committed by a judge if the conviction of such offense is a felony that-- ``(i) is punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year; and ``(ii) involves moral turpitude.
Subject to subparagraph (C), a district judge convicted of a felony described under subparagraph (A) shall be suspended from office without pay.
Such suspension shall be effective on and after the date on which the verdict of guilt of such felony is entered.
(i) In the event of reversal of the conviction upon final appeal, the district judge shall be reinstated with back pay, unless impeached.
If articles of impeachment of the judge are reported to the House of Representatives and the final disposition of the articles is not a conviction in the Senate, the district judge shall be reinstated without back pay.''.
Retirement Age and Service Requirements for Federal Justices and Judges Convicted of a Felony.--Section 371(c) of title 28, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(1)'' after ``(c)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), if a justice or judge is convicted of a felony punishable by death or imprisonment for a term exceeding one year and which involves moral turpitude, the age and years of service of the justice or judge on the date on which the verdict of guilt of such felony is entered, shall be the attained age and years of service of the justice or judge for purposes of paragraph (1).
Subparagraph (A) shall not apply if-- ``(i) the conviction is reversed upon final appeal, unless the justice or judge is impeached; or ``(ii) articles of impeachment of the justice or judge are reported to the House of Representatives and the final disposition of the articles is not a conviction in the Senate.