This Act may be cited as the ``Sierra Leone Peace Support Act of 2000''.
FINDINGS AND SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) Eight years of civil war and massive human rights violations have created a humanitarian crisis in the Republic of Sierra Leone, leaving over 50,000 dead and 1,000,000 displaced from their homes.
As many as 480,000 Sierra Leoneans have fled into neighboring countries, especially Guinea.
All parties to the conflict have committed abuses, but the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) and its ally, the former Sierra Leonean army (AFRC) are responsible for the overwhelming majority.
The RUF and AFRC have systematically abducted, raped, mutilated, killed, or forced children to fight alongside RUF soldiers.
The RUF continues to hold hundreds and perhaps thousands of prisoners, including many child soldiers, despite the agreement of RUF leadership at Lome to release all children.
The civil defense forces committed human rights violations, including killings and recruitment of child soldiers, and Economic Community of West African States Military Observer Group (ECOMOG) forces have also committed human rights abuses, including executions of captured combatants and killings of civilians.
Neighboring countries, especially Liberia and Burkina Faso, have contributed greatly to the destruction of Sierra Leone by aiding and arming the RUF and providing sanctuary for RUF fighters.
International humanitarian efforts to assist Sierra Leoneans, both at home and in Guinea, have fallen far short of need such that conditions in refugee camps and among displaced persons camps are deplorable, food and medicine is dangerously inadequate, and the refugee population on the Sierra Leonean border continues to be preyed upon by RUF insurgents and subjected to rape, mutilation, or killing.
Demobilization, demilitarization, and reintegration (DDR) efforts, as called for in the Lome agreement of July 1999, have begun months late and are still at beginning stages.
With the withdrawal of the West African peacekeeping forces, the United Nations Security Council has approved the deployment of 11,000 peacekeeping forces for Sierra Leone.
There are approximately 45,000 combatants, including many child soldiers, in Sierra Leone who must be demobilized, provided with alternate employment, and reintegrated into their communities.
Both the Government of Sierra Leone and the RUF/AFRC formally agreed in the Lome Convention of July 7, 1999, to uphold, promote, and protect the human rights (including the right to life and liberty, freedom from torture, the right to a fair trial, freedom of conscience, expression, and association, and the right to take part in the governance of one's country) of every Sierra Leonean as well as the enforcement of humanitarian law.
Sense of the Congress.--The Congress urges the President to vigorously promote efforts to end further degradation of conditions in the Republic of Sierra Leone, to dramatically increase United States assistance to demobilization, demilitarization, and reintegration (DDR) efforts and humanitarian initiatives, to assist in the collection of documentation about human rights abuses by all parties, and to engage in diplomatic initiatives aimed at consolidating the peace and protecting human rights.
DEMOBILIZATION, DEMILITARIZATION, AND REINTEGRATION ASSISTANCE.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $13,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 for assistance under chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2221 et seq.)
to the Sierra Leone DDR Trust Fund of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development for demobilization, demilitarization, and reintegration assistance in Sierra Leone.
Assistance under the preceding sentence may not be used to provide stipends to ex-combatants of the civil war in the Republic of Sierra Leone.
Additional Requirements.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to subsection (a)-- (1) are in addition to any other amounts available for the purpose described in such subsection; and (2) are authorized to remain available until expended.
DEMOCRATIZATION, ELECTORAL, AND JUDICIAL ASSISTANCE.
Judicial Assistance.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2001 for assistance to rebuild and strengthen the capacity of the judiciary in the Republic of Sierra Leone and to assist efforts to establish the rule of law and maintain law and order in Sierra Leone.
Expanded International Military Education and Training Assistance.--Beginning 1 year after the conclusion of free and fair elections in Sierra Leone, the President may provide expanded international military education and training assistance to the military forces and related civilian personnel of Sierra Leone under section 541 of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (22 United States Code 2347) solely for the purpose of providing training relating to defense management, civil-military relations, law enforcement cooperation, and military justice.
Additional Requirements.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subsection (a)-- (1) are in addition to any other amounts available for the purposes described in such subsection; and (2) are authorized to remain available until expended.
Statement of Congressional Concern About Accountability.--It is the sense of the Congress that a thorough and nonpartisan initiative to collect information on human rights abuses by all parties to the conflict in the Republic of Sierra Leone be undertaken.
Comprehensive and detailed information, particularly the identification of specific units, individuals, and commanders found to have been especially abusive, will be essential for vetting human rights abusers from the newly formed armed forces and police forces of Sierra Leone and for deterring abuses by all parties in the future.
Accordingly, the Congress calls upon the administration to strongly support an independent process of data collection on human rights abuses in Sierra Leone, for use by the Truth and Reconciliation Commission when it has been established, and to support any future initiatives of international accountability for Sierra Leone.
Assistance for Truth and Reconciliation Commission.-- (1) Assistance for establishment and support of commission.--The President is authorized to provide assistance for the establishment and support of a Truth and Reconciliation Commission to establish accountability for human rights abuses in the Republic of Sierra Leone.
Assistance for human rights data collection.--The Secretary of State, acting through the Assistant Secretary of the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor, is authorized to collect human rights data with respect to Sierra Leone and assist the Truth and Reconciliation Commission in carrying out its functions.
Authorization of appropriations.-- (A) Establishment and support of commission.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the President $1,500,000 for fiscal year 2001 for assistance under chapter 4 of part II of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 to carry out paragraph (1).
Human rights data collection.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of State $500,000 for fiscal year 2001 to carry out paragraph (2).
Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under the preceding sentence shall be deposited in the ``Human Rights Fund'' of the Bureau of Democracy, Human Rights and Labor of the Department of State.
Availability.--Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations under subparagraphs (A) and (B) are authorized to remain available until expended.
NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES OF SIERRA LEONE.
Reports to Congress.-- (1) Arms flows.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall transmit to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report which provides information, including measurable, credible, and verifiable evidence (to the extent practicable), concerning the extent to which neighboring countries of the Republic of Sierra Leone are involved in arms flows into Sierra Leone.
Sierra leonean minerals.--Not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act, the President shall transmit to the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report which provides information, including measurable, credible, and verifiable evidence (to the extent practicable), concerning illicit sales of Sierra Leonean gold and diamonds through neighboring countries of the Republic of Sierra Leone.
Notification by Secretary of State.--If a report transmitted by the President pursuant to paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) contains measurable, credible, or verifiable evidence that a country is involved in arms flows into Sierra Leone, or that a country is involved in illicit sales of Sierra Leonean gold or diamonds through that country, then the Secretary of State-- (1) shall take all necessary steps to initiate diplomatic efforts to bring about the termination of such activities by the country; and (2) if the country has not ceased the proscribed activity within 3 months of the initiation of such diplomatic efforts, shall inform the country of the possibility that United States foreign assistance for the country may be terminated or suspended if the country does not cease the proscribed activity.
Assistance for Neighboring Countries.--United States assistance may be provided to the central government of a neighboring country of the Republic of Sierra Leone only if such government-- (1)(A) provides demonstrated support for the peace process in the Republic of Sierra Leone in accordance with the Lome Convention of July 7, 1999; and (B) does not provide training or other support for the RUF/ AFRC forces or any other forces proscribed under the Lome Convention; and (2) cooperates with efforts to monitor arms flows to Sierra Leone.
United states assistance.--In this subsection, the term ``United States assistance'' means assistance of any kind which is provided by grant, sale, loan, lease, credit, guaranty, or insurance, or by any other means, by any agency or instrumentality of the United States Government.
Passed the House of Representatives May 3, 2000.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.