This Act may be cited as the ``Coordinated Recovery Initiative for Babies Act of 2014'' or the ``CRIB Act of 2014''.
IDENTIFICATION, TREATMENT, AND SURVEILLANCE OF NEONATAL ABSTINENCE SYNDROME.
Study.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall conduct a study to identify-- (1) the most effective and beneficial methods that are currently available to identify the need for treating and best treatment methods for, infants diagnosed with neonatal abstinence syndrome; (2) barriers, including associated costs and limitations or disparities in the availability or scope of health insurance coverage, that may hinder the clinical use of best practices by medical professionals and other health care providers for the identification and treatment of neonatal abstinence syndrome; (3) circumstances, such as populations with unique needs and health care settings with limited resources, that may require particularized best practices for medical professionals and other health care providers for the identification and treatment of neonatal abstinence syndrome; (4) existing surveillance measures within the Department of Health and Human Services (in this Act referred to as the ``Department'') and in State health agencies relating to neonatal abstinence syndrome; and (5) areas in which information on neonatal abstinence syndrome and its surrounding circumstances is insufficient, incomplete, or requires further study or analysis.
Advisory Panel.-- (1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall convene an advisory panel (in this section referred to as the ``Panel'') to identify and compile the best practices under subsection (c).
The Secretary shall reconvene the Panel for such purpose whenever the Secretary, with the advice of the Panel, determines updates are needed to the list of best practices under subsection (e), but no less than every 2 years.
Members.--The Panel shall be composed of 19 members, all of whom shall be medical professionals or health care providers with expertise in neonatal abstinence syndrome.
Members shall represent the broad range of such professionals and providers necessary to identify and compile the best practices for identification and treatment of neonatal abstinence syndrome, including representatives of-- (A) The American Academy of Family Physicians.
The American Academy of Pediatrics.
The American Academy of Physician Assistants.
The American College of Nurse-Midwives.
The American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists.
The American Hospital Association.
The American Medical Association.
The American Nurses Association.
The American Pharmacists Association.
The American Public Health Association.
The American Society for Addiction Medicine.
The American Society of Anesthesiologists.
The Association of State and Territorial Health Professionals.
The Association of Women's Health, Obstetric, and Neonatal Nurses.
The Children's Hospital Association.
The National Association of Medicaid Directors.
The National Association of Nurse Practitioners in Women's Health.
The National Association of Pediatric Nurse Practitioners.
The National Association of Social Workers.
Administrative support.--The Secretary shall provide appropriate administrative support, including technical assistance, to the Panel.
Best Practices; Plan; Report.--Not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1)(A) identify and compile the best practices for medical professionals and other health care providers for identifying and treating neonatal abstinence syndrome; and (B) identify any gaps in best practices for medical professionals and other health care providers that may require additional research or analysis; (2) develop and implement a plan for the coordination and, if necessary, expansion and enhancement of public health surveillance of neonatal abstinence syndrome that-- (A) identifies the data necessary for a public health response to neonatal abstinence syndrome; (B) identifies any gaps in current surveillance or coordination that results in the lack of collection of such data, including a lack of timeliness or standardization of data reporting; (C) makes recommendations and provides assistance to the States to implement effective measures to collect such necessary data by State health agencies; and (D) designates an appropriate agency in the Department to coordinate such data; and (3) not later than 18 months after the date of enactment of this Act, submit to the Congress a report containing the Secretary's findings and identifying issues that-- (A) relate to neonatal abstinence syndrome, including its causes, identification, treatment, prevalence, and effects; and (B) public health issues related to neonatal abstinence syndrome that would benefit from further study.
Dissemination of Best Practices.--The Secretary-- (1) shall disseminate the best practices identified and compiled under subsection (c), including any updates under subsection (e), directly or through arrangements with nonprofit organizations, government agencies, or the media; (2) shall post such best practices on the public Internet site of the Department; and (3) may include in such dissemination any supplemental information which the Secretary determines to be relevant and appropriate, in consultation with the Panel.
Updates to Best Practices.--The Secretary shall periodically, but no less often than every 2 years, review the best practices identified under subsection (c) to ensure that such best practices are up-to-date and reflect the views of the medical community, including organizations listed in subsection (b)(2).
Appropriate Agency.--In designating an appropriate agency within the Department under subsection (c), the Secretary shall consider, among other factors, agency resources, purpose, expertise, and capability to conduct public health programs and research.