This Act may be cited as the ``District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 Amendments of 1993''.
AUTHORIZATION OF A NEW STADIUM.
The District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 (71 United States Statutes at Large 619; D.C. Code sections 2-321 through 2-330) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
(1) The District of Columbia is authorized to use, for a period not to exceed 99 years from the date of enactment of the District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 Amendments of 1993, a portion of the lands adjacent to the stadium constructed pursuant to section 2 (known as `Robert Federal Reporter Kennedy Memorial Stadium'), as generally shown on the map identified as `Map to Designate Location of Stadiums and Lease of Parking Lots to the District', and further identified as National Park Service Drawing No.
831/87306, for the purposes of constructing, maintaining, and operating, itself or through a third party, either public or private, a new stadium, or any replacement of a new stadium.
The use of the new stadium shall not be limited by the seating capacity, cost, and other provisions in section 2.
Nothing in section 7(b), or any lease or deed executed pursuant thereto, or in this section, shall be construed to limit the authority or ability of the District of Columbia to sublease or otherwise encumber the said portion to a third party, either public or private, for-- ``(A) any use consistent with the use authorized by this section; and ``(B) any term not exceeding that which is authorized in this section.
(1)(A) Except for those lands used by the District of Columbia for the new stadium authorized by subsection (a), the use of the lands leased to the District of Columbia for stadium and stadium parking lots purposes pursuant to section 7(b) shall continue in accord with the provisions of that section subject to the provisions of subparagraphs (B) and (C).
The term of the authorized use of the lands leased to the District of Columbia for stadium and stadium parking lots is extended for a period not to exceed 99 years from the date of enactment of the District of Columbia Stadium Act of 1957 Amendments of 1993.
Nothing in section 7(b), or any lease or deed executed pursuant thereto, or in this section, shall be construed to limit the authority or ability of the District of Columbia to sublease or otherwise encumber the lands to a third party, either public or private, for-- ``(i) any use consistent with the use authorized by section 7(b) and this section: and ``(ii) any term not exceeding that which is authorized in this section.
The responsibility and authority for construction, maintenance, and operation of the parking lots on the lands leased to the District of Columbia for parking lots purposes is vested exclusively in the District of Columbia.
Such responsibility and authority for the parking lots may be assigned by the District of Columbia to a third party under any sublease executed pursuant to the authority provided in this section.
The National Park Service shall not be responsible for construction, maintenance, or operation of the parking lots, or any cost arising therefrom.
(1)(A) Except for the lands described in subparagraph (B), the lands designated as `Area F' on the map entitled `Map to designate Location of Stadiums and Lease of Parking Lots to the District', and further identified as National Park Service Drawing No.
831/87306 (hereinafter referred to as `Area F'), are leased to the District of Columbia.
Such lands may be used by the District of Columbia, or any sublessee of the District of Columbia, for the stadium parking lots purposes specified in section 7(b), during the term of use of stadium parking lots authorized by subsection (b)(1) of this section, only for `overflow' parking, that is not to exceed 2,000 automobiles, and only when all other stadium striped parking spaces are filled to capacity.
The area described in subparagraph (A) excludes that area of land used by the District of Columbia for the new stadium authorized by subsection (a) of this section.
The use of Area F shall be in accord with the terms and conditions specified in an agreement between the National Park Service and the District of Columbia.
The terms and conditions specified in such agreement shall be reasonable and necessary to ensure that Area F is maintained as grassed park land suitable for public recreational uses.
The National Park Service shall not be responsible for improvement, maintenance, or operation of Area F, or any costs arising therefrom.
The responsibility and authority for construction, maintenance, naming, and operation of the new stadium authorized by subsection (a) of this section is vested exclusively in the District of Columbia.
Such responsibility and authority for the new stadium may be assigned by the District of Columbia to a third party, either public or private.
The National Park Service shall not be responsible for construction, maintenance, naming, or operation of the new stadium, or any costs arising therefrom.
Notwithstanding the provisions of the Act entitled `An Act to regulate the height of buildings in the District of Columbia', approved June 1, 1910 (36 United States Statutes at Large 452; D.C. Code 5-401 through 5-409), a stadium authorized by subsection (a) may be constructed if-- ``(1) the design has been reviewed by the Commission of Fine Arts; and ``(2) reviewed and approved by the National Capital Planning Commission.