RESIDENTIAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FOR STATE PRISONERS.
Residential Substance Abuse Treatment for Prisoners.--Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes), is amended-- (1) by redesignating part Q as part R; (2) by redesignating section 1701 as section 1801; and (3) by inserting after part P the following: ``PART Q--RESIDENTIAL SUBSTANCE ABUSE TREATMENT FOR STATE PRISONERS ``SEC.
``The Director of the Bureau of Justice Assistance (referred to in this part as the `Director') may make grants under this part to States, for the use by States and units of local government for the purpose of developing and implementing residential substance abuse treatment programs within State correctional facilities, as well as within local correctional facilities in which inmates are incarcerated for a period of time sufficient to permit substance abuse treatment.
In General.--(1) To request a grant under this part the chief executive of a State shall submit an application to the Director in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Such application shall include assurances that Federal funds received under this part shall be used to supplement, not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this part.
Such application shall coordinate the design and implementation of treatment programs between State correctional representatives and the State Alcohol and Drug Abuse agency (and, if appropriate, between representatives of local correctional agencies and representatives of either the State alcohol and drug abuse agency or any appropriate local alcohol and drug abuse agency).
Substance Abuse Testing Requirement.--To be eligible to receive funds under this part, a State must agree to implement or continue to require urinalysis or similar testing of individuals in correctional residential substance abuse treatment programs.
Such testing shall include individuals released from residential substance abuse treatment programs who remain in the custody of the State.
Eligibility for Preference With After Care Component.-- ``(1) To be eligible for a preference under this part, a State must ensure that individuals who participate in the substance abuse treatment program established or implemented with assistance provided under this part will be provided with aftercare services.
State aftercare services must involve the coordination of the correctional facility treatment program with other human service and rehabilitation programs, such as educational and job training programs, parole supervision programs, half-way house programs, and participation in self- help and peer group programs, that may aid in the rehabilitation of individuals in the substance abuse treatment program.
To qualify as an aftercare program, the head of the substance abuse treatment program, in conjunction with State and local authorities and organizations involved in substance abuse treatment, shall assist in placement of substance abuse treatment program participants with appropriate community substance abuse treatment facilities when such individuals leave the correctional facility at the end of a sentence or on parole.
State Office.--The Office designated under section 507 of this title-- ``(1) shall prepare the application as required under section 1702, and ``(2) shall administer grant funds received under this part, including review of spending, processing, progress, financial reporting, technical assistance, grant adjustments, accounting, auditing, and fund disbursement.
1703. REVIEW OF STATE APPLICATIONS.
In General.--The Director shall make a grant under section 1701 to carry out the projects described in the application submitted under section 1702 upon determining that-- ``(1) the application is consistent with the requirements of this part; and ``(2) before the approval of the application the Director has made an affirmative finding in writing that the proposed project has been reviewed in accordance with this part.
Approval.--Each application submitted under section 1702 shall be considered approved, in whole or in part, by the Director not later than 45 days after first received unless the Director informs the applicant of specific reasons for disapproval.
Restriction.--Grant funds received under this part shall not be used for land acquisition or construction projects.
Disapproval Notice and Reconsideration.--The Director shall not disapprove any application without first affording the applicant reasonable notice and an opportunity for reconsideration.
ALLOCATION AND DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
Allocation.--Of the total amount appropriated under this part in any fiscal year-- ``(1) 0.4 percent shall be allocated to each of the participating States; and ``(2) of the total funds remaining after the allocation under paragraph (1), there shall be allocated to each of the participating States an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount of remaining funds described in this paragraph as the State prison population of such State bears to the total prison population of all the participating States.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant made under this part may not exceed 75 percent of the total costs of the projects described in the application submitted under section 1702 for the fiscal year for which the projects receive assistance under this part.
``Each State that receives a grant under this part shall submit to the Director an evaluation not later than March 1 of each year in such form and containing such information as the Director may reasonably require.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et seq.
), is amended by striking the matter relating to part Q and inserting the following: ``Part Q--Residential Substance Abuse Treatment for Prisoners ``Sec.
1703. Review of State applications.
Allocation and distribution of funds.
``Part R--Transition--Effective Date--Repealer ``Sec.
Continuation of rules, authorities, and proceedings.''.
Definitions.--Section 901(a) of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3791(a)) is amended by adding after paragraph (23) the following: ``(24) The term `residential substance abuse treatment program' means a course of individual and group activities, lasting between 9 and 12 months, in residential treatment facilities set apart from the general prison population-- ``(A) directed at the substance abuse problems of the prisoner; and ``(B) intended to develop the prisoner's cognitive, behavioral, social, vocational, and other skills so as to solve the prisoner's substance abuse and related problems.''.
Section 1001(a) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793), is amended by adding after paragraph (10) the following: ``(11) There are authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996 to carry out the projects under part Q.''.
Passed the House of Representatives November 3, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.