PERCENTAGE LIMITATION ON NONPARTY MULTICANDIDATE POLITICAL COMMITTEE CONTRIBUTIONS ACCEPTED BY HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not, with respect to an election, accept contributions from nonparty multicandidate political committees that, in the aggregate, exceed 40 percent of the total of contributions accepted from all sources.''.
INCOME TAX CREDIT FOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO NONINCUMBENT HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 23 the following new section: ``SEC.
CONTRIBUTIONS TO NONINCUMBENT HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
General Rule.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed, subject to the limitations of subsection (b), as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year, an amount equal to one-half of all contributions to candidates for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress (other than contributions to an incumbent of any such office), payment of which is made by the taxpayer within the taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Maximum credit.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) for a taxable year shall not exceed $50 ($100 in the case of a joint return under section 6013).
Verification.--The credit allowed by subsection (a) shall be allowed, with respect to any contribution, only if such contribution is verified in such manner as the Secretary shall prescribe by regulations.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section, the terms `candidate' and `contribution' have the meanings given those terms in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971.
Cross Reference.-- ``For disallowance of credits to estates and trusts, see section 642(a)(2).''.
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (a) of section 642 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(a) Credits Against Tax.-- ``(1) Foreign tax credit allowed.--An estate or trust shall be allowed the credit against tax for taxes imposed by foreign countries and possessions of the United States, to the extent allowed by section 901, only in respect of so much of the taxes described in such section as is not properly allocable under such section to the beneficiaries.
Credit for contributions to nonincumbent house of representatives candidates not allowed.--An estate or trust shall not be allowed the credit against tax for contributions to nonincumbent House of Representatives candidates provided by section 24.''.
The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 23 the following new item: ``Sec.
Contributions to nonincumbent House of Representatives candidates.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.
NOTIFICATION REQUIREMENTS FOR EXPENDITURES BY CERTAIN POLITICAL COMMITTEES IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) In addition to any other reporting requirement provided for by law, each political committee (other than a political committee of a political party or a political committee of a candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress) that makes expenditures with respect to an election for such office shall-- ``(1) not later than one week after the date on which such committee makes aggregate expenditures in excess of $50, so notify each candidate in the election; ``(2) in the case of a committee to which paragraph (1) applies, simultaneously with submission of any report of expenditures to the Commission, notify each candidate in the election of all expenditures in the reporting period; and ``(3) not later than one week after the date on which such committee makes any single expenditure in excess of $50, so notify each candidate in the election.''.
PERCENTAGE LIMITATION ON OUT-OF-STATE CONTRIBUTIONS ACCEPTABLE BY HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES CANDIDATES.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a), as amended by section 1 of this Act, is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not, with respect to an election, accept contributions from individuals who are not residents of the State involved that, in the aggregate, exceed 25 percent of the total of contributions accepted from all individuals.''.
REDUCTION IN THRESHOLD AMOUNT FOR REPORTING OF CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS AND EXPENDITURES.
Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434), as amended by section 3, is further amended by striking out ``$200'' each place it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``$50''.
REDUCED THIRD CLASS MAIL RATE FOR NONINCUMBENTS IN HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES ELECTIONS.
In General.--Chapter 34 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: Sec.
Reduced third class mail rate for nonincumbents in House of Representatives elections ``(a)(1) A nonincumbent candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress shall be entitled to send third class campaign material through the mails at a rate equal to one-half of the third class bulk mail rate.
The rate provided for in subsection (a) shall be available-- ``(A) for 3 mailings in the congressional district involved; and ``(B) only for material mailed to households with resident registered voters.
There are authorized to be appropriated such amounts as may be necessary to reimburse the Postal Service for the difference between the revenues received for campaign materials mailed under subsection (a) and the revenues that the Postal Service would have received if such materials had been carried at the regular rate.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 34 of title 39, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``3407.
Reduced third class mail rate for nonincumbents in House of Representatives elections.