This Act may be cited as the ``Hudson and Mohawk Rivers National Historical Park Act''.
As used in this Act-- (1) Hudson-mohawk area.--The term ``Hudson-Mohawk Area'' means the area made up of the cities of Troy, Cohoes, and Watervliet, the towns of Waterford and Colonie, and the villages of Waterford and Green Island in the State of New York.
Park.--The term ``park'' means the Hudson and Mohawk Rivers National Historical Park established pursuant to section 4(c).
Sites.--The term ``sites'' means the Harmony Mills National Historic Site and the Kate Mullaney National Historic Site established by sections 4 (a) and (b), respectively.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The area of the confluence of the Hudson and Mohawk Rivers in the State of New York experienced rapid growth and transformation from an agrarian to an industrial area in the early 19th century because of its geographic location, water power, and human creative genius.
It has been called the ``Birthplace of America's Industrial Revolution''.
The cities and villages in the 19th century that make up the Hudson and Mohawk area were commercial and industrial communities that linked New England's markets with other northeastern cities and Europe, spawned the collar industry, the thriving iron and textile industries, and a diversified economy.
The transition from an agrarian to industrial society within this area produced dramatically different relationships between workers and employers and historically significant examples of the Americanization of immigrant workers.
The city of Troy was a leader nationally in the development of trade unions with the Troy union of iron molders being at one time the largest local in America and the Trojan laundry workers organizing the first female union in the Nation.
Across the Hudson River from Troy in the city of Cohoes, the Harmony Mills complex, America's largest complete cotton mill in its time, made Cohoes a significant example of the company town pervading almost every aspect of the life of the mill workers.
As a result of the enactment of Public Law 102-101 calling for a national labor theme study, the Harmony Mills complex and the Kate Mullaney house, home of the organizer of the first female union in the Nation, were nominated for National Historic Landmark status.
This area exists today as a reservoir of historic and cultural lands, waterways, and structures revealing the wide diversity of individual and social endeavor associated with the life of the American worker that created a productive urban industrial society.
Collectively, the resources of this area provide opportunities for illustrating and interpreting cultural themes of the heritage of the United States and unique opportunities for education, public use and enjoyment.
The seven cities, towns, and villages making up this Hudson-Mohawk area have entered into a cooperative arrangement to manage their valuable cultural resources, and the area has been designated by the State of New York to be one of 14 urban cultural parks to represent industrial development and labor themes in the State's development.
This area, known as the Hudson-Mohawk Urban Cultural Park or RiverSpark, has been a pioneer in the development of ``partnership parks'' where intergovernmental and public and private partnerships bring about the conservation of its heritage and the attainment of goals for preservation, education, recreation, and economic development.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve and interpret for the benefit, inspiration, and education of the people of the United States significant places illustrative and representative of the legacy of the Hudson-Mohawk area workers; (2) to help maintain the integrity of setting in the Hudson-Mohawk area that reveals significant chapters in the story of the American worker; (3) through cooperative management, to coordinate the interpretive, preservation, and recreational efforts of Federal, State, and regional entities in the Hudson-Mohawk area in order to enhance opportunities for education, public use, and enjoyment; and (4) to broaden public understanding of the Hudson-Mohawk area and its role in American prehistory, history, and culture.
ESTABLISHMENT OF SITES AND PARK.
Harmony Mills National Historic Site.--There is established, as a unit of the National Park System, the Harmony Mills National Historic Site consisting of a portion of the Harmony Mills complex as depicted on the map entitled ``________'' and dated ________.
Kate Mullaney House National Historic Site.--There is established, as a unit of the National Park System, the Kate Mullaney National Historic Site consisting of the home of Kate Mullaney located at 350-8th Street, City of Troy, State of New York and as generally depicted on the map entitled ``________'' and dated ________.
Hudson and Mohawk Rivers National Historical Park.-- (1) Establishment.--At such time as the Secretary determines that sufficient lands, improvements, and interests in lands and improvements have been acquired, or at such time as the Secretary has entered into cooperative agreements satisfying the interpretive, preservation, and historical objectives of this Act, the Secretary may establish the Hudson and Mohawk Rivers National Historical Park in the State of New York by publication in the Federal Register of notice of the establishment and a detailed description or map setting forth the lands and improvements included in the park.
Included lands.--The park shall consist of the sites established by subsections (a) and (b).
Maps.--The maps referred to in this section shall be on file and available for public inspection in appropriate offices of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
ACQUISITION OF REAL AND PERSONAL PROPERTY AND SERVICES.
Real Property.--The Secretary may acquire the sites and such lands and improvements as are necessary for the management and operation of the sites.
Personal Property.--For the purposes of the Park, the Secretary may acquire historic objects and artifacts and other personal property associated with and appropriate for the interpretation of the Park.
Other Property, Funds, and Services.--For the purpose of carrying out this Act, the Secretary may accept donated funds, property, and services and enter into cooperative agreements with the Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation of the State of New York, the Department of Environmental Conservation of the State of New York, and other appropriate State, county, and local entities and individuals, including the Hudson-Mohawk Urban Cultural Park Commission, the Hudson-Mohawk Industrial Gateway, the Hudson River Valley Greenway Council, and other private museums and institutions.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the park in accordance with this Act and all laws generally applicable to national historic sites, including the Acts entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Preservation and Interpretation.--In administering the park, the Secretary shall preserve and interpret the site and preserve and perpetuate knowledge and understanding of the park's natural and cultural resources.
In General.-- (1) Cooperative agreements.--To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may consult with and enter into cooperative agreements with the State of New York and other public and private entities.
Each agreement shall facilitate the development, presentation, and funding of exhibits and programs and other appropriate activities related to the preservation, development, and use of the park, and encourage an appreciation of the story and traditions inspired by the workers of the Hudson-Mohawk area.
Technical assistance.--Through agreements, the Secretary may provide technical assistance to cooperating entities described in paragraph (1) for the marking, interpretation, restoration, preservation, or interpretation of any property listed in section 4.
Interpretation agreements.--The Secretary may enter into additional cooperative agreements to plan and coordinate the interpretation of the cultural and natural history of the Hudson River Valley region, which provides the context for relating the story of the workers of the Hudson-Mohawk area.
General Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than the end of the second fiscal year that begins after the establishment of the park, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee or Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives a general management plan for the sites and the park.
Consultation.--In preparing the plan, the Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall consult with advisors (including representatives of cooperating entities described in subsection (c), representatives of local and municipal interests, nationally recognized historians, scholars, and other experts) concerning the interpretation, preservation, and visitations of, and other issues pertaining to the Park and other sites of related historical or scenic significance in the Hudson-Mohawk Rivers area.
Statutory authorities.--The plan shall be prepared in accordance with this subsection and section 12(b) of the Act entitled ``An Act to improve the administration of the national park system by the Secretary of the Interior, and to clarify the authorities applicable to the system, and for other purposes'', approved August 18, 1970 (16 United States Code 1a-7), and other applicable law.
Contents.--The plan shall include-- (A) recommendations and cost estimates for the identification, marking, interpretation, and preservation of properties associated with the workers of the Hudson-Mohawk Rivers area to be carried out through cooperative agreements and other means considered appropriate and practicable; (B) recommendations on ways to broaden public understanding of the Hudson and its role in American prehistory, history, and culture; and (C) recommendations on ways to foster relevant public education, resources preservation, and appropriate levels of regional tourism.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.