This Act may be cited as the ``Thomas Cole National Historic Site Establishment Act of 1995''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) the Hudson River school of landscape painting was inspired by Thomas Cole and was characterized by a group of 19th century landscape artists who recorded and celebrated the landscape and wilderness of America, particularly in the Hudson River Valley region in the State of New York; (2) Thomas Cole has been recognized as America's most prominent landscape and allegorical painter in the mid-19th century; (3) the Thomas Cole House in Greene County, New York is listed on the National Register of Historic Places and has been designated as a National Historic Landmark; (4) within a 15 mile radius of the Thomas Cole House, an area that forms a key part of the rich cultural and natural heritage of the Hudson River Valley region, significant landscapes and scenes painted by Thomas Cole and other Hudson River artists survive intact; (5) the State of New York has established the Hudson River Valley Greenway to promote the preservation, public use, and enjoyment of the natural and cultural resources of the Hudson River Valley region; and (6) establishment of the Thomas Cole National Historic Site will provide opportunities for the illustration and interpretation of cultural themes of the heritage of the United States and unique opportunities for education, public use, and enjoyment.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act are-- (1) to preserve and interpret the home and studio of Thomas Cole for the benefit, inspiration, and education of the people of the United States; (2) to help maintain the integrity of the setting in the Hudson River Valley region that inspired artistic expression; (3) to coordinate the interpretive, preservation, and recreational efforts of Federal, State, and other entities in the Hudson Valley region in order to enhance opportunities for education, public use, and enjoyment; and (4) to broaden understanding of the Hudson River Valley region and its role in American history and culture.
As used in this Act: (1) Historic site.--The term ``historic site'' means the Thomas Cole National Historic Site established by section 4.
Hudson river artists.--The term ``Hudson River artists'' means artists who belonged to the Hudson River school of landscape painting.
Plan.--The term ``plan'' means the general management plan developed pursuant to section 6(d).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THOMAS COLE NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE.
In General.--There is established, as a unit of the National Park System, the Thomas Cole National Historic Site, in the State of New York.
Description.--The historic site shall consist of the home and studio of Thomas Cole, comprising approximately 3.4 acres, located at 218 Spring Street, in the village of Catskill, New York, as generally depicted on the boundary map numbered TCH/80002, and dated March 1992.
Real Property.--The Secretary is authorized to acquire lands, and interests in lands, within the boundaries of the historic site by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, or exchange.
Personal Property.--The Secretary may also acquire by the same methods as provided in subsection (a), personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic site: Provided, That the Secretary may acquire works of art associated with Thomas Cole and other Hudson River artists only by donation or purchase with donated funds.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic site in accordance with this Act and all laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act To establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1, 2-4), and the Act entitled ``An Act to provide for the preservation of historic American sites, buildings, objects, and antiquities of national significance, and for other purposes'', approved August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--To further the purposes of this Act, the Secretary may consult with and enter into cooperative agreements with the State of New York, the Thomas Cole Foundation, and other public and private entities to facilitate public understanding and enjoyment of the lives and works of the Hudson River artists through the development, presentation, and funding of art exhibits, resident artist programs, and other appropriate activities related to the preservation, interpretation, and use of the historic site.
Library and research center.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with the Greene County Historical Society to provide for the establishment of a library and research center at the historic site.
Exhibits.--The Secretary may display, and accept for the purposes of display, works of art associated with Thomas Cole and other Hudson River artists, as may be necessary for the interpretation of the historic site.
General Management Plan.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 2 complete fiscal years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a general management plan for the historic site.
Submission to congress.--On the completion of the plan, the plan shall be submitted to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Public Lands and Resources of the House of Representatives.
Regional wayside exhibits.--The plan shall include recommendations for regional wayside exhibits, to be carried out through cooperative agreements with the State of New York and other public and private entities.
Preparation.--The plan shall be prepared in accordance with section 12(b) of the Act entitled ``An Act to improve the administration of the national park system by the Secretary of the Interior, and to clarify the authorities applicable to the system, and for other purposes'', approved August 18, 1970 (16 United States Code 1a-1 through 1a-7).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.