This Act may be cited as the ``Veterans Comprehensive Hepatitis C Health Care Act''.
COMPREHENSIVE HEPATITIS C HEALTH CARE TESTING AND TREATMENT PROGRAM FOR VETERANS.
In General.--(1) Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1720E the following new section: ``Sec.
Hepatitis C testing and treatment ``(a)(1) During the first year after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary shall provide a blood test for the Hepatitis C virus to-- ``(A) each veteran who served in the active military, naval, or air service during the Vietnam era and is enrolled to receive care under section 1710 of this title who requests the test or is otherwise receiving a physical examination or any care or treatment from the Secretary; and ``(B) to any other veteran who requests the test.
After the end of the one-year period referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall provide a blood test for the Hepatitis C virus to any veteran who presents one or more risk factors for that virus and who requests the test.
In the case of any veteran who tests positive for the Hepatitis C virus, the Secretary shall provide an appropriate treatment protocol for that veteran.
Treatment shall be provided under this subsection without regard to whether the Hepatitis C virus is determined to be service-connected and without regard to priority group categorization of the veteran.
No copayment may be charged for treatment under this subsection.
In the case of any veteran who tests positive for the Hepatitis C virus, the Secretary shall, upon request, perform a liver biopsy on the veteran as a follow-up test.
In the case of any veteran who tests positive for the Hepatitis C virus, the Secretary shall, upon request, provide a Hepatitis C virus genotype test before beginning treatment of the veteran under subsection (b).
(1) The Secretary shall require that each Department medical center employ at least one full-time gastroenterologist or hepatologist to conduct tests for the Hepatitis C virus under this section.
The Secretary shall, to the extent practicable, ensure that each Department medical center has at least one staff member assigned to work, in coordination with Hepatitis C medical personnel, to coordinate treatment options for Hepatitis C patients and provide information for those patients.
Such a staff member should preferably be trained in psychology or psychiatry or be a social worker.
In order to improve treatment provided to veterans with the Hepatitis C virus, the Secretary shall provide increased training options to Department health care personnel.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1720E the following new item: ``1720F.
Hepatitis C testing and treatment.''.
FUNDING FOR HEPATITIS C PROGRAMS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF VETERANS AFFAIRS.
Program Account.--Beginning with fiscal year 2001, amounts appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for Hepatitis C detection and treatment shall be provided, within the ``Medical Care'' account, through the ``Specific Purpose'' subaccount, rather than the ``VERA'' subaccount.
Allocation of Funds to VISNs.--In allocating funds appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for the ``Medical Care'' account to the Veterans Integrated Service Networks, the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall allocate funds for detection and treatment of the Hepatitis C virus based upon incidence rates of that virus among veterans (rather than based upon the overall population of veterans) in each such network.
Limitation on Use of Funds.--Amounts appropriated for the Department of Veterans Affairs for Hepatitis C detection and treatment through the ``Specific Purpose'' subaccount may not be used for any other purpose.
Standardized Nationwide Policy.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall develop and implement a standardized policy to be applied throughout the Department of Veterans Affairs health care system with respect to the Hepatitis C virus.
The policy shall include the testing protocol for the Hepatitis C virus, treatment options, education and notification efforts, and establishment of a specific Hepatitis C diagnosis code for measurement and treatment purposes.
Outreach.--The Secretary shall, on an annual basis, take appropriate actions to notify veterans who have not been tested for the Hepatitis C virus of the need for such testing and the availability of such testing from the Department of Veterans Affairs.
HEPATITIS C CENTERS OF EXCELLENCE.
Establishment.--The Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall establish at least one, and not more than three, Hepatitis C centers of excellence.
Each such center shall be established at a Department of Veterans Affairs medical center in one of the five geographic service areas (known as a Veterans Integrated Service Network) with the highest case rate of Hepatitis C in fiscal year 1999.
Funding.--Funding for the centers established under subsection (a) shall be provided from amounts available to the Central Office of the Department of Veterans Affairs and shall be in addition to amounts allocated for Hepatitis C pursuant to section 3.