This Act may be cited as the ``Financing Corporation and Savings Association Insurance Fund Reform Act of 1995''.
PAYMENT OF INTEREST EARNED ON RTC FUNDS TO FICO.
In General.--Subsection (i) of section 21A of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 United States Code 1441a(i)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(7) Trust fund for unexpended rtc funding.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall transfer that portion of the amounts appropriated under paragraph (3) which are available to the Corporation but have not been paid to the Corporation to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation for deposit in a trust fund to be managed by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Investment.--The Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall invest such portion of the trust fund established under subparagraph (A) as, in the judgment of the Board of Directors, is not required to meet the short-term requirements of the Resolution Trust Corporation or the Savings Association Insurance Fund.
Interest.--Interest earned on investments of the trust fund shall be paid to the Financing Corporation to meet interest payments, issuance costs, and custodial fees on obligations issued by the Financing Corporation.
Availability of trust fund principal as backstop for saif.--The balance in the trust fund shall be available to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to cover losses incurred, or reasonably anticipated to be incurred, by the Savings Association Insurance Fund until the reserve ration of the Savings Association Insurance Fund first meets or exceeds the applicable designated reserve ratio.
Return of unexpended principal to treasury.-- After the maturity and full repayment of all obligations issued by the Financing Corporation under section 21, any remaining balance in the trust fund shall be returned to the general fund of the Treasury and the trust fund shall be abolished.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 21A(i)(5) of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 United States Code 1441a(i)(5)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``or to meet the requirements of section 11(a)(6)(F) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act''; and (B) by striking ``general fund of the Treasury'' and inserting ``trust fund established pursuant to paragraph (7)(A)''.
Section 11(a)(6) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1821(a)(6)) is amended by striking subparagraph (F).
Section 11(a)(6)(K) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1821(a)(6)(K)) is amended by striking ``or (F)''.
CLARIFICATION OF EXISTING LAW.
Congressional Declaration.--The Congress declares as follows: (1) The Financing Corporation was established pursuant to the amendments made by title III of the Competitive Equality Banking Act of 1987 for the sole purpose of providing additional funding to the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation to meet the deposit insurance obligations of the Corporation with respect to savings associations.
The interest payments, issuance costs, and custodial fees on obligations issued by the Financing Corporation are paid, pursuant to section 21 of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act, by assessments on savings associations.
The total amount of assessments paid by savings associations to the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, and since 1989, to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, as premiums for deposit insurance are required to be reduced by the amount of the assessments paid by such associations to the Financing Corporation in recognition of the fact that the latter assessments are being made to finance the insurance obligations incurred with respect to savings associations.
Treatment of FICO Assessments.--The assessments paid by Savings Association Insurance Fund members to the Financing Corporation shall be treated as insurance outlays for purposes of Federal law.
TIME SPECIAL SAIF CAPITALIZATION ASSESSMENT.
Section 7(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Special 1-time assessment to recapitalize saif.-- ``(A) In general.--The Corporation may, in the discretion of the Board of Directors, impose a special assessment on each Savings Association Insurance Fund member in an amount not greater than 0.40 percent of the assessment base, as of January 1, 1995, on which assessments are imposed under the risk-based assessment system established pursuant to paragraph (1).
Deposit of assessment in saif.--The proceeds of any assessment imposed under subparagraph (A) shall be deposited in the Savings Association Insurance Fund.
Imposition over period of years.--The assessment authorized under subparagraph (A) may be imposed incrementally over such period of years as the Board of Directors may determine to be appropriate, except the larger percentage of any such incremental assessment shall be allocated to the first year of the effective period for such assessment.
Abatement for troubled institutions.--The Board of Directors may abate any portion of any assessment under this paragraph in the case of any undercapitalized institution or any institution which would become undercapitalized as a result of the imposition of such assessment.''.
REPEAL OF MINIMUM SAIF ASSESSMENT RULE.
Section 7(b)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)(2)) is amended by striking subparagraph (E).
LIMIT ON DIFFERENTIAL BETWEEN ASSESSMENT RATES IMPOSED ON FORMER BIF MEMBERS AND FORMER SAIF MEMBERS.
Section 7(b)(2) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act (12 United States Code 1817(b)(2)) is amended by inserting after paragraph (G) the following new subparagraph: ``(H) Cap on differential between former bif and saif members.--The average assessment rate under the risk-based assessment system for insured depository institutions which, as of December 31, 1994, were Savings Association Insurance Fund members, including the special assessment under paragraph (9), shall not exceed the average assessment rate under the risk-based assessment system for insured depository institutions which, as of December 31, 1994, were Bank Insurance Fund members by more than 9 basis points.