This Act may be cited as the ``Campaign Finance Improvement Act of 1998''.
MANDATORY ELECTRONIC PRESERVATION AND FILING OF FEDERAL ELECTION COMMISSION REPORTS; ACCESS THROUGH INTERNET SITE.
Electronic Filing Through the Internet.--Section 304(a)(11) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)(11)) is amended to read as follows: ``(11)(A) Through a competitive bidding process, the Commission shall establish a public Internet site not later than January 1, 1999, with the following features: ``(i) Any person filing a report required by this Act may post the report directly on the site.
Any member of the public may obtain the reports posted on the site (together with any other information the Commission may make available through the site) at any time.
Any information in a report posted on the site shall be subject to the same prohibition on sale and use as information from a report or statement under paragraph (4).
All information posted on the site shall be integrated in a manner which permits users to search the information across categories and sources.
Each person required to file a report under this Act shall file the report by posting it directly on the Internet site established under subparagraph (A), or by filing it by such electronic method as the Commission may designate to enable the Commission to post the report on such site immediately upon receipt.
The Commission shall provide for one or more methods (other than requiring a signature on the report being filed) for verification of reports filed in accordance with the methods described in subparagraph (B).
Any verification under the preceding sentence shall be treated for all purposes (including penalties for perjury) in the same manner as a verification by signature.
As used in this paragraph, the term ``report'' means, with respect to the Commission, a report, designation, or statement required by this Act to be filed with the Commission.''.
Requiring Commission To Make Software Available.--Section 311(a) of such Act (2 United States Code 438(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (9); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (10) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(11) through competitive bidding, obtain and provide for computer software required to carry out section 304(a)(11).''.
Internet Defined.--Section 301 of such Act (2 United States Code 431) is amended by striking paragraph (19) and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(19) The term `Internet' means the international computer network of both Federal and non-Federal interoperable packet-switched data networks.''.
EXPANDING REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN CONTRIBUTIONS.
Requiring Reporting of All Contributions of $200 or More Within 10 Days of Receipt.--Section 304 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d)(1) Each political committee which receives a contribution of $200 or more shall notify the Commission of the contribution not later than 10 days after receipt, and shall include the identification of the contributor, the date of receipt and amount of the contribution, and (in the case of an authorized committee of a candidate) the name of the candidate and the office sought by the candidate.
The report required under this subsection shall be in addition to all other reports required under this Act.''.
Expanding Types of Contributions to Principal Campaign Committees Subject to Expedited Reporting.--Section 304(a)(6)(A) of such Act (2 United States Code 434(a)(6)(A)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``$1,000'' and inserting ``$200''; and (2) by striking ``20th day'' and inserting ``90th day''.
REQUIRING MAJORITY OF AMOUNT OF CONTRIBUTIONS ACCEPTED BY HOUSE CANDIDATES TO COME FROM IN-STATE RESIDENTS.
Section 315 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i)(1) A candidate for the office of Representative in, or Delegate or Resident Commissioner to, the Congress may not accept contributions with respect to an election from persons other than individuals residing in the State involved totaling in excess of the aggregate amount of contributions accepted with respect to the election from individuals residing in the State involved.
Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to contributions from a political committee of a national, State, or local political party (including any subordinate committee thereof).''.
WAIVER OF ``BEST EFFORTS'' EXCEPTION FOR INFORMATION ON IDENTIFICATION OF CONTRIBUTORS.
Section 302(i) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 432(i)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(i) When the treasurer'' and inserting ``(i)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), when the treasurer''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Paragraph (1) shall not apply with respect to information regarding the identification of any person who makes a contribution or contributions aggregating more than $200 during a calendar year (as required to be provided under subsection (c)(3)).''.
LOWERING THRESHOLD FOR CASH CONTRIBUTIONS.
Section 321 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441g) is amended by striking ``exceed $100'' and inserting ``exceed $20''.
CONTRIBUTIONS BY DEPENDENTS NOT OF VOTING AGE.
Section 315(a) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441a) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9)(A) For purposes of the limitations imposed by this section, any contribution made by a dependent minor shall be treated as follows: ``(i) If the dependent minor is the dependent of one other individual, the contribution shall be treated as a contribution made by such other individual.
If the dependent minor is the dependent of another individual and such other individual's spouse, the contribution shall be allocated among such individuals in such manner as such other individuals may determine.
In this paragraph, the term `dependent minor' means an individual who-- ``(i) is a dependent of another individual; and ``(ii) has not, as of the time of making the contribution involved, attained the legal age for voting in elections for Federal office in the State in which such individual resides.''.
PROHIBITING NON-CITIZEN INDIVIDUALS FROM MAKING CONTRIBUTIONS IN CONNECTION WITH FEDERAL ELECTIONS.
Section 319(b)(2) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441e(b)(2)) is amended by striking ``and who is not lawfully admitted'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
MANDATORY SUBMISSION OF MONTHLY REPORTS BY NATIONAL POLITICAL PARTY COMMITTEES.
Section 304(a)(4)(B) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(a)(4)(B)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``monthly reports'' and inserting ``in the case of a national committee of a political party and any other political committee (other than an authorized committee of a candidate) not filing quarterly reports under subparagraph (A), monthly reports''; and (2) by striking the period at the end and inserting the following: ``except that in the case of a national committee of a political party, the committee shall file the reports due in November and December of such year together with such a pre- general election report, post-general election report, and year end report.''.
DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS FOR CERTAIN SOFT MONEY EXPENDITURES OF POLITICAL PARTIES.
Transfers of Funds by National Political Parties.--Section 304(b)(4) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 434(b)(4)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (H); (2) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (I); and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(J) in the case of a political committee of a national political party, all funds transferred to any political committee of a State or local political party, without regard to whether or not the funds are otherwise treated as contributions or expenditures under this title;''.
Disclosure by State Political Parties of Information Reported Under State Law.--Section 304 of such Act (2 United States Code 434), as amended by section 3(a), is further amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) If a political committee of a State political party is required under a State or local law, rule, or regulation to submit a report on its disbursements to an entity of the State or local government, the committee shall file a copy of the report with the Commission at the time it submits the report to such an entity.''.
In General.--Section 201(b) of the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 United States Code 431(b)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (5); and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(7) an itemization of amounts spent by the labor organization for-- ``(A) contract negotiation and administration; ``(B) organizing activities; ``(C) strike activities; ``(D) political activities; ``(E) lobbying and promotional activities; and ``(F) market recovery and job targeting programs; and ``(8) all transactions involving a single source or payee for each of the activities described in subparagraphs (A) through (F) of paragraph (7) in which the aggregate cost exceeds $10,000.''.
Computer Network Access.--Section 201(c) of the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 United States Code 431(c)) is amended by inserting ``including availability of such reports via a public Internet site or another publicly accessible computer network,'' after ``its members,''.
Reporting by Secretary.--Section 205(a) of the Labor Management Reporting and Disclosure Act of 1959 (29 United States Code 435(a)) is amended by inserting after ``and the Secretary'' the following: ``shall make the reports and documents filed pursuant to section 201(b) available via a public Internet site or another publicly accessible computer network.
PROHIBITING INVOLUNTARY ASSESSMENT OF EMPLOYEE FUNDS FOR POLITICAL ACTIVITIES.
In General.--Section 316 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c)(1) Except with the separate, prior, written, voluntary authorization of each individual, it shall be unlawful-- ``(A) for any national bank or corporation described in this section to collect from or assess its stockholders or employees any dues, initiation fee, or other payment as a condition of employment if any part of such dues, fee, or payment will be used for political activity in which the national bank or corporation is engaged; and ``(B) for any labor organization described in this section to collect from or assess its members or nonmembers any dues, initiation fee, or other payment if any part of such dues, fee, or payment will be used for political activity in which the labor organization is engaged.
An authorization described in paragraph (1) shall remain in effect until revoked and may be revoked at any time.
Each entity collecting from or assessing amounts from an individual with an authorization in effect under such paragraph shall provide the individual with a statement that the individual may at any time revoke the authorization.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `political activity' means any activity carried out for the purpose of influencing (in whole or in part) any election for Federal office, influencing the consideration or outcome of any Federal legislation or the issuance or outcome of any Federal regulations, or educating individuals about candidates for election for Federal office or any Federal legislation, law, or regulations.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to amounts collected or assessed on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
SOLICITATIONS BY TRADE ASSOCIATIONS OF SHAREHOLDERS AND PERSONNEL OF MEMBER CORPORATIONS.
Section 316(b)(4)(D) of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 441b(b)(4)(D)) is amended by striking ``to the extent that'' and all that follows and inserting a period.
Except as otherwise provided, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to elections and transactions occurring after December 31, 1998.