This Act may be cited as the ``College Access Act''.
Program Established.--From amounts made available to the Secretary pursuant to section 6(a), the Secretary shall award grants to eligible organizations to enable such organizations to conduct the authorized activities described in section 4.
Award Basis.-- (1) Mandatory.--The Secretary shall award a grant under this Act in a fiscal year to an eligible organization in an amount determined on the basis of-- (A) the size of the budget of the eligible organization in such year compared to the size of the budgets of all eligible organizations receiving assistance under this Act in such year; or (B) the size of the endowment of the eligible organization in such year compared to the size of the endowments of all eligible organizations receiving assistance under this Act in such year.
Permissive.--The Secretary may award a grant under this Act in a fiscal year to an eligible organization in an amount determined on the basis of-- (A) the number of students served individually by the eligible organization in such year compared to the number of students served individually by all eligible organizations receiving assistance under this Act in such year; or (B) the eligible organization's audited financial statement for the preceding fiscal year.
Application.-- (1) In general.--Each eligible organization desiring a grant under this Act in any fiscal year shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application shall include-- (A) information documenting the provision of authorized activities described in section 4 by the eligible organization to students in the year preceding the year for which assistance under this Act is requested; and (B) the eligible organization's audited financial statement for the preceding fiscal year.
For the purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``college'' means an institution of higher education (as such term is defined in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965) that awards an associate's or bachelor's degree; (2) the term ``eligible organization'' means an organization that-- (A) provides a school-based advisor to students attending public secondary schools and offers assistance and incentives to encourage such students to attend college; (B) has been in existence for 2 years prior to the date of enactment of this Act; (C) awards last dollar, gap financing; and (D) is an organization described in section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986; (3) the term ``Fund'' means the College Access Endowment Fund established in section 5(a); (4) the term ``last dollar, gap financing'' means the funds required to fill the gap between the cost of college and the resources available to a student, which resources shall include a family contribution and any financial aid awarded to a student; (5) the term ``Secretary'', unless otherwise specified, means the Secretary of Education; and (6) the term ``secondary school'' has the same meaning given to such term by section 1471(21) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
Grant funds under this Act may be used by an eligible organization to provide students attending public secondary schools with-- (1) funds to enable such students to attend college; (2) information about college and financial aid for college; (3) information about academic qualifications and preparation for college; (4) the costs of preparing for admission to college, including the costs of college entrance exams, application fees, financial aid forms, and scholastic aptitude test (SAT) and American College Test (ACT) exam preparation courses; (5) full and partial financial grants, especially last dollar, gap financing; (6) assistance in selecting and applying for appropriate colleges and applying for available financial aid; (7) the costs of entering college, including dormitory reservation and college acceptance fees; or (8) continuing college mentors, including paying students to act as tutors and peer counselors at college.
COLLEGE ACCESS ENDOWMENT FUND.
Establishment.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States an endowment fund to be known as the College Access Endowment Fund.
The Fund shall consist of amounts appropriated to the Fund pursuant to section 8 of this Act.
Investment.--It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Treasury to invest in full amounts appropriated to the Fund.
Such investments may be made only in interest-bearing obligations of the United States or in obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States.
For such purpose, such obligations may be acquired (1) on original issue at the issue price, or (2) by purchase of outstanding obligations at the market price.
The purposes for which obligations of the United States may be issued under the Second Liberty Bond Act, as amended, are hereby extended to authorize the issuance at par of special obligations exclusively to the Fund.
Such special obligation shall bear interest at a rate equal to the average rate of interest, computed as to the end of the calendar month next preceding the date of such issue, borne by all marketable interest-bearing obligations of the United States then forming a part of the public debt, except that where such average rate is not a multiple of one-eighth of 1 percent, the rate of interest of such special obligations shall be the multiple of one-eighth of 1 percent next lower than such average rate.
Such special obligations shall be issued only if the Secretary of the Treasury determines that the purchase of other interest-bearing obligations of the United States, or of obligations guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States on original issue or at the market price, is not in the public interest.
Sale and Redemption.--Any obligation acquired by the Fund (except special obligations issued exclusively to the Fund) may be sold by the Secretary of the Treasury at the market price, and such special obligations may be redeemed at par plus accrued interest.
Interest and Proceeds.--The interest on, and the proceeds from the sale or redemption of, any obligations held in the Fund shall be credited to and form a part of the Fund.
EXPENDITURES FROM THE FUND.
In General.--The interest and earnings of the Fund shall be available to the Secretary to enable the Secretary to award grants to eligible organizations in accordance with this Act.
Audit.--The activities of each eligible organization receiving a grant under this Act may be audited by the General Accounting Office under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Comptroller General of the United States.
The representatives of the General Accounting Office shall have access to all books, accounts, records, reports, and files and all other papers, things, or property belonging to or in use by the eligible organization, pertaining to such activities and necessary to facilitate the audit.
REPORT; TERMINATION OF GRANT PAYMENTS.
Report.--Each eligible organization receiving a grant under this Act shall annually prepare and submit to the Secretary a report demonstrating such organization's compliance with the provisions of this Act.
Termination.--The Secretary shall terminate grant payments under this Act for any eligible organization which the Secretary determines is not in compliance with the provisions of this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Fund $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 to carry out this Act.