SHORT TITLE; AMENDMENT OF 1986 CODE.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Land Conservation Act of 1993''.
Amendment of 1986 Code.--Except as otherwise provided, whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
ESTATE TAX TREATMENT OF LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2031 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the definition of gross estate) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.-- ``(1) In general.--If the executor makes the election described in paragraph (4) of this subsection, then, except as otherwise provided in this subsection, there shall be excluded from the gross estate the value of land subject to a qualified conservation easement (reduced by the amount of any indebtedness to which such land is subject).
Land subject to a qualified conservation easement.-- For purposes of this subsection-- ``(A) In general.--The term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' means land which-- ``(i) is located in or within 50 miles of an area which, on the date of the decedent's death, is-- ``(I) a metropolitan area (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget), or ``(II) a national park, unless it is determined by the Secretary that land in or within 50 miles of the park is not under significant development pressure, ``(ii) which was owned by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family at all times during the 3-year period ending on the date of the decedent's death, and ``(iii) with respect to which a qualified conservation contribution (as defined in section 170(h)(1)) of a qualified real property interest described in section 170(h)(2)(C) is (or has been made) by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family.
Certain contributions not included.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), section 170(h)(4)(A) shall be applied without regard to clause (iv) thereof in determining whether there is a qualified conservation contribution.
Family member.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `member of the decedent's family' has the same meaning given such term by section 2032A(e)(2).
Tax on disposition if land subject to retained development right.-- ``(A) In general.--If the donor retained any development right when the qualified conservation contribution described in paragraph (2)(A)(iii) was made, there is hereby imposed an additional estate tax on the first person disposing (other than by gift or devise) of the property after the death of the decedent.
Amount of additional tax.-- ``(i) In general.--The amount of the additional tax imposed by subparagraph (A) shall be the amount equal to the increase in estate tax liability which would have occurred if the value of the development right had been included in the gross estate of the decedent (as determined under paragraph (4)).
Partial disposition.--If only a portion of the property is disposed of, the person disposing of the property shall pay a pro rata portion of the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) (and such tax shall be reduced with respect to subsequent dispositions by the taxes imposed with respect to prior dispositions).
Time for payment of tax.--Any tax imposed under subparagraph (A) shall be due and payable by the person disposing of the property no later than April 15 of the calendar year following the calendar year in which the disposition occurs.
Development right.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `development right' means the right-- ``(i) to establish or use any structure (and the land immediately surrounding it) for sale, rent, or other commercial purpose which is not subordinate to and directly supportive of the conservation purpose of the qualified conservation contribution described in paragraph (2)(A)(iii), or ``(ii) to conduct the activity of farming, forestry, ranching, horticulture, viticulture, or recreation, whether or not for profit, on the land.
Election with respect to land subject to qualified conservation easement.--The election under this subsection shall be made on the return of the tax imposed by section 2001 and shall be made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulations prescribe.
Such an election, once made, shall be irrevocable.
Calculation and notice of potential estate tax due.-- ``(A) In general.--An executor making the election described in paragraph (4) of this subsection shall compute the amount of the additional estate tax described in paragraph (3)(B).
Notice.--The executor shall file a `Notice of Potential Estate Tax Due' in the place or places where deeds are put to public record for the locality in which the land subject to the qualified conservation easement is located.
Form and manner.--The computation and filing required by this paragraph shall be done in such manner and on such forms as the Secretary may prescribe.''.
Carryover Basis.--Section 1014(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis of property acquired from a decedent) is amended by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, or'' at the end thereof, and by inserting at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) in the case of property excluded from the gross estate of the decedent under section 2031(c), the basis of the property in the hands of the decedent.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1992, which includes land subject to qualified conservation easements granted after December 31, 1992.
GIFT TAX ON LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable gifts) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.-- ``(1) In general.--At the election of the donor, the transfer by gift of land subject to a qualified conservation easement shall not be treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' shall have the same meaning as in section 2031(c), except that any reference to `decedent' or `the date of the decedent's death' shall refer to the donor and the date of the transfer by the donor, respectively.''
Land subject to retained development rights.-- ``(A) In general.--If the donor retains any development right when the gift is made, then there is hereby imposed an additional gift tax on the first person disposing (other than by gift or device) of the property after the date of the gift to which this subsection applies.
Amount of tax.--The amount of the tax under subparagraph (A) shall be equal to the increase in gift tax liability which would have occurred if the value of the development right had been treated as a gift.
Definition and rules.--For purposes of this paragraph-- ``(i) Development right.--The term `development right' has the meaning given such term by section 2031(c)(3)(C).
Other rules.--The rules of clauses (ii) and (iii) of paragraph (3)(B) and paragraph (5) of section 2031(c) shall apply, except that `donor' shall be substituted for `executor' each place it appears.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to gifts of land subject to qualified conservation easements granted after December 31, 1992.
QUALIFIED CONSERVATION CONTRIBUTION WHERE SURFACE AND MINERAL RIGHTS ARE SEPARATED.
In General.--Section 170(h)(5)(B)(ii) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rule) is amended to read as follows: ``(ii) Special rule.--With respect to any contribution of property in which the ownership of the surface estate and mineral interests has been and remains separated, subparagraph (A) shall be treated as met if the probability of surface mining occurring on such property is so remote as to be negligible.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall apply with respect to contributions made after December 31, 1992, in taxable years ending after such date.
QUALIFIED CONSERVATION CONTRIBUTION IS NOT A DISPOSITION.
Qualified Conservation Contribution Is Not a Disposition.-- Subsection (c) of section 2032A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alternative valuation method) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(8) Qualified conservation contribution is not a disposition.--A qualified conservation contribution (as defined in section 170(h)) by gift or otherwise shall not be treated as a disposition for purposes of this subsection.
If qualified real property is land subject to a qualified conservation easement (as defined in section 2031(c)), this subsection shall not apply to such property.''.
Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement Is Not Disqualified.--Subsection (b) of section 2032A of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alternative valuation method) is amended by adding at the end the following paragraph: ``(6) Qualified conservation easement.--Property shall not fail to be treated as qualified real property solely because it is land subject to a qualified conservation easement (as defined in section 2031(c)).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to estates of decedents dying after December 31, 1992, which include land subject to qualified conservation easements granted after December 31, 1992.