This Act may be cited as the ``National Commission on the Environment and National Security Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) new threats to the global environment, including to the earth's climate system, the ozone layer, biological diversity, soils, oceans, and freshwater resources, have arisen in recent years; (2) such threats to the global environment may adversely affect the health, livelihoods, and physical well-being of Americans, the stability of many societies, and international peace; (3) in recent years, the definition of national security of the United States has been broadened, both in official White House documents and in legislation, to include economic security as well as environmental security; (4) with the end of the Cold War, the dramatic reduction of the military threat to United States interests, and the new recognition in world politics of the urgency of reversing global environmental degradation recognized at the Earth Summit in Rio in June 1992, the global environment has taken on even greater importance to the United States; (5) the extent and significance of such threats to United States security has not been fully evaluated by the Congress or the executive branch, and responses to global environmental threats have not yet been fully integrated into United States national security policy; and (6) the United States Government currently lacks a focal point for assessing the importance of such new environmental threat to the national security of the United States and their implications for United States global security policy.
There is established a commission to be known as the National Commission on the Environment and National Security (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Study.--The Commission shall study the role in United States national security of security against global environmental threats, in light of recent global political changes and the rise of new environmental threats to the earth's natural resources and vital life support systems, including such threats referred to in section 2.
Report.--The Commission shall submit a preliminary and final report pursuant to section 8, each of which shall contain-- (1) a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission on the matters described in subsection (a); and (2) specific recommendations with respect to-- (A) ways in which the United States might integrate concerns about global environmental threats into its national security and foreign policy; (B) priority international action to respond to global environmental threats and likely resource commitments required to support them; and (C) possible institutional changes in the executive and legislative branches of the United States Government that may be needed to ensure that such new environmental threats receive adequate priority in the national security policies and budgetary allocations of the United States.
Number and Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 14 members, to be appointed not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, as follows: (1) 2 members appointed by the President.
3 members, 1 of whom shall be a Senator, appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate from among the recommendations made by the majority leader of the Senate.
3 members, 1 of whom shall be a Senator, appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate from among the recommendations made by the minority leader of the Senate.
3 members, 1 of whom shall be a member of the House of Representatives, appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members, 1 of whom shall be a member of the House of Representatives, appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Additional Qualifications.--The Commission members (not including the members of Congress) shall be chosen from among individuals who-- (1) are scientists, environmental specialists, experts on national and international security, or analysts who have studied the relationship between the environment and national security, and (2) are not officers or employees of the United States.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than one-half of the members appointed from individuals who are not Members of Congress may be of the same political party.
With respect to members who are Members of Congress, not more than one-half may be of the same political party.
Continuation of Membership.--If a member was appointed to the Commission as a Member of Congress and the member ceases to be a Member of Congress, or was appointed to the Commission because the member was not an officer or employee of any government and later becomes an officer or employee of a government, that member may continue as a member for not longer than the 60-day period beginning on the date that member ceases to be a Member of Congress, or becomes such an officer or employee, as the case may be.
Terms.-- (1) In general.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Basic Pay.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), each member of the Commission shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which such member is engaged in the actual performance of duties of the Commission.
Prohibition of compensation of members of congress.-- Members of the Commission who are Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Commission.
Travel Expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--8 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by a majority of the members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson.
DIRECTOR AND STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairperson.
The Director shall be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--Subject to rules prescribed by the Commission, the Chairperson may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel as the Chairperson considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of the title 5, United States Code.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals not to exceed the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for GS-18 of the General Schedule.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairperson of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish that information to the Commission.
Gifts, Bequests, and Devises.--The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts, bequests, or devises of services or property, both real and personal, for the purpose of aiding or facilitating the work of the Commission.
Gifts, bequests, or devises of money and proceeds from sales of other property received as gifts, bequests, or devises shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be available for disbursement upon order of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Service of process.--All process of any court to which application is made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Immunity.--Except as provided in this subsection, a person may not be excused from testifying or from producing evidence pursuant to a subpoena on the ground that the testimony or evidence required by the subpoena may tend to incriminate or subject that person to criminal prosecution.
A person, after having claimed the privilege against self- incrimination, may not be criminally prosecuted by reason of any transaction, matter, or thing which that person is compelled to testify about or produce evidence relating to, except that the person may be prosecuted for perjury committed during the testimony or made in the evidence.
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act, and for other services.
Preliminary Report.--The Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a preliminary report not later than 18 months after the date on which all the members of the Commission have been appointed.
Final Report.--The Commission shall submit a final report to the President and the Congress not later than 2 years after the date on which all the members of the Commission have been appointed.
The Commission shall terminate 60 days after submitting its final report pursuant to section 8(b).
Amounts shall be made available to carry out this Act only to the extent such amounts are made available in advance in appropriations Acts.