This Act may be cited as the ``Prosecution Drug Treatment Alternative to Prison Act of 2001''.
DRUG TREATMENT ALTERNATIVE TO PRISON PROGRAMS ADMINISTERED BY STATE OR LOCAL PROSECUTORS.
Prosecution Drug Treatment Alternative to Prison Programs.-- Title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3711 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART AA--PROSECUTION DRUG TREATMENT ALTERNATIVE TO PRISON PROGRAMS ``SEC.
In General.--The Attorney General may make grants to State or local prosecutors for the purpose of developing, implementing, or expanding drug treatment alternative to prison programs that comply with the requirements of this part.
Use of Funds.--A State or local prosecutor who receives a grant under this part shall use amounts provided under the grant to develop, implement, or expand the drug treatment alternative to prison program for which the grant was made, which may include payment of the following expenses: ``(1) Salaries, personnel costs, equipment costs, and other costs directly related to the operation of the program, including the enforcement unit.
Payments to licensed substance abuse treatment providers for providing treatment to offenders participating in the program for which the grant was made, including aftercare supervision, vocational training, education, and job placement.
Payments to public and nonprofit private entities for providing treatment to offenders participating in the program for which the grant was made.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant under this part shall not exceed 75 percent of the cost of the program.
Supplement and Not Supplant.--Grant amounts received under this part shall be used to supplement, and not supplant, non-Federal funds that would otherwise be available for activities funded under this part.
``A drug treatment alternative to prison program with respect to which a grant is made under this part shall comply with the following requirements: ``(1) A State or local prosecutor shall administer the program.
An eligible offender may participate in the program only with the consent of the State or local prosecutor.
Each eligible offender who participates in the program shall, as an alternative to incarceration, be sentenced to or placed with a long term, drug free residential substance abuse treatment provider that is licensed under State or local law.
Each eligible offender who participates in the program shall serve a sentence of imprisonment with respect to the underlying crime if that offender does not successfully complete treatment with the residential substance abuse provider.
Each residential substance abuse provider treating an offender under the program shall-- ``(A) make periodic reports of the progress of treatment of that offender to the State or local prosecutor carrying out the program and to the appropriate court in which the defendant was convicted; and ``(B) notify that prosecutor and that court if that offender absconds from the facility of the treatment provider or otherwise violates the terms and conditions of the program.
The program shall have an enforcement unit comprised of law enforcement officers under the supervision of the State or local prosecutor carrying out the program, the duties of which shall include verifying an offender's addresses and other contacts, and, if necessary, locating, apprehending, and arresting an offender who has absconded from the facility of a residential substance abuse treatment provider or otherwise violated the terms and conditions of the program, and returning such offender to court for sentence on the underlying crime.
In General.--To request a grant under this part, a State or local prosecutor shall submit an application to the Attorney General in such form and containing such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
Certifications.--Each such application shall contain the certification of the State or local prosecutor that the program for which the grant is requested shall meet each of the requirements of this part.
``The Attorney General shall ensure that, to the extent practicable, the distribution of grant awards is equitable and includes State or local prosecutors-- ``(1) in each State; and ``(2) in rural, suburban, and urban jurisdictions.
``For each fiscal year, each recipient of a grant under this part during that fiscal year shall submit to the Attorney General a report regarding the effectiveness of activities carried out using that grant.
Each report shall include an evaluation in such form and containing such information as the Attorney General may reasonably require.
The Attorney General shall specify the dates on which such reports shall be submitted.
``In this part: ``(1) Eligible offender.--The term `eligible offender' means an individual who-- ``(A) has been convicted of, or pled guilty to, or admitted guilt with respect to a crime for which a sentence of imprisonment is required and has not completed such sentence; ``(B) has never been convicted of, or pled guilty to, or admitted guilt with respect to, and is not presently charged with, a felony crime of violence or a major drug offense or a crime that is considered a violent felony under State or local law; and ``(C) has been found by a professional substance abuse screener to be in need of substance abuse treatment because that offender has a history of substance abuse that is a significant contributing factor to that offender's criminal conduct.
Felony crime of violence.--The term `felony crime of violence' has the meaning given such term in section 924(c)(3) of title 18, United States Code.
Major drug offense.--The term `major drug offense' has the meaning given such term in section 36(a) of title 18, United States Code.
State or local prosecutor.--The term `State or local prosecutor' means any district attorney, State attorney general, county attorney, or corporation counsel who has authority to prosecute criminal offenses under State or local law.''.
Authorization of Appropriations.--Section 1001(a) of title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Street Act of 1968 (42 United States Code 3793(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(24) There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out part AA-- ``(A) $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2002; ``(B) $85,000,000 for fiscal year 2003; ``(C) $95,000,000 for fiscal year 2004; ``(D) $105,000,000 for fiscal year 2005; and ``(E) $125,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.