This Act may be cited as the ``Claremont Commission Act''.
On June 11, 1995, in Claremont, New Hampshire, the President of the United States and the Speaker of the House of Representatives made an historic handshake agreement calling for establishment of an independent Federal election campaign reform commission.
The purpose of this Act is to effectuate that agreement.
There is established a nonpartisan commission to be known as the ``Claremont Commission'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
GOALS OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission is established to help effectuate the following goals of Federal election campaign reform: (1) Limit the influence of money in Federal election campaigns.
Increase public confidence in the Federal electoral process.
Encourage qualified candidates to seek public office.
Create a more equitable electoral system for both challengers and incumbents.
Remove the negative aspects of financing of Federal election campaigns.
Safeguard the role of political parties in the Federal electoral process.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall study the law (including regulations) that affects how election campaigns for Federal office are conducted and may make recommendations for change.
Matters To Be Considered.--In studying Federal election campaign practices, the Commission shall consider-- (1) whether too much or too little money is spent on campaigns for Federal office (both directly by candidates and by other persons trying to influence the outcome of the election) and whether the funds that are spent are sufficiently disclosed; (2) whether the law governing campaigns for Federal office encourages or discourages those most qualified to hold office from seeking it; (3) whether the existing system of financing campaigns for Federal office promotes trust and confidence in the political process among the electorate; (4) whether the current system for financing campaigns for Federal office ensures that the electorate has the greatest possible opportunity to be informed of candidates' positions on the issues; (5) whether the law should be amended to prohibit from making contributions to candidates or political committees-- (A) persons who are not eligible to vote in Federal elections in the United States; or (B) United States' subsidiaries of foreign corporations; (6) whether the law governing the manner in which unions and union multicandidate political committees (commonly referred to as political action committees or PAC's), or corporations and corporate multicandidate political committees may raise money for spending on political election campaigns and other politically-related activities should be amended; (7) whether amounts given to or spent by a political party that are not subject to the limitations or reporting requirements of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) (commonly referred to as ``soft money'') should be limited or banned; (8) whether the law should be amended to restrict or limit the making of independent expenditures, including independent expenditures made by corporations; (9) whether the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431 et sequentes) should be amended to define ``express advocacy'' and ``independent expenditure'' to include certain forms of issue advertising under the limits and requirements of such Act; (10) whether discounted broadcast time should be made available to candidates for Federal office; (11) whether the law should be amended to increase or decrease the current limits on contributions by individuals or multicandidate political committees; (12) whether the law governing required disclosures in the financing of campaigns for Federal office should be amended to ensure more accurate disclosure, including broadening the required disclosures; (13) whether-- (A) the Federal Election Commission has adequate powers to effectively oversee the existing system of financing campaigns for Federal office; or (B) the Commission should be given additional enforcement powers; and (14) such other matters as the Commission considers appropriate.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 9 members of the private sector, appointed as follows: (1) Two shall be appointed by the President.
Two shall be appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
Two shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
One shall be appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
One, who shall act as chairperson, shall be appointed jointly by the majority leader and minority leader of the Senate and the Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representatives.
Expedited Appointments.--The President, majority leader and minority leader of the Senate, and Speaker and minority leader of the House of Representatives shall make the appointments under subsection (a) not later than 10 days after the date of enactment of the Act.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission shall each be entitled to receive the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay in effect for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code, for each day during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of the duties of the Commission.
Quorum.--Six members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, and any decision of the Commission shall require the affirmative vote of 6 members.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson or at the request of 6 members of the Commission.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; SERVICES.
Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the chairperson, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service and without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classifications and General Schedule pay rates, may appoint such staff personnel as the chairperson considers necessary and procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
RECOMMENDATION; FAST TRACK PROCEDURES.
Report.--Not later than 270 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall submit to Congress a report describing the study conducted under section 5.
Recommendations.--The report under subsection (a) may include any recommendations for changes in the laws (including regulations) governing the conduct of Federal campaigns, including any changes in the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives, to which 5 or more members of the Commission agree.
Preparation of Bill.--If 6 or more members concur on a plan to make changes in Federal election campaign law, and related laws and regulations, the members agreeing to the plan shall prepare a bill to implement the plan and the implementing bill shall be submitted with the report under subsection (a).
Consideration by Congress.--The implementing bill submitted with the report under subsection (a) shall be given expedited consideration under the same provisions and in the same way as an implementing bill for a trade agreement under section 151 of the Trade Act of 1974 (19 United States Code 2191).
The Commission shall cease to exist 30 days after submission of the report under section 8.
There is authorized to be appropriated $750,000 to carry out this Act.