SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Alopecia Fairness Expansion Act of 2002''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Medicare coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
Medicaid coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
SCHIP coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
FEHBP coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
Veterans' coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
TRICARE coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
IHS coverage of scalp hair prosthesis for individuals who have scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata.
MEDICARE COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--Section 1861(s)(2) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(s)(2)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (U); (2) by adding ``and'' at the end of subparagraph (V); and (3) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(W) scalp hair prosthesis (which may include artificial substitutes for scalp hair) for an individual who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the individual certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment;''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply to items furnished on or after July 1, 2003.
MEDICAID COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--Section 1905(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396d(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (26); (2) by redesignating paragraph (27) as paragraph (28); and (3) by inserting after paragraph (26) the following new paragraph: ``(27) scalp hair prosthesis (which may include artificial substitutes for scalp hair) for an individual who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the individual certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment; and''.
Effective Date.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by subsection (a) apply to calendar quarters beginning on or after July 1, 2003, without regard to whether or not final regulations to carry out such amendments have been promulgated by such date.
In the case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in order for the plan to meet the additional requirement imposed by the amendment made by subsection (a), the State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet this additional requirement before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
SCHIP COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--Section 2103(a) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1397cc(a)) is amended by adding after and below paragraph (4) the following: ``No coverage may be approved under this section unless the coverage provides benefits for scalp hair prosthesis (which may include artificial substitutes for scalp hair) for an individual who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the individual certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment.''.
Effective Date.--(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), the amendments made by subsection (a) apply to calendar quarters beginning on or after July 1, 2003, without regard to whether or not final regulations to carry out such amendments have been promulgated by such date.
In the case of a State plan for medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act which the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines requires State legislation (other than legislation appropriating funds) in order for the plan to meet the additional requirement imposed by the amendment made by subsection (a), the State plan shall not be regarded as failing to comply with the requirements of such title solely on the basis of its failure to meet this additional requirement before the first day of the first calendar quarter beginning after the close of the first regular session of the State legislature that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of the previous sentence, in the case of a State that has a 2-year legislative session, each year of such session shall be deemed to be a separate regular session of the State legislature.
FEHBP COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--Section 8902 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(p)(1) A contract may not be made or a plan approved which does not include coverage for scalp hair prosthesis (which may include artificial substitutes for scalp hair) for an individual who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the individual certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment.
The coverage required under this subsection is not subject to dollar limits, deductibles, and coinsurance provisions that are less favorable than those for other prosthesis coverage under a health benefits plan, except that a plan may provide that the plan will only pay for 80 percent of the customary and usual costs of the scalp hair prosthesis exclusive of any deductible.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to items furnished on or after January 1, 2004.
VETERANS' COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--Section 1701(6) of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(G) Scalp hair prosthesis (which may include artificial substitutes for scalp hair) for a person who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata;''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to items furnished on or after October 1, 2002.
TRICARE COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--Section 1074c of title 10, United States Code, is amended by striking ``resulting from the treatment of a malignant disease'' and inserting ``(including alopecia resulting from the treatment of a malignant disease)''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to items furnished on or after October 1, 2002.
IHS COVERAGE OF SCALP HAIR PROSTHESIS FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO HAVE SCALP HAIR LOSS AS A RESULT OF ALOPECIA AREATA.
In General.--The Indian Health Care Improvement Act (25 United States Code 1601 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 225 the following new section: ``scalp hair prosthesis ``Sec.
The Secretary, through the Service, shall provide scalp hair prosthesis (which may include artificial substitutes for scalp hair) for an Indian who has scalp hair loss as a result of alopecia areata if the attending physician of the Indian certifies in writing the medical necessity of that proposed course of rehabilitative treatment.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to items furnished on or after January 1, 2003.