This Act may be cited as the ``Urban Watershed Restoration Act of 1994''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) Urban communities are disproportionately impacted by water quality degradation and aquatic habitat loss.
Local residents in urban communities can and should be supported and empowered to revitalize and restore the urban streams, rivers, lakes, and wetlands in their neighborhoods.
Water quality and watershed programs in urban areas must create new and diverse jobs for youths and other unemployed workers in order to ensure the long-term participation of urban communities within these programs.
A range of biological techniques, including revegetation and other methods, have been demonstrated to be effective in restoring urban waters, but have been underutilized and underfunded in municipal stormwater and watershed management programs.
Loss of species diversity and the invasion of exotic species negatively impact estuarine habitat and can be addressed through projects that enhance the diversity of indigenous plant and animal communities.
Lack of public access to waterways and riparian parkland fosters human isolation from and disinterest in urban watersheds.
Access to waterways can and should be created in urban neighborhoods when and where appropriate.
The Nation benefits by supporting citizen monitoring and local initiatives to protect and prevent further degradation of urban waterways.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To enable local citizen and government organizations in urban areas to undertake, with Federal, State, and private assistance, urban watershed restoration programs which are consistent with existing watershed and estuarine restoration plans and existing Federal regulatory programs.
To restore both small and large urban waterbodies to become oases of beauty, recreation, sustenance, and renewal for their communities.
To achieve the goals of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act in the most degraded and neglected urban areas; specifically, to restore and maintain the chemical, physical, and biological integrity of urban waters and watersheds, including restoration and maintenance of water quality, a balanced indigenous population of shellfish, fish, and wildlife, aquatic and riparian vegetation, and recreational activities in and on the water, and to protect designated uses, including fishing, swimming, and drinking water supply.
To support the formation of, and provide the funds for, small local and minority-owned businesses and nonprofit citizen organizations focused on providing urban watershed restoration jobs, services, and products for persons and communities in degraded urban watershed areas.
To promote development of careers in urban watershed restoration and related fields, as well as environmental education, for youths.
To create urban watershed restoration project opportunities for State and local conservation or service corps.
To encourage the coordination of urban watershed restoration projects and municipal stormwater and combined sewer overflow permit programs.
To increase public access to urban waterways and to increase the amount of urban estuarine and riparian parkland available for passive recreation.
To promote the use of physical restoration of urban waterways as a means to low-cost stormwater management.
Creation of new wetland and riparian environments as part of a multiobjective stormwater management system in which the created wetlands, stream channels, and riparian zones provide stormwater storage, detention, retention, nutrient filtering, wildlife habitat, and increase biological diversity.
Section 319 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 United States Code 1329) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(o) National Urban Watershed Restoration Program.-- ``(1) Establishment.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall establish a National Urban Watershed Restoration Program to be carried out in accordance with the requirements of this subsection.
Administration.-- ``(A) In general.--The Program shall be administered by each State which the Administrator determines has a demonstrated successful urban river restoration program.
If a State does not have a demonstrated successful urban river restoration program, the Administrator shall administer the Program through the Regional Administration of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Combined funding.--The Administrator shall assist States participating in the Program in combining funding from the Program and other related programs to reduce inefficiencies.
Funding.--The Administrator shall allocate at least 25 percent of funds made available to carry out this section for the purpose of carrying out the Program.
Project grants and technical assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--The Administrator shall use funds allocated to carry out the Program for making grants and providing technical assistance for projects which meet the requirements of this subsection and which are selected by the Administrator or the State, as the case may be.
Federal share.--The Federal share of the cost of carrying out a project with Federal assistance under this subsection in any fiscal year shall not exceed 60 percent of the cost incurred in carrying out such project and shall be made on condition that the non- Federal share is provided from non-Federal sources.
The non-Federal share may include in-kind services.
Maximum amount to be used for individual projects.--Not more than $500,000 of the funds allocated to carry out the Program may be expended to carry out any individual project.
Simplified contracting procedures.--The Administrator shall develop simplified contracting procedures for grants under the Program and may waive Federal contracting requirements as appropriate for grants under $100,000.
Project selection.-- ``(A) Conditions.--The Administrator or State, as the case may be, shall select a project to be carried out under the Program only if the project meets the following requirements: ``(i) Proposal.--The project is jointly nominated by a State, local, regional, or tribal governmental entity and by a private citizen's organization active in the urban watershed area of the project, and the project sponsors submit to the Administrator or State a proposal for carrying out the project.
Consistency with existing plans and permits.--In order to ensure consistency with regional restoration priorities, the project sponsors-- ``(I) certify that all available and relevant water quality and watershed plans, reports, studies, and strategies (including those under sections 118, 119, 120, 208, 303, 314, 319, and 320 of this Act) that the Administrator deems appropriate and, where appropriate, municipal stormwater discharge and combined sewer overflow permits under section 402 have been considered by the project sponsor; and ``(II) provide assurances that the project will be carried out in a manner which is consistent with such plans, reports, studies, strategies, and permits, as well as the goals and objectives of the Program and this Act.
Priority projects.--Under the Program, the Administrator shall encourage through technical assistance and other means, and give priority to, those projects that-- ``(i) assist communities in meeting municipal stormwater discharge and combined sewer overflow permit program requirements under section 402 of this Act; ``(ii) assist in the implementation of approved national estuary plans under section 320 of this Act; and ``(iii) assist municipalities in the development and implementation of stream protection measures and monitoring.
Factors to be considered.--In considering whether or not to select a project to be carried out under the Program, the Administrator or State shall consider, at a minimum, the following factors and give priority to those projects that meet more than one of these factors: ``(i) The project will be carried out in a low-income urban area.
The project will correct a water pollution, stormwater drainage, aquatic and riparian habitat loss, erosion reduction and control, or landscape degradation problem which contributes to the economic, social, and environmental and water quality degradation of the area.
The project will support ecologically-oriented businesses or occupations in the area served by the project.
The project will employ and train State and local conservation or service corps in watershed restoration and monitoring and assessment work.
The project will employ youth.
The project will support diverse community coalitions in low-income urban areas and support outreach programs to involve these communities in urban watershed monitoring and restoration.
The project will restore urban waterways providing benefits to urban fisheries of recreational, subsistence, commercial, or scientific significance, giving priority to ecological restoration methods.
The project will employ and train urban fishers and other urban aquatic resource users and harvesters who have experienced loss or reduction of their livelihoods due to habitat degradation or related harvesting regulations.
The project will integrate local or regional schools, colleges, universities, and nonprofit organizations into the restoration, monitoring, and education activities of urban water quality programs.
The project will assist a municipal project sponsor in complying with municipal stormwater and combined sewer overflow permit program requirements under section 402.
Eligible project costs.--Project costs eligible for funding under the Program shall be limited to the following activities and purposes: ``(A) Ecological restoration of existing degraded wetlands, streams, lakes, and rivers.
Creation of a greater diversity of aquatic habitats in urban environments.
Construction of new wetlands and vegetated riparian areas.
Reduction of runoff caused by urbanization, including impervious surface and abandoned lot reclamation and revegetation projects.
Streambank restoration and stabilization utilizing biological slope stabilization.
Creation of floodplain riparian zones, sediment removal from storm flows, and nutrient uptake by riparian plant communities.
Projects designed to remove barriers to fish passage and projects designed to remove culverts or storm drains to reestablish stream channel environments or to manage stormwater flow.
Organization of neighborhood or regional nonprofit watershed citizen groups and councils to develop a consensus watershed restoration strategy where one does not currently exist and to carry out restoration activities under such a plan.
Watershed landscape projects and geographical surveys and mapping to carry out the purposes of this Act, including the identification of potential riparian restoration sites.
Employment of youths in any or all of the activities described in subparagraphs (A) and (J).
Such employment shall be through membership in State or local conservation or service corps or, where such corps do not exist, through membership in State, regional, or local community service organizations or other equivalent agencies.
Coordination with other agencies.--The Administrator shall assist project sponsors in coordinating with Federal and State agencies, academic institutions, community organizations, and public interest groups.
Cooperative agreements.--Each Regional Administrator may enter into 1 or more cooperative agreements with appropriate officials of the Soil Conservation Service of the Department of Agriculture and the Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Park Service of the Department of the Interior for the purpose of having the cooperating agency provide technical assistance to one or more projects being carried out under the Program.
Nondegradation policy.--Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to encourage additional development, alteration, loss, or degradation of wetlands or other waters within urban watersheds or stream corridors or any other waters of the United States.
Reports.-- ``(A) Regional administrators.--Not later than January 1, 1995, and each January 1 thereafter, each Regional Administrator shall submit to the Administrator a report for the preceding fiscal year on the implementation of the Program in its region, together with recommendations of methods of improving such implementation.
Administrator.--Not later than March 1, 1997, the Administrator shall transmit to Congress a report for fiscal years 1994, 1995, and 1996 on the implementation of the Program under this subsection, together with recommendations concerning continuation of the Program after fiscal year 1998 and recommendations concerning methods of improving such implementation.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this subsection, the following definitions apply: ``(A) Ecological restoration.--The term `ecological restoration' means the process of intentionally altering a site to establish a defined, indigenous, historic ecosystem with the goal of emulating the structure, function, diversity, and dynamics of the ecosystem.
Program.--The term `Program' means the National Urban Watershed Restoration Program established under paragraph (1) by the Administrator.
Regional administrator.--The term `Regional Administrator' means a Regional Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Urban watershed.--The term `urban watershed' means any watershed located wholly or substantially within the boundaries of an urbanized area designated by the Bureau of the Census or any watershed located wholly or substantially within the boundaries of lands owned or controlled by an Indian tribe.
Watershed.--The term `watershed' means all lands that drain directly into a single waterbody, the land that drains into sewer conveyances that discharge to the waterbody, and the waterbody itself.