This Act may be cited as the ``Gun Excise Tax Funds to Prevention Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) Medical costs are a substantial burden to society.
For example, the cost for acute care and followup treatment of gunshot injuries in 1994 in the United States was $2,300,000,000, of which $1,100,000,000 was paid by government programs, according to an article in the Journal of the American Medical Association.
The mean medical cost per gunshot injury is about $17,000.
For hospital-admitted survivors of gunshot injuries, estimates suggest that Federal, State, or local government is the primary payer of medical costs of the injuries in 44 percent of the cases.
The excise tax on firearms and ammunition has not changed in 60 years.
This excise tax has raised more than $2,600,000,000 during that time.
Congress needs to ensure that the revenue raised by this excise tax is used for the proper purposes.
INCREASE IN EXCISE TAX ON FIREARMS.
In General.--Section 4181 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax on firearms) is amended-- (1) by striking ``10 percent'' and inserting ``15 percent'', and (2) by striking ``11 percent'' and inserting ``16 percent''.
Retention of Prior Rate for Taxable Sales to Government.-- Section 4182 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Sales to Government.--Except as provided in subsection (b), in the case of a sale for the use by the United States, a State, or a political subdivision of a State (or any department, agency, or instrumentality of any of the foregoing), the tax imposed by section 4181 shall be determined by substituting ``10 percent'' for ``15 percent'' and ``11 percent'' for ``16 percent''.
Use of Proceeds of Excise Tax.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of subtitle I such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new sections: ``SEC.
DELINQUENCY PREVENTION TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Delinquency Prevention Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be apportioned or credited to such Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to the Delinquency Prevention Trust Fund amounts equivalent to half of the net revenues received in the Treasury from the tax imposed by section 4181 (relating to tax on firearms), to the extent attributable to a tax rate greater than 10 percent, in the case of pistols and revolvers, and greater than 11 percent, in the case of firearms (other than pistols and revolvers), shells, and cartridges.
Net revenues.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `net revenues' means the amount estimated by the Secretary based on the excess of-- ``(A) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 4181 (relating to tax on firearms), over ``(B) the decrease in the tax imposed by chapter 1 resulting from the tax imposed by section 4181.
Expenditures.--Amounts in the Delinquency Prevention Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, only for carrying out the purposes of title V of the Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5781 et sequentes) (relating to incentive grants for local delinquency prevention programs).
Coordination With Other Funds.--So much of the rate of tax as is taken into account in determining amounts appropriated to the Delinquency Prevention Trust Fund shall not be taken into account in determining amounts deposited into any other fund.
EMERGENCY MEDICAL SERVICES FOR CHILDREN TRUST FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Emergency Medical Services for Children Trust Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be apportioned or credited to such Trust Fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.-- ``(1) In general.--There are hereby appropriated to the Emergency Medical Services for Children Trust Fund amounts equivalent to half of the net revenues received in the Treasury from the tax imposed by section 4181 (relating to tax on firearms), to the extent attributable to a tax rate greater than 10 percent, in the case of pistols and revolvers, and greater than 11 percent, in the case of firearms (other than pistols and revolvers), shells, and cartridges.
Net revenues.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `net revenues' means the amount estimated by the Secretary based on the excess of-- ``(A) the taxes received in the Treasury under section 4181 (relating to tax on firearms), over ``(B) the decrease in the tax imposed by chapter 1 resulting from the tax imposed by section 4181.
Expenditures.--Amounts in the Emergency Medical Services for Children Trust Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, only for carrying out the purposes of the Emergency Medical Services for Children program (administered by the Department of Health and Human Services and the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration).
Coordination With Other Funds.--So much of the rate of tax as is taken into account in determining amounts appropriated to the Emergency Medical Services for Children Trust Fund shall not be taken into account in determining amounts deposited into any other fund.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of subtitle I of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 9510 the following new items: ``Sec.
Delinquency Prevention Trust Fund.
Emergency Medical Services for Children Trust Fund.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to sales after the date of the enactment of this Act.