This Act may be cited as the ``Government Shutdown Prevention Act''.
In General.--If any regular appropriation bill for fiscal year 1998 does not become law prior to the beginning of fiscal year 1998 or a joint resolution making continuing appropriations is not in effect, there is appropriated, out of any moneys in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, and out of applicable corporate or other revenues, receipts, and funds, such sums as may be necessary to continue any program, project, or activity for which funds were provided in fiscal year 1997.
Level of Funding.--Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for a program, project, or activity for fiscal year 1998 pursuant to this Act shall be at 98 per cent of the rate of operations that was provided for the program, project, or activity in fiscal year 1997 in the corresponding regular appropriation Act for fiscal year 1997.
Period of Availability.--Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for fiscal year 1998 pursuant to this Act for a program, project, or activity shall be available for the period beginning with the first day of a lapse in appropriations and ending with the earlier of-- (1) the date on which the applicable regular appropriation bill for fiscal year 1998 becomes law (whether or not that law provides for that program, project, or activity) or a continuing resolution making appropriations becomes law, as the case may be; or (2) the last day of fiscal year 1998.
In General.--An appropriation of funds made available, or authority granted, for a program, project, or activity for fiscal year 1998 pursuant to this Act shall be made available to the extent and in the manner which would be provided by the pertinent appropriations Act for fiscal year 1997, including all of the terms and conditions and the apportionment schedule imposed with respect to the appropriation made or funds made available for fiscal year 1997 or authority granted for the program, project, or activity under current law.
Extent and Manner.--Appropriations made by this Act shall be available to the extent and in the manner which would be provided by the pertinent appropriations Act.
Appropriations and funds made available, and authority granted, for any program, project, or activity for fiscal year 1998 pursuant to this Act shall cover all obligations or expenditures incurred for that program, project, or activity during the portion of fiscal year 1998 for which this Act applies to that program, project, or activity.
Expenditures made for a program, project, or activity for fiscal year 1998 pursuant to this Act shall be charged to the applicable appropriation, fund, or authorization whenever a regular appropriation bill or a joint resolution making continuing appropriations until the end of fiscal year 1998 providing for that program, project, or activity for that period becomes law.
INITIATING OR RESUMING A PROGRAM, PROJECT, OR ACTIVITY.
No appropriation or funds made available or authority granted pursuant to this Act shall be used to initiate or resume any program, project, or activity for which appropriations, funds, or other authority were not available during fiscal year 1997.
PROTECTION OF OTHER OBLIGATIONS.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to effect Government obligations mandated by other law, including obligations with respect to Social Security, Medicare, Medicaid, and veterans benefits.
In this Act, the term ``regular appropriation bill'' means any annual appropriation bill making appropriations, otherwise making funds available, or granting authority, for any of the following categories of programs, projects, and activities: (1) Agriculture, rural development, and related agencies programs.
The Departments of Commerce, Justice, and State, the judiciary, and related agencies.
The Department of Defense.
The government of the District of Columbia and other activities chargeable in whole or in part against the revenues of the District.
The Departments of Labor, Health and Human Services, and Education, and related agencies.
The Departments of Veterans and Housing and Urban Development, and sundry independent agencies, boards, commissions, corporations, and offices.
Energy and water development.
Foreign assistance and related programs.
The Department of the Interior and related agencies.
The Department of Transportation and related agencies.
The Treasury Department, the United States Reports Postal Service, the Executive Office of the President, and certain independent agencies.