This Act may be cited as the ``Carlsbad Irrigation Project Acquired Land Transfer Act''.
Lands and Facilities.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), and subject subsection (c), the Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') may convey to the Carlsbad Irrigation District (a quasi-municipal corporation formed under the laws of the State of New Mexico and in this Act referred to as the ``District''), all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the lands described in subsection (b) (in this Act referred to as the ``acquired lands'') and all interests the United States holds in the irrigation and drainage system of the Carlsbad Project and all related lands including ditch rider houses, maintenance shop and buildings, and Pecos River Flume.
Limitations.-- (A) Retained surface rights.--The Secretary shall retain title to the surface estate (but not the mineral estate) of such acquired lands which are located under the footprint of Brantley and Avalon dams or any other project dam or reservoir diversion structure.
Storage and flow easements.--The Secretary shall retain storage and flow easements for any tracts located under the maximum spillway elevations of Avalon and Brantley Reservoirs.
Acquired Lands Described.--The lands referred to in subsection (a) are those lands (including the surface and mineral estate) in Eddy County, New Mexico, described as the acquired lands in section (7) of the ``Status of Lands and Title Report: Carlsbad Project'' as reported by the Bureau of Reclamation in 1978 .
Terms and Conditions of Conveyance.--Any conveyance of the acquired lands under this Act shall be subject to the following terms and conditions: (1) Management and use, generally.--The conveyed lands shall continue to be managed and used by the District for the purposes for which the Carlsbad Project was authorized, consistent with the management of other adjacent project lands.
Assumed rights and obligations.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the District shall assume all rights and obligations of the United States under-- (A) the agreement dated July 28, 1994, between the United States and the Director, New Mexico Department of Game and Fish (Document No.
LM-40-00640), relating to management of certain lands near Brantley Reservoir for fish and wildlife purposes; and (B) the agreement dated March 9, 1977, between the United States and the New Mexico Department of Energy, Minerals, and Natural Resources (Contract No.
07-57- X0888) for the management and operation of Brantley Lake State Park.
Exceptions.--In relation to agreements referred to in paragraph (2)-- (A) the District shall not be obligated for any financial support agreed to by the Secretary, or the Secretary's designee, in either agreement; and (B) the District shall not be entitled to any receipts or revenues generated as a result of either agreement.
Completion of Conveyance.-- (1) Sense of the congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that the Secretary should complete the conveyance authorized by this Act, including such action as may be required under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969 (42 United States Code 4321 et seq.
), within the 9-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
Report.--If the Secretary does not complete the conveyance within the period referred to in paragraph (1), the Secretary shall submit a report to the Congress within 30 days after that period that includes a detailed explanation of problems that have been encountered in completing of the conveyance, and specific steps that the Secretary has taken or will take to complete the conveyance.
LEASE MANAGEMENT AND PAST REVENUES COLLECTED FROM THE ACQUIRED LANDS.
Identification and Notification of Leaseholders.--Within 120 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall-- (1) provide to the District a written identification of all mineral and grazing leases in effect on the acquired lands on the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) notify all leaseholders of the conveyance authorized by this Act.
Management of Mineral and Grazing Leases, Licenses, and Permits.--The District shall assume all rights and obligations of the United States for all mineral and grazing leases, licenses, and permits existing on the acquired lands conveyed under section 2, and shall be entitled to any receipts from such leases, licenses, and permits accruing after the date of conveyance.
All such receipts shall be used for purposes for which the project was authorized.
The District shall continue to adhere to the current Bureau of Reclamation mineral leasing stipulations for the Carlsbad Project.
Availability of Amounts Paid Into Reclamation Fund.-- (1) Existing receipts.--Receipts in the reclamation fund on the date of enactment of this Act which exist as construction credits to the Carlsbad Project under the terms of the Mineral Leasing Act for Acquired Lands (30 United States Code 351-359) shall be made available to the District as credits toward its ongoing operation and maintenance obligation to the United States until such credits are depleted.
Receipts after enactment.--Of the receipts from mineral and grazing leases, licenses, and permits on acquired lands to be conveyed under section 2, that are received by the United States after the date of enactment and before the date of conveyance-- (A) not to exceed $200,000 shall be available to the Secretary for the actual costs of implementing this Act; and (B) the remainder shall be deposited into the reclamation fund and shall be made available to the District as credits toward its ongoing operation and maintenance obligation to the United States until such credits are depleted.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary, in cooperation with the District, may expend not to exceed $100,000 annually, from amounts appropriated for operation and maintenance within the Bureau of Reclamation, for the purposes of implementing water conservation practices at the Carlsbad Project, including, but not limited to, phreatophyte control.
Matching Funds.--As a condition of any expenditure under subsection (a), the Secretary shall require that the District provide matching funds in direct proportion to the amount of project lands held by the District in relation to withdrawn or other project lands held by the United States.
Voluntary Water Conservation Practices.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit the ability of the District to voluntarily implement water conservation practices.
Liability.--Effective on the date of conveyance of any lands authorized by this Act, the United States shall not be held liable by any court for damages of any kind arising out of any act, omission, or occurrence relating to the conveyed property, except for damages caused by acts of negligence committed by the United States or by its employees, agents, or contractors, prior to conveyance.
Nothing in this section shall be considered to increase the liability of the United States beyond that provided under chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, popularly known as the Federal Tort Claims Act.