This Act may be cited as the ``Community Development Bank Act''.
The purposes of this Act are as follows: (1) To increase the amount of credit available for the economic revitalization of distressed urban and rural communities.
To enable economically disadvantaged persons and small, minority-owned, and women-owned businesses to have improved access to the resources of our financial system, and to use such resources as a foundation for economic growth, increased employment and community development.
To increase the supply of mortgage credit and other financing necessary for the private sector to rehabilitate the housing stock in inner cities and rural areas for low- and moderate-income families.
To provide capital for housing construction and development, small businesses, and community development projects.
To provide technical and managerial assistance to small businesses and other entrepreneurs located in economically distressed areas.
To encourage the establishment of privately capitalized community development banks to serve the credit needs of financially underserved residents of urban and rural areas of our country.
TITLE I--COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BANKS SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF A COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BANKERS' BANK.
In General.--The Comptroller of the Currency is hereby authorized to issue a certificate of authority to commence the business of banking to a national banking association that is owned exclusively (except to the extent directors' qualifying shares are required by law) by one or more insured depository institutions and will be engaged primarily in community development activities.
Required Name.--A national banking association chartered pursuant to subsection (a) shall be known as a ``community development bank'', and shall use the term ``community development bank'' and the name of the community in which it is located and will serve, in its title.
Regulation.--A community development bank chartered pursuant to subsection (a) shall be subject to such rules and orders as the Comptroller deems appropriate, and, except as otherwise specifically provided in this title or in such rules and orders, shall be vested with and subject to the same rights, duties and limitations that apply to other national banking associations, including the right to accept deposits.
Board of Directors.--At least 25 percent of members of the community development bank's board of directors shall be individuals residing in and representing the interests of the community that the bank will serve.
AUTHORITY TO INVEST IN A COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BANK.
An insured depository institution may invest in the shares of one or more community development banks.
Such investment may not exceed, in the aggregate, an amount in excess of 5 percent of the depository institution's tier one or core capital or, in the case of a particular institution, such lesser amount as the appropriate Federal banking agency determines to be necessary in order to protect the safety and soundness of the institution.
Within six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller of the Currency shall develop and publish in the Federal Register expedited procedures for the consideration of applications for a certificate to commence the business of banking for a community development bank.
The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation shall develop expedited procedures for consideration of an application by a community development bank for deposit insurance.
Final decisions shall be made by the Comptroller and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation within nine months after the receipt of completed applications.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BANK ACTIVITIES.
Primary Purpose.--A community development bank may only make loans and other investments designed to provide a reasonable economic return to the bank and its shareholders, consistent with its primary purpose of providing credit, capital, and related services to targeted persons and targeted geographic areas within its community.
Loan and Investment Activities.--In order to accomplish the purposes of this Act, a community development bank may engage in activities consistent with this Act, including the making or providing of the following: (1) Residential mortgage loans.
Small business commercial loans.
Home improvement and rehabilitation loans.
Neighborhood commercial revitalization loans.
Equity investments in low- and moderate-in-come real estate development and rehabilitation projects.
Equity investments in community development corporations and projects.
Equity investments in small business development corporations.
Marketing and management assistance.
Business planning and counseling services.
Financial and technical services.
Deposit funds in credit unions serving predominately low-income members as defined by the National Credit Union Administration Board.
Coordination.--A community development bank shall coordinate its activities with activities and programs of the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the Department of Veterans Affairs, the Department of Commerce, the Small Business Administration, and other agencies with respect to the development and financing of community development organizations and projects and small businesses.
Competition With Existing Institutions.--A community development bank shall target its activities to customers do adequately served by existing depository institutions.
OTHER COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT BANKS.
Any insured depository institution may apply to the appropriate Federal banking agency to be certified as a ``community development bank''.
The agency shall issue such certification if it finds that such bank is primarily engaged in community development activities, and otherwise complies with the provisions of this Act, other than subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 101, and that such certification will further the purposes of this title.
COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT EVALUATION.
Examination.--The appropriate Federal banking agency shall conduct an annual onsite examination and evaluation of every community development bank in order to determine compliance with this Act and to assess the bank's record of meeting the credit needs of its community, as described in section 804 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977.
Hearing Required.--Prior to issuing a final Community Reinvestment Act evaluation and rating, the appropriate Federal banking agency shall-- (1) publish in two or more newspapers of general circulation a statement that an informal hearing on the bank's success in meeting the credit needs of its community is to be held; and (2) directly notify known representatives of consumer and community groups located within the bank's community that an informal hearing is to be held.
Notice.--The publication and notice required under subsection (b) shall state the date and place for the hearing, which must be at least thirty days following the date of the publication or mailing of the notice, and shall invite interested persons and organizations to provide oral and written testimony concerning the performance of the community development bank.
Consideration of Testimony.--The appropriate Federal banking agency shall consider and take into account the testimony and statements provided by community representatives in evaluating the performance of a community development bank under this section.
Final Evaluation.--Following the hearing, the appropriate Federal banking agency shall provide a final Community Reinvestment Act of 1977 evaluation and rating, including a written explanation for any findings and conclusions.
Re-evaluation.--A community development bank that receives a final rating that is less than a satisfactory rating shall be reevaluated within ninety days by the appropriate Federal banking agency in order to determine whether it has made the necessary changes in policies or practices to warrant a satisfactory rating.
COMMUNITY REINVESTMENT ACT COMPLIANCE.
Effect of Rating.--For purposes of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977, the evaluation and rating of a community development bank shall be deemed to be the evaluation and rating of each insured depository institution that has made a qualifying investment in such community development bank.
Any insured depository institution receiving a satisfactory or outstanding rating pursuant to this section shall be deemed to have met the credit needs of its community.
Coordination With Other Law.--An insured depository institution that maintains a qualifying investment in a community development bank shall not be subject to an evaluation conducted pursuant to section 804 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977.
Effect of Non-qualifying Investment.--An insured depository institution that makes an investment that is not a qualifying investment shall have that investment considered by the appropriate Federal banking agency when that institution is evaluated under sections 804 and 807 of the Community Reinvestment Act of 1977.
BANK HOLDING COMPANY ACT.
No person shall be considered a bank holding company, or subject to the Bank Holding Company Act of 1956, due to an investment in a community development bank authorized under this title.
For purposes of this title-- (1) the term ``community development bank'' means-- (A) a bank established pursuant to section 101, or (B) certified as a community development bank pursuant to section 105, that is primarily engaged in the business of providing credit and investment capital and related services to targeted populations and targeted geographic areas; (2) the term ``targeted population'' means minority-owned and women-owned businesses, non-profit organizations, community groups, and economically disadvantaged persons; (3) the term ``targeted geographic area'' means a neighborhood or other geographic area that is suffering economic distress, as measured by unemployment, poverty, condition of housing stock, availability of credit, or other indicator of relative economic condition; (4) the term a community development bank's ``community'' means one or more contiguous geographic areas that represent the combined market or service areas of the financial institutions that have made qualifying investments in such bank; (5) the term ``insured depository institution'' shall have the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; (6) the term ``appropriate Federal banking agency'' shall have the meaning given such term in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act; and (7) the term ``qualifying investment'' means an investment in the equity shares of a community development bank in an amount that is equal to the maximum permissible amount for that investing institution, as prescribed in section 102.
Nothing in this title shall be deemed to interfere with the authority of the appropriate Federal banking agency or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation to limit the permissible activities or investments of an insured depository institution or depository institution holding company, by order or regulation, in order to protect the safety or soundness of such institution or holding company.
DISCRIMINATION AND FAIR HOUSING.
In General.--Nothing in this title shall be deemed to interfere with the authority of the appropriate Federal banking agencies to examine institutions for compliance with or to enforce the Equal Credit Opportunity Act, the Fair Housing Act, or the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.
Applicability of Section 107.--Section 107 shall not apply to any institution found, in a civil or criminal judicial proceeding or final agency adjudication, to have violated any law described in subsection (a).
TITLE II--CONFORMING AMENDMENTS SEC.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN FUND FOR CREDIT UNIONS.
Repeal.--Section 120(k) of the Federal Credit Union Act (12 United States Code 1766(k)) is repealed.
Amendment.--The Federal Credit Union Act is amended by inserting after section 129 (12 United States Code 1772c) the following new section: ``SEC.
COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT REVOLVING LOAN FUND FOR CREDIT UNIONS.
In General.--The Board may exercise the authority granted it by the Community Development Credit Union Revolving Loan Fund Transfer Act (Public Law 99-609) including any additional appropriation made or earnings accrued, subject only to this section and to regulations prescribed by the Board.
Investment.--The Board may invest any idle Fund moneys in United States Treasury securities.
Any interest accrued on such securities shall become a part of the Fund.
Loans.--The Board may require that any loans made from the Fund be matched by increased shares in the borrower credit union.
Interest.--Interest earned by the Fund may be allocated by the Board for technical assistance to community development credit unions.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term `Fund' means the Community Development Credit Union Revolving Loan Fund.''.
STUDY OF COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT CREDIT UNION.
In General.--The National Credit Union Administration Board in consultation with representatives of the credit union industry shall conduct a study of community development credit activities by credit unions.
In conducting the study, the Board shall consider-- (1) the role of these institutions in providing credit and related financial services to inner city and rural areas, (2) the failure rate of these institutions in the past, (3) the desirability of establishing a special examination force for community development credit unions, and mentor programs, (4) the desirability of establishing a clearinghouse for the recirculation of startup equipment and furniture for community development credit unions, and (5) appropriate startup and permanent financing programs for such credit unions.
Report.--Not later than October 1, 1993, the Board shall issue a report to the Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate and the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives on the study and the regulatory and legislative changes that may be necessary to ensure that community development activity by credit unions become and remain viable and productive.