This Act may be cited as the ``Citizen Congress Act''.
LIMITATION ON RETIREMENT COVERAGE FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, effective at the beginning of the Congress next beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, a Member of Congress shall be ineligible to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System or the Federal Employees' Retirement System, except as otherwise provided under this section.
Participation in the Thrift Savings Plan.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), a Member may participate in the Thrift Savings Plan subject to section 8351 if title 5, United States Code, at anytime during the 12-year period beginning on the date the Member begins his or her first term.
Refunds of Contributions.-- (1) In general.--Nothing in subsection (a) shall prevent refunds from being made, in accordance with otherwise applicable provisions of law (including those relating to the Thrift Savings Plan), on account of an individual's becoming ineligible to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System or the Federal Employees' Retirement System (as the case may be) as a result of the enactment of this section.
Treatment of refund.--For purposes of any refund referred to in paragraph (1), a Member who so becomes ineligible to participate in either of the retirement systems referred to in paragraph (1) shall be treated in the same way as if separated from service.
Annuities Not Affected to the Extent Based on Prior Service.-- Subsection (a) shall not be considered to affect-- (1) any annuity (or other benefit) entitlement which is based on a separation from service occurring before the date of the enactment of this Act (including any survivor annuity based on the death of the individual who so separated); or (2) any other annuity (or benefit), to the extent provided under subsection (e).
Preservations of Rights Based on Prior Service.-- (1) In general.--For purposes of determining eligibility for, or the amount of, any annuity (or other benefit) referred to in subsection (d)(2) based on service as a Member of Congress-- (A) all service as a Member of Congress shall be disregarded except for any such service performed before the date of the enactment of this Act; and (B) all pay for service performed as a Member of Congress shall be disregarded other than pay for service which may be taken into account under subparagraph (A).
Preservation of rights.--To the extent practicable, eligibility for, and the amount of, any annuity (or other benefit) to which an individual is entitled based on a separation of a Member of Congress occurring after such Member becomes ineligible to participate in the Civil Service Retirement System or the Federal Employees' Retirement System (as the case may be) by reason of subsection (a) shall be determined in a manner that preserves any rights to which the Member would have been entitled, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, had separation occurred on such date.
Regulations.--Any regulations necessary to carry out this section may be prescribed by the Office of Personnel Management and the Executive Director (referred to in section 8401(13) of title 5, United States Code) with respect to matters within their respective areas of responsibility.
Definition.--In this section, the terms ``Member of Congress'' and ``Member'' have the meaning of the term ``Member'' as defined under section 8331(2) or 8401(20) of title 5, United States Code.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be considered to apply with respect to any savings plan or other matter outside of subchapter III of chapter 83 or chapter 84 of title 5, United States Code.
DISCLOSURE OF ESTIMATES OF FEDERAL RETIREMENT BENEFITS OF MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
In General.--Section 105(a) of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1965 (2 United States Code 104a; Public Law 88-454; 78 United States Statutes at Large 550) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) The Secretary of the Senate and the Clerk of the House of Representatives shall include in each report submitted under paragraph (1), with respect to Members of Congress, as applicable-- ``(A) the total amount of individual contributions made by each Member to the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund and the Thrift Savings Fund under chapters 83 and 84 of title 5, United States Code, for all Federal service performed by the Member as a Member of Congress and as a Federal employee; ``(B) an estimate of the annuity each Member would be entitled to receive under chapters 83 and 84 of such title based on the earliest possible date to receive annuity payments by reason of retirement (other than disability retirement) which begins after the date of expiration of the term of office such Member is serving; and ``(C) any other information necessary to enable the public to accurately compute the Federal retirement benefits of each Member based on various assumptions of years of service and age of separation from service by reason of retirement.''.
Effective Date.--This section shall take effect 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
ELIMINATION OF AUTOMATIC ANNUITY ADJUSTMENTS FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
The portion of the annuity of a Member of Congress which is based solely on service as a Member of Congress shall not be subject to a cost-of-living adjustment under section 8340 or 8462 of title 5, United States Code.
ELIMINATION OF AUTOMATIC PAY ADJUSTMENTS FOR MEMBERS OF CONGRESS.
Pay Adjustments.--Paragraph (2) of section 601(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1946 (2 United States Code 31) is repealed.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 601(a)(1) of such Act is amended-- (1) by striking ``(a)(1)'' and inserting ``(a)''; (2) by redesignating subparagraphs (A), (B), and (C) as paragraphs (1), (2), and (3), respectively; and (3) by striking ``, as adjusted by paragraph (2) of this subsection''.
ROLLCALL VOTE FOR ANY CONGRESSIONAL PAY RAISE.
It shall not be in order in the Senate or the House of Representatives to dispose of any amendment, bill, resolution, motion, or other matter relating to the pay of Members of Congress unless the matter is decided by a rollcall vote.