This Act may be cited as the ``Microbicides Development Act of 2000''.
In General.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) Annually at least 1 billion people worldwide contracted one of eight sexually transmitted diseases (``STDs'')-- chlamydia, gonorrhea, syphilis, trichomoniasis, hepatitis B, herpes, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), and human papilloma virus.
Of these, hepatitis B, herpes, HIV, and human papilloma virus are incurable and represented two-thirds of the new infections.
In 1999, 15.4 million people in the United States acquired at least one of these eight diseases, the highest rate in the industrialized world.
Five of the top 10 most frequently reported infectious diseases (87 percent of all cases) are sexually transmitted.
At least 66 million Americans, over 1 in 3 adults aged 15-65, are now living with an incurable viral STD.
The total costs to the United States Reports economy of STDs, excluding HIV infection, were approximately $16 billion.
When the costs of sexually-transmitted HIV infection are included, that total rises to $23 billion.
STDs impose high human costs in pain, diminished quality of life, disability, and mortality.
In women, STDs other than HIV can produce infertility, cancers, and numerous pregnancy-related complications, including ectopic pregnancy, spontaneous abortion, and stillbirth.
Passed to a fetus or infant, these infections can cause low birthweight, pneumonia, neurologic damage, and congenital abnormalities.
These infections also substantially enhance susceptibility to HIV infection.
Individuals of every age and every geographic, racial, cultural, socioeconomic, and religious background are affected by STDs.
Some infections are so prevalent that almost everyone is at risk, with many perhaps unaware of their infected status.
Biologically and socially, women are more vulnerable to STDs than men.
Many STDs are transmitted more easily from a man to a woman and are more likely to remain undetected in women, resulting in delayed diagnosis and treatment, and more severe complications.
In the United States, HIV morbidity and mortality remain highest among African Americans, who make up 13% of the United States Reports population but accounted for almost half of AIDS deaths and new AIDS cases in 1998.
For African American women between the ages 25 and 44 in the United States, AIDS now occupies second place as the cause of death.
In the United States as well as globally, adolescents and young adults are at highest risk of acquiring a sexually- transmitted infection.
At least a quarter of all new cases of STDs occur in teens, two-thirds in people ages 15-24, so that by age 24, at least 1 in 3 sexually-active Americans will have contracted an STD.
Teenage girls are at particular risk, behaviorally and physiologically.
The social, health, and economic burdens of STDs are especially severe for developing countries.
Among women ages 15-49 in developing countries, STDs represent the second largest burdens of mortality and disability.
Only ``maternal causes,'' that is, immediate complications of pregnancy and childbirth, rank higher.
AIDS is rapidly becoming a ``women's epidemic.''
In the United States, women now constitute the fastest growing group of those newly infected with HIV and in Africa, more women are becoming infected with HIV than are men.
Worldwide, almost half of the approximately 14,000 adults infected daily with HIV in 1998 were women, of whom 9 out of 10 live in developing countries.
Microbicides.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) Since the early 1990s, ``topical microbicides'' have attracted scientific attention as a possible new technology for preventing STDs, including HIV.
Like today's spermicides, microbicides would be used vaginally by women to help protect themselves, their partners, and their infants from the sexual transmission of HIV and other STD pathogens.
These compounds could be formulated in a number of ways--as a gel, film, sponge or time released-capsule--and could be used in addition to condoms or as an alternative when condom use is not possible.
For individuals needing to use them without partner knowledge or consent, safe, effective, acceptable, and affordable topical microbicides could be formulated to be undetectable.
TITLE I--MICROBICIDE RESEARCH AT THE NATIONAL INSTITUTES OF HEALTH SEC.
PROGRAM REGARDING MICROBICIDES FOR PREVENTING TRANSMISSION OF SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES.
Part B of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 284 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end following section: ``microbicides for preventing transmission of sexually transmitted diseases ``Sec.
Expansion and Coordination of Activities.--The Director of NIH (referred to in this section as the `Director') shall expand, intensify, and coordinate the activities of the Institute with respect to research on the development of microbicides to prevent the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV (in this section referred to as `microbicide research').
Coordination.--The Director shall coordinate the activities under subsection (a) as outlined in subparagraph (c)(1) among all appropriate institutes and components of the National Institutes of Health to the extent such institutes and components have responsibilities that are related to the development of microbicides.
Program for Microbicide Development.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Institute shall establish a program to support research to develop microbicides that can substantially reduce transmission of sexually transmitted infections.
Activities under such subsection shall provide for an expansion and intensification of the conduct and support of-- ``(1) basic research on the initial mechanisms of infection by sexually transmitted pathogens; ``(2) development of appropriate animal models for evaluating safety and efficacy of microbicides; ``(3) development of mucosal delivery systems; ``(4) research on approaches to the design of contraceptive and non-contraceptive microbicides; ``(5) clinical trials; and ``(6) behavioral research on use, acceptability and compliance with microbicides.
Implementation Plan.--The Director, in coordination with institute directors as described in subsection (b), shall develop and implement a plan to ensure that the research programs described in paragraph (c)(1) are implemented in accordance with a plan for such programs.
Such plan shall include the comments of the Director and shall include, but not be limited to, the following information for the five year period beginning upon enactment of such section: ``(1) Description of plan and objectives with respect to microbicide research.
Description of the institutes involved and their role in microbicide research.
Capacity of such institutes to conduct microbicide research as described in (c)(1).
Description of grant and contract mechanisms available to facilitate microbicide research, including grant and contract mechanisms, RFA's, SBIR/STTRs, support for preclinical product development and clinical trial capacity.
Description of the plan for increasing number of investigators in this area of research.
Public Comment.--The Director shall develop a mechanism to provide the public, including non-profit private entities concerned with microbicide research, opportunities to submit comments on the plan, including provisions relating to the selection of products for clinical evaluations and to the SBIR and STTR program referred to in subparagraph (d)(4).
Report to Congress.--The Director shall prepare, and the Secretary shall submit, not later than 1 year after the date on enactment, and annually thereafter, a report that describes the activities of the Institute, under the research programs referred to in subsection (c), that shall include-- ``(1) a description of the research plan with respect to microbicide research prepared under subsection (d); ``(2) an assessment of the development, revision, and implementation of such plan; ``(3) a description and evaluation of the progress made, during the period for which such report is prepared, in the research on microbicides; ``(4) a summary and analysis of expenditures made, during the period for which the report is made, for activities with respect to microbicides conducted and supported by the National Institutes of Health; and ``(5) such comments and recommendations as the Director considers appropriate.
Coordination.--The Director, to the extent practicable, shall consult with the Director for the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the United States Agency for International Development, in developing the plan under subparagraph (d) for research on microbicides that takes into consideration research on sexually transmitted diseases and microbicides carried out at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the United States Agency for International Development.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $75,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 and 2005.''.
TITLE II--MICROBICIDE RESEARCH AT THE CENTERS FOR DISEASE CONTROL AND PREVENTION SEC.
MICROBICIDES FOR PREVENTING TRANSMISSION OF SEXUALLY TRANSMITTED DISEASES.
Part B of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 243 et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 317G the following section: ``microbicides for preventing transmission of sexually transmitted diseases ``Sec.
Expansion and Coordination of Microbicide Research Activities.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, shall expand, intensify, and coordinate the activities of such Centers with respect to research on microbicides to prevent the transmission of sexually transmitted diseases, including HIV.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purposes of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $7,000,000 for fiscal year 2001, $11,000,000 for fiscal year 2002, $15,000,000 for fiscal year 2003, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2004 and 2005.