SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Grand Canyon Capital Improvements Act of 2001''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Park surcharge or set-aside.
Use of bond proceeds.
In this Act: (1) Fundraising organization.--The term ``fundraising organization'' means an entity authorized to act as a fundraising organization under section 3(a).
Memorandum of agreement.--The term ``memorandum of agreement'' means a memorandum of agreement entered into by the Secretary under section 3(a) that contains the terms specified in section 4.
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the Grand Canyon National Park.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
In General.--The Secretary may enter into a memorandum of agreement under section 4 with an entity to act as an authorized fundraising organization for the benefit of the Park.
Bonds.--The fundraising organization for the Park shall issue taxable bonds in return for the surcharge or set-aside for the Park collected under section 5.
Professional Standards.--The fundraising organization shall abide by all relevant professional standards regarding the issuance of securities and shall comply with all applicable Federal and State law.
Audit.--The fundraising organization shall be subject to an audit by the Secretary.
No Liability for Bonds.--The United States shall not be liable for the security of any bonds issued by the fundraising organization.
The fundraising organization shall enter into a memorandum of agreement that specifies-- (1) the amount of the bond issue; (2) the maturity of the bonds, not to exceed 20 years; (3) the per capita amount required to amortize the bond issue, provide for the reasonable costs of administration, and maintain a sufficient reserve consistent with industry standards; (4) the project or projects at the Park that will be funded with the bond proceeds and the specific responsibilities of the Secretary and the fundraising organization with respect to each project; and (5) procedures for modifications of the agreement with the consent of both parties based on changes in circumstances, including modifications relating to project priorities.
PARK SURCHARGE OR SET-ASIDE.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may authorize the Superintendent of the Park-- (1) to charge and collect a surcharge in an amount not to exceed $2 for each individual otherwise subject to an entrance fee for admission to the Park; or (2) to set aside not more than $2 for each individual charged the entrance fee.
Surcharge in Addition to Entrance Fees.--The Park surcharge under subsection (a) shall be in addition to any entrance fee collected under-- (1) section 4 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a); (2) the recreational fee demonstration program authorized by section 315 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (as contained in Public Law 104-134; 110 United States Statutes at Large 1321-156; 1321-200; 16 United States Code 460l-6a note); or (3) the national park passport program established under title VI of the National Parks Omnibus Management Act of 1998 (16 United States Code 5991 et sequentes).
Limitation.--The total amount charged or set aside under subsection (a) may not exceed $2 for each individual charged an entrance fee.
Use.--A surcharge or set-aside under subsection (a) shall be used by the fundraising organization to-- (1) amortize the bond issue; (2) provide for the reasonable costs of administration; and (3) maintain a sufficient reserve consistent with industry standards, as determined by the bond underwriter.
USE OF BOND PROCEEDS.
Eligible Projects.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), bond proceeds under this Act may be used for a project for the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of a facility in the Park.
Project limitations.--A project referred to in paragraph (1) shall be consistent with-- (A) the laws governing the National Park System; (B) any law governing the Park; and (C) the general management plan for the Park.
Prohibition on use for administration.--Other than interest as provided in subsection (b), no part of the bond proceeds may be used to defray administrative expenses.
Interest on Bond Proceeds.--Any interest earned on bond proceeds may be used by the fundraising organization to-- (1) meet reserve requirements; and (2) defray reasonable administrative expenses incurred in connection with the management and sale of the bonds.
In General.--Not later than 2 years after the promulgation of regulations under section 8, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the bond program.
Requirements.--The report shall include-- (1) a review of the bond program carried out under this Act at the Park; and (2) recommendations to Congress on whether to establish a bond program at all units of the National Park System.
The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Treasury, shall promulgate regulations to carry out this Act.