This Act may be cited as the ``Women's Cardiovascular Diseases Research and Prevention Act''.
The Congress finds as follows with respect to women in the United States: (1) Heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases are the leading causes of death in women.
Heart attacks and strokes are leading causes of disability in women.
Cardiovascular diseases claim the lives of more women each year than does cancer.
Each year more than 500,000 females die of cardiovascular diseases, while approximately 254,000 females die of cancer.
Heart attack kills more than 5\1/2\ times as many females as breast cancer.
Stroke kills twice as many females as breast cancer.
More than 1 in 5 females has some form of cardiovascular disease.
Of females under age 65, each year approximately 20,000 die of heart attacks.
In the case of African-American women, from ages 35 to 74 the death rate from heart attacks is 38 percent higher than that of white women.
Each year since 1984, cardiovascular diseases have claimed the lives of more females than males.
In 1993, of the number of individuals who died of such diseases, 52 percent were females and 48 percent were males.
The clinical course of cardiovascular diseases is different in women than in men, and current diagnostic capabilities are less accurate in women than in men.
Once a woman develops a cardiovascular disease, she is more likely than a man to have continuing health problems, and she is more likely to die.
Of women who have had a heart attack, approximately 44 percent die within 1 year of the attack.
Of men who have had such an attack, 27 percent die within 1 year.
At older ages, women who have had a heart attack are twice as likely as men to die from the attack within a few weeks.
Women are more likely than men to have a stroke during the first 6 years following a heart attack.
More than 60 percent of women who suffer a stroke die within 12 years.
Long-term survivorship of stroke is better in women than in men.
Of individuals who die from a stroke, each year approximately 61 percent are females.
In 1993, 91,060 females died from strokes.
Women have unrecognized heart attacks more frequently than men.
Of women who died suddenly from heart attack, 63 percent had no previous evidence of disease.
More than half of the annual health care costs that are related to cardiovascular diseases are attributable to the occurrence of the diseases in women, each year costing this nation hundreds of billions of dollars in health care costs and lost productivity.
A number of recent studies have found that hormone replacement therapy contributes to the reduction of risk factors for cardiovascular disease in postmenopausal women and may reduce the risk of cardiovascular mortality in such women by as much as 50 percent.
EXPANSION AND INTENSIFICATION OF ACTIVITIES REGARDING HEART ATTACK, STROKE AND OTHER CARDIOVASCULAR DISEASES IN WOMEN.
Subpart 2 of part C of title IV of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 285b et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 424 the following section: ``heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases in women ``Sec.
In General.--The Director of the Institute shall expand, intensify, and coordinate research and related activities of the Institute with respect to heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases in women.
Coordination With Other Institutes.--The Director of the Institute shall coordinate activities under subsection (a) with similar activities conducted by the other national research institutes and agencies of the National Institutes of Health to the extent that such Institutes and agencies have responsibilities that are related to heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases in women.
Certain Programs.--In carrying out subsection (a), the Director of the Institute shall conduct or support research to expand the understanding of the causes of, and to develop methods for preventing, cardiovascular diseases in women.
Activities under such subsection shall include conducting and supporting the following: ``(1) Research to determine the reasons underlying the prevalence of heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases in women, including African-American women and other women who are members of racial or ethnic minority groups.
Basic research concerning the etiology and causes of cardiovascular diseases in women.
Epidemiological studies to address the frequency and natural history of such diseases and the differences among men and women, and among racial and ethnic groups, with respect to such diseases.
The development of safe, efficient, and cost- effective diagnostic approaches to evaluating women with suspected ischemic heart disease.
Clinical research for the development and evaluation of new treatments for women, including rehabilitation.
Studies to gain a better understanding of methods of preventing cardiovascular diseases in women, including applications of effective methods for the control of blood pressure, lipids, and obesity.
Information and education programs for patients and health care providers on risk factors associated with heart attack, stroke, and other cardiovascular diseases in women, and on the importance of the prevention or control of such risk factors and timely referral with appropriate diagnosis and treatment.
Such programs shall include information and education on health-related behaviors that can improve such important risk factors as smoking, obesity, high blood cholesterol, and lack of exercise.
Activities Regarding Hormone Replacement Therapy.--Activities carried out under subsection (c) shall include information and education programs for patients and health care providers on the benefits and risks of hormone replacement therapy and the role of such therapy in reducing the risk of cardiovascular disease in women.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $140,000,000 for fiscal year 1998, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1999 and 2000.
The authorization of appropriations established in the preceding sentence is in addition to any other authorization of appropriation that is available for such purpose.