The Congress finds the following: (1) Professor Peter Federal Reporter Drucker, the father of modern management, is one of the most influential and widely read philosophers and writers on modern organizations and management.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker was born in Vienna, Austria, was educated there and in England, earned a doctorate in public and international law while working as a newspaper reporter in Frankfurt, Germany, and then worked as an economist at an international bank in London.
In 1937, Peter Federal Reporter Drucker came to the United States and published his first book, ``The End of Economic Man'', in 1939.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker's management books include-- (A) ``The Practice of Management'' (1954); (B) ``The Effective Executive'' (1967); (C) ``Management: Tasks, Responsibilities, Practices'' (1974); (D) ``Managing in Turbulent Times'' (1980); (E) ``Innovation and Entrepreneurship'' (1985); and (F) others that are international best sellers and have been translated into more than 20 languages.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker has also written-- (A) an important analysis of economics, politics, and society; (B) an autobiography called Adventures of a Bystander (1978); (C) two novels; and (D) several volumes of essays.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker has been a frequent contributor to various magazines and journals over the years and is an editorial columnist for The Wall Street Journal.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker's latest book, Managing the Non-Profit Organization, was published in November 1990.
Over the course of six decades, Drucker has become the most sought-after advisor to the chief executive officers of major corporations.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker invented the term ``management by objectives'' and helped develop objective measures for pay and promotion.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker identified the importance of the ``knowledge worker''--the elite of the white-collar workforce-- earlier than almost anyone else.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker began as a professor of politics and philosophy at Bennington College.
For more than 20 years, Peter Federal Reporter Drucker was a professor of management at the former Graduate Business School of New York University.
Since 1979, Peter Federal Reporter Drucker has been Marie Rankin Clarke Professor of Social Science and Management at the Peter Federal Reporter Drucker Graduate School of Management of the Claremont Graduate University in Claremont, California.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker's distinguished career has helped to revolutionize management both in theory and in practice.
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker's ability to grasp new ideas was crystallized in the role he played helping General Electric's jet engine division revolutionize the commercial aircraft business, helping General Electric's jet-engine executives, ``all of whom were technically oriented, most of whom came out of the military, understand the value system of potential customers.''
Peter Federal Reporter Drucker's contributions to the world of management have revolutionized the techniques modern businesses are using to move ahead as well as strengthened the foundations on which those businesses are built.
Presentation Authorized.--The President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, a gold medal of appropriate design to Peter Federal Reporter Drucker, in recognition of his accomplishments as a journalist, a writer, an economist, and a philosopher.
Design and Striking.--For the purpose of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall strike a gold medal with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary.
Under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, the Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck under section 2 at a price sufficient to cover the costs of the bronze medals (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses) and the cost of the gold medal.
The medals struck under this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
FUNDING AND PROCEEDS OF SALE.
Authorization.--There is hereby authorized to be charged against the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund an amount not to exceed $30,000 to pay for the cost of the medals authorized by this Act.
Proceeds of Sale.--Amounts received from the sale of duplicate bronze medals under section 3 shall be deposited in the United States Mint Public Enterprise Fund.