ESTATE TAX DEFERRAL IF REAL PROPERTY MANAGED ACCORDING TO HABITAT CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 11 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax imposed) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
EXCLUSION OF REAL PROPERTY MANAGED UNDER HABITAT CONSERVATION AGREEMENT.
In General.--If the executor elects the application of this section and files the agreement referred to in subsection (b), then for purposes of the tax imposed by section 2001 the value of the taxable estate shall be determined by deducting from the value of the gross estate an amount equal to the value of the qualified real property of the decedent included in determining the gross estate.
Qualified Real Property.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified real property' means real property with respect to which each owner has entered into an agreement-- ``(1) with the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce, under which each owner agrees to maintain the property in accordance with habitat conservation concerns, as determined by the agreement, or ``(2) with a State environmental agency, under which each owner agrees to so maintain the property, if the agreement is approved by the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce.
Recapture.-- ``(1) Disposition of interest, material breach, or termination.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as provided in subparagraph (C), if-- ``(i) any owner disposes of any interest in the property to which subsection (a) applies, or ``(ii) there is a material breach or termination by any owner of any agreement described in subsection (b) with respect to such property, then there is hereby imposed an additional tax.
Amount of tax.--The amount of the tax imposed by subparagraph (A) with respect to any property shall equal the sum of-- ``(i) the difference between-- ``(I) the amount of the tax imposed by section 2001 on the estate of the decedent, and ``(II) the amount of tax which would have been so imposed if the value of real property excluded under subsection (a) had been included in the gross estate at the fair market value applicable at the time of the disposition, breach, or termination referred to in subparagraph (A), and ``(ii) if the disposition, breach, or termination referred to in subparagraph (A) occurs during the 2-year period beginning on the date of the death of the decedent referred to subsection (a), interest on the amount described in clause (i), determined using the underpayment rate established under section 6621, for the period beginning on the due date of the return of the tax imposed by section 2001 (determined without regard to any extension) and ending on the date of the payment of the additional tax under this paragraph.
Exception if transferee assumes obligations of transferor.--Subparagraph (A)(i) shall not apply to a disposition by an owner if the owner (or his estate) and the transferee of the property enter into a written agreement under which the transferee agrees-- ``(i) to assume the obligations imposed on the owner under the agreement described in subsection (b), ``(ii) to assume liability for any tax imposed under subparagraph (A) with respect to any future transfers or breaches by such transferee, and ``(iii) to notify the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of Commerce (whichever is applicable) and the Secretary that the transferee has assumed the obligations and liabilities described in clauses (i) and (ii).
If an owner and a transferee enter into an agreement described in clauses (i), (ii), and (iii), such transferee shall be treated for purposes of this section as having entered into an agreement described in subsection (b).
Statute of limitations.--If a taxpayer incurs a tax liability pursuant to paragraph (1), then-- ``(A) the statutory period for the assessment of any additional tax imposed by paragraph (1) shall not expire before the expiration of 3 years from the date the Secretary is notified (in such manner as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe) of the incurring of such tax liability, and ``(B) such additional tax may be assessed before the expiration of such 3-year period notwithstanding the provisions of any other law or rule of law that would otherwise prevent such assessment.
Owner.--For purposes of this section, the term `owner' means a person in being who has an interest (whether or not in possession) in real property.
Election and Filing of Agreement.-- ``(1) Election.--The election under this section shall be made on the return of the tax imposed by section 2001.
Such election shall be made in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation provide.
Agreement.--The agreement described in subsection (b) shall be filed in such manner as the Secretary shall by regulation prescribe.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter A of chapter 11 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
2017. Credit if real property managed under habitat conservation agreement.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this Act shall apply to the estates of decedents dying after the date of the enactment of this Act.
CREDIT FOR CERTAIN CONSERVATION EXPENSES.
In General.--Subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR CONSERVATION EXPENSES.
In General.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the applicable conservation expense amount for the taxable year.
Applicable Conservation Expense Amount.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `applicable conservation expense amount' means, with respect to qualified conservation expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year-- ``(A) such qualified conservation expenses, if the out-of-pocket expenses of the taxpayer are 50 percent or more of such qualified conservation expenses, or ``(B) the out-of-pocket expenses of the taxpayer, if the out-of-pocket expenses are less than 50 percent of such qualified conservation expenses.
Out-of-pocket expenses.--The term `out-of-pocket expenses' means, with respect to qualified conservation expenses paid or incurred by the taxpayer during the taxable year, the excess of-- ``(A) such qualified conservation expenses, over ``(B) the amount of any grant to the taxpayer which is-- ``(i) made for the purpose of paying such qualified conservation expenses, and ``(ii) excludable from income.
Qualified Conservation Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified conservation expenses' means, with respect to any real property, expenses paid or incurred for-- ``(A) any action taken pursuant to a qualified conservation agreement for such property, or ``(B) any qualified conservation activity.
Qualified conservation activity.--The term `qualified conservation activity' means any activity so designated for purposes of this paragraph by the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or the Administrator of the National Marine Fisheries Service.
Qualified conservation agreement.--The term `qualified conservation agreement' means an agreement described in section 2057(b).
Limitation.--The credit allowed under this section for any taxable year may not exceed $1,500.
Carryforward or Unused Credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year exceeds the limitation imposed by section 26(a) for such taxable year reduced by the sum of the credits allowable under subpart A and this subpart (other than this section), such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such succeeding taxable year up to 10 years.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No deduction may be allowed under this chapter for any expense for which a credit is allowed under this section.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit for conservation expenses.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to expenses paid or incurred after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXCLUSION FROM INCOME OF GRANTS MADE FOR QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EXPENSES.
In General.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
GRANTS MADE FOR QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EXPENSES.
In General.--Gross income shall not include the amount of any grant which is-- (1) made to the taxpayer for the purpose of paying, during the taxable year, qualified conservation expenses with respect to real property owned by the taxpayer, and (2) used by the taxpayer to pay such expenses.
Qualified Conservation Expenses.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified conservation expenses' has the meaning given such term by section 30A(d).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the item relating to section 137 and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Grants made for qualified conservation expenses.
Cross references to other Acts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to amounts received after the date of the enactment of this Act.