This Act may be cited as the ``Ecosystem and Indigenous Peoples Protection Act''.
FINDINGS; SENSE OF THE CONGRESS.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The Congress is pleased that the institutions of the World Bank Group have adopted environmental assessment and information access procedures.
These policy changes have generated increased concern for the environmental impact of projects, and have created a greater environmental awareness at such institutions.
However, problems continue to arise in the use by World Bank decision makers of information generated by environmental assessments and the adequacy of their content.
Furthermore, while environmental information and compliance with environmental and social policies has improved substantially, there are inconsistencies and gaps in how the World Bank implements their policies and procedures.
Current environmental safeguards in the taxpayer- supported international financial institutions are inadequate.
The World Bank does not prepare a full environmental assessment for a significant portion of its activities.
Even in those cases where an environmental assessment is made, the assessment is often not made available in a full or timely manner to the United States Executive Director of the institution.
The World Bank's internal evaluation department found that the environmental assessments have little to no impact on the project design and project decisions.
Internal reviews have further determined that more than a third of all World Bank projects either do not adhere to the environmental policies or fail to meet environmental performance goals.
Under current law, United States taxpayers are forced to contribute funds even for projects that are opposed by the United States Executive Director of the institution from which funding for the project has been requested.
For example, United States taxpayers will contribute $27,200,000 for a loan that will be used for a project that will result in resettlement that will harm Tibetan and Mongolian indigenous peoples, and despoil the environment of the region, notwithstanding that the United States voted against providing a loan for the project.
Projects of the World Bank Group resettle large numbers of people.
A world Bank study concluded that 543,000 people had been relocated from 1986 through 1993.
Almost 3,000,000 more people are or will be resettled under the current active portfolio, according to the World Bank.
The Bank's inspection panel has found an imbalance in execution of investment components of Bank-financed projects and resettlement components of the same projects, in large part due to the common practice of leaving resettlement and environmental measures to counterpart financing.
United States funding should be made contingent on evidence that the institutions will not make any loan or provide any financial assistance that will have a significant adverse environmental impact, including involuntary resettlement and the destruction of forests or other natural ecosystems.
For several years, the Congress has made it a priority to seek a broader policy framework for environmental and social protection at the World Bank Group.
The World Bank Group sets the standards, which other international financial institutions follow.
In fact, the Congress has made environmental issues a condition for United States contributions to the international financial institutions.
The World Bank repeatedly exhibits a failure to comply with these environmental and social policies.
Furthermore, in 1999, 63 percent of the lending by the World Bank is for macroeconomic adjustment programs that do not have to follow environmental or social policies.
The World Bank's board of directors and management have consistently undermined the effectiveness of its only accountability mechanism, the independent inspection panel, by interfering with the ability of the panel to carry out investigations of Bank policy violations in response to legitimate citizen claims.
The inspection panel was created in response to calls by the Congress for more, not less, accountability at the Bank.
The United States and other donor governments agreed in the replenishment negotiations for IDA 12 that the World Bank Group should make more information publicly available and improve overall transparency.
Sense of the Congress.--It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) the World Bank Group has not made significant progress in complying with environmental policies or mandates; (2) the World Bank Group should seek full compliance with its environmental and social policies and policies on information disclosure; (3) the World Bank Group should apply its environmental and social policies to all lending and financial instruments; and (4) the World Bank should not interfere with the authority or the independence of its inspection panel, and that panel should have the mandate to cover all institutions in the World Bank Group.
PREVENTION OF UNITED STATES FUNDS FROM SUPPORTING WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONS THAT DO NOT FULLY COMPLY WITH WORLD BANK GROUP ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL POLICIES.
Title XIII of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262m-262m-7) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
PREVENTION OF UNITED STATES FUNDS FROM SUPPORTING WORLD BANK GROUP OPERATIONS THAT DO NOT FULLY COMPLY WITH WORLD BANK GROUP ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL POLICIES.
In General.--No department, agency, officer, or employee of the United States may make funds available to an institution in the World Bank Group if-- ``(1) the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, or the Administrator of the Agency for International Development determines that the institution will use any part of the funds to provide financial assistance with respect to a project or activity that will have a significant adverse environmental impact, or that will violate an environmental or social policy of the World Bank Group; ``(2) the Secretary of the Treasury or the Administrator of the Agency for International Development has certified to the committees specified in subsection (d)(3) that a project funded by the institution has resulted in significant involuntary resettlement, unless the Secretary or the Administrator subsequently have certified to such committees that the institution has verified that all of the costs of such resettlement, including all costs incurred by those involuntarily resettled, have been paid by entities other than those involuntarily resettled; or ``(3) the institution has not developed and implemented a `pay-for-performance policy' which requires salary or pay reduction, or termination of employment, for any employee of the institution who is involved in the preparation, appraisal, or implementation of any project or activity which, if conducted, would violate any environmental or social policy of the World Bank Group.
Use of United States Influence To Achieve Funding Conditions.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director at each institution in the World Bank Group to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to-- ``(1) oppose the provision by the institution of financial assistance of any kind for any project or activity that the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development have determined will have a significant adverse environmental impact or violate an environmental or social policy of the World Bank Group; ``(2) oppose the provision of financial assistance of any kind for any project if, at least 120 days before the board of directors of the institution votes to approve or disapprove the project, the institution does not make available to the public and to the United States Executive Director at the institution all environmental assessments, technical information, feasibility studies, consultant reports on environmental risks, engineering studies, Project Appraisal Reports, Project Information Documents, resettlement plans, plans involving indigenous peoples, supervision reports, project completion reports, performance audit reports, country assistance reviews, draft policy papers, draft and final country assistance strategies, quality assurance group reports, compliance unit reports and audits, annual reviews of portfolio performance, Policy Framework Papers, and all documentation related to the categorization of projects and of environmental screening documents relating to the project, and relating to all projects with environmental and social impacts; and ``(3) oppose the provision of any financial assistance that it would be unlawful for the Export-Import Bank of the United States or the Overseas Private Investment Corporation to provide, and seek to have the institution adopt the same environmental policies limiting the provision of financial assistance as apply to the Export-Import Bank of the United States or the Overseas Private Investment Corporation.
Enforcement.--If the Secretary of the Treasury determines that an international financial institution has provided financial assistance for a project or activity over the opposition of the United States Executive Director as expressed pursuant to subsection (b), then, in addition to any reduction pursuant to this subsection with respect to any other such project or activity, the Secretary shall reduce the amount of any payment required to be made to the institution by any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States, during the 5-year period beginning with the date the financial assistance is so provided, by a percentage equal to-- ``(1) the total amount of financial assistance to be provided by the institution for the project or activity, divided by the total amount of financial assistance to be provided by the institution to all projects and activities during the period for which financial assistance is to be provided by the institution for the project or activity; multiplied by ``(2) the total amount of contributions paid to the institution by any department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States during the 5-year period ending on the date the assistance begins to be so provided, divided by the total amount of contributions paid to the institution by all member countries of the institution during such 5-year period.
Compliance Report.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall prepare annual reports on the extent to which the United States Executive Directors at the institutions in the World Bank Group have complied with subsection (b), and a statement of the number of projects which were approved by such institutions, notwithstanding opposition or abstention by the United States Executive Directors involved, and a record of the United States Executive Directors' voting records.
Efforts to have problem project watch lists released.--The United States Executive Directors at the institutions in the World Bank Group and the Secretary of the Treasury shall seek the public release of any list which details problem projects and those projects that do not comply with an environmental or social policy of the World Bank Group.
Submission.--On October 1 of each fiscal year, the Secretary of the Treasury, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, and the Administrator of the Agency for International Development shall submit each report required by paragraph (1) to the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Environment and Public Works of the Senate and the Committee on Banking and Financial Services and the Committee on International Affairs of the House of Representatives.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Environmental or social policy of the world bank group.--The term `environmental or social policy of the World Bank Group' includes Operational Policies (OP), Operational Directives (OD), and Operational Policies Notes (OPN), including the matters set forth in the following documents: ``(A) Information Policy.
Environmental assessment (OP 4.01).
Natural Habitats (OP 4.04).
Pest Management (OP 4.09).
Safety of Dams (OP 4.37).
Cultural Property (OPN 4.11).
Indigenous Peoples (OD 4.20).
Involuntary Resettlement (OD 4.30).
Projects in International Waterwyas (OP 7.50).
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP 7.60).
Project Supervision (OD 13.05) .
Project Monitoring And Evaluation (OD 10.70).
Institution in the world bank group.--The term `institution in the World Bank Group' means the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the International Development Association, the International Finance Corporation, and the Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency.
Oppose.--The term `oppose' means, with respect to voting, to vote `No'.
Significant.--The term `significant'-- ``(A) in relation to an adverse environmental impact, has the meaning given in section 1508.27 of volume 40, Code of Federal Regulations (in effect as of July 1, 1998); and ``(B) in relation to involuntary resettlement, means any resettlement that affects indigenous populations, and any resettlement project that affects more than 500 individuals.''.
ADVANCEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL GOALS.
Title XIII of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262m-262m-7) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
ADVANCEMENT OF ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL GOALS.
``The Secretary of the Treasury shall instruct the United States Executive Director at the institutions of the World Bank Group to use the voice, vote, and influence of the United States to encourage the institutions to-- ``(1) establish a list of projects and categories of projects for which the institutions will not provide financial assistance because doing so would cause serious environmental or social effects; and ``(2) work with other donor countries to establish an environmental and social trust fund to ameliorate the detrimental environmental and social effects caused by projects.''.
STRENGTHENING OF ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT REQUIREMENTS.
Extension of Requirements to All International Financial Institutions.--Section 1307 of the International Financial Institutions Act (22 United States Code 262m) is amended-- (1) in subsections (a) through (f), except in subsection (d)(2)-- (A) by striking ``multilateral development bank'' each place it appears and inserting ``international financial institution''; and (B) by striking ``banks'' each place it appears and inserting ``institutions''; (2) in subsection (d)(2), by striking ``a multilateral development bank'' and inserting ``an international financial institution''; and (3) by striking subsection (g) and inserting the following: ``(g) International Financial Institution Defined.--In this section, the term `international financial institution' has the meaning given in section 1701(c)(2).''.
Elimination of Exception to Assessment Requirement.--Section 1307(a) of such Act (22 United States Code 262m(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``(a) Assessment'' and all that follows through ``(1) In general.--Beginning'' and inserting the following: ``(a) Assessment Required Before Favorable Vote on Action.-- Beginning''; (2) by striking ``(A)'' and inserting ``(1)''; (3) by striking ``(B) except as provided in paragraph (2),'' and inserting ``(2)''; (4) by moving the provisions amended by paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection 2 ems to the left; and (5) by striking paragraph (2).
Assessments To Include Proposals for Mitigating Potential Adverse Environmental Impacts.--Section 1307(a)(1) of such Act (22 United States Code 262m(a)(1)), as amended by subsection (b) of this section, is amended by inserting ``, and proposing methods to mitigate any potential adverse environmental impacts of the proposed action,'' before ``has been completed''.