entitled ``Joint Resolution to establish the Fort Sumter National Monument in the State of South Carolina'', approved April 28, 1948 (62 United States Statutes at Large 204, chapter 239; 16 United States Code 450ee), to commemorate historic events in the vicinity of Fort Sumter, the site of the first engagement of the Civil War on April 12, 1861; (2) Fort Moultrie-- (A) was the site of the first defeat of the British in the Revolutionary War on June 28, 1776; and (B) was acquired by the Federal Government from the State of South Carolina in 1960 under the authority of the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666, chapter 593); (3) since 1960, Fort Moultrie has been administered by the National Park Service as part of the Fort Sumter National Monument without a clear management mandate or established boundary; (4) Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie played important roles in the protection of Charleston Harbor and in the coastal defense system of the United States; (5) Fort Moultrie is the only site in the National Park System that preserves the history of the United States coastal defense system during the period from 1776 through 1947; and (6) Sullivan's Island Life Saving Station, located adjacent to the Charleston Light-- (A) was constructed in 1896; and (B) is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
In this Act: (1) Charleston light.--The term ``Charleston Light'' means the Charleston Light and any associated land and improvements to the land that are located between Sullivan's Island Life Saving Station and the mean low water mark.
Map.--The term ``map'' means the map entitled ``Boundary Map, Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie National Historical Park'', numbered 392/80088, and dated November 30, 2000.
Park.--The term ``Park'' means the Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie National Historical Park established by section 4(a).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State.--The term ``State'' means the State of South Carolina.
FORT SUMTER AND FORT MOULTRIE NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--There is established the Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie National Historical Park in the State as a unit of the National Park System to preserve, maintain, and interpret the nationally significant historical values and cultural resources associated with Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie.
Boundary.-- (1) In general.--The boundary of the Park shall be comprised of the land, water, and submerged land depicted on the map.
Availability of map.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
Acquisitions.-- (1) Land.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary may acquire any land or interest in land (including improvements) located within the boundaries of the Park by-- (i) donation; (ii) purchase with appropriated or donated funds; (iii) exchange; or (iv) transfer from another Federal agency.
Limitation.--Any land or interest in land (including improvements) located within the boundaries of the Park that is owned by the State (including political subdivisions of the State) shall be acquired by donation only.
Personal property.--The Secretary may acquire by donation, purchase with appropriated or donated funds, exchange, or transfer from another Federal agency, personal property associated with, and appropriate for, interpretation of the Park.
Administration.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall administer the Park in accordance with this Act and the laws generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including-- (A) the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et seq.
); and (B) the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et seq.).
Interpretation of historical events.--The Secretary shall provide for the interpretation of historical events and activities that occurred in the vicinity of Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie, including-- (A) the Battle of Sullivan's Island on June 28, 1776; (B)(i) the bombardment of Fort Sumter by Confederate forces on April 12, 1861; and (ii) any other events of the Civil War that are associated with Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie; (C) the development of the coastal defense system of the United States during the period from the Revolutionary War to World War II; and (D) the lives of-- (i) the free and enslaved workers who built and maintained Fort Sumter and Fort Moultrie; (ii) the soldiers who defended the forts; (iii) the prisoners held at the forts; and (iv) captive Africans bound for slavery who, after first landing in the United States, were brought to quarantine houses in the vicinity of Fort Moultrie in the 18th Century, if the Secretary determines that the quarantine houses and associated historical values are nationally significant.
Cooperative Agreements.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements with public and private entities and individuals to carry out this Act.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the Secretary of Transportation shall transfer to the Secretary, for no consideration, administrative jurisdiction over, and management of the Charleston Light for inclusion in the Park.
Condition.--Before transferring the Charleston Light under subsection (a) the Secretary of Transportation shall repair, paint, remove hazardous substances from, and improve the condition of the Charleston Light in any other manner that the Secretary may require.
Improvements.--The Secretary shall make improvements to the Charleston Light only to the extent necessary to-- (1) provide utility service; and (2) maintain the existing structures and historic landscape.
REPEAL OF EXISTING LAW.
Section 2 of the Joint Resolution entitled ``Joint Resolution to establish the Fort Sumter National Monument in the State of South Carolina'', approved April 28, 1948 (62 United States Statutes at Large 204, chapter 239; 16 United States Code 450ee-1), is repealed.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.