Congress finds the following: (1) Methyl bromide is a broad spectrum pesticide which protects plants and agricultural products from a wide range of insects, rodents, viruses, fungi, weeds, and nematodes.
American farmers depend on methyl bromide to grow, store, ship, process, and trade over 100 different crops.
The agricultural community has no safe, effective, commercially available alternatives to methyl bromide.
Some nonchemical pest control alternatives have proven effective in small scale tests but are largely untested, much less proven, for commercial food production purposes.
The Environmental Protection Agency's Office of Prevention, Pesticides, and Toxic Substances reports that few substitutes exist, all of which pose potential human health and environmental risks.
In 1992, the Montreal Protocol on Substances Depleting the Ozone Layer was amended to include methyl bromide.
Subsequent peer-reviewed research indicates that most methyl bromide is naturally occurring, that a significant percentage never reaches the ozone layer, and that methyl bromide clearly does not pose the threat initially believed.
Scientists agree that much is yet to be learned about methyl bromide's effect on stratospheric ozone.
According to the 1992 Science Assessment Report to the Montreal Protocol, agricultural use of methyl bromide accounts for less than 3 percent of the threat to the ozone layer, and a similar report issued in 1994 notes that the Earth's ozone layer will return to normal by the middle of the next century even if methyl bromide remains available to farmers.
In 1993, despite the importance of methyl bromide, the lack of alternatives, and many scientific uncertainties, the Environmental Protection Agency, citing the Montreal Protocol, listed methyl bromide as an ozone depleting chemical under the provisions of the Clean Air Act and ordered United States production frozen at 1991 levels and an end to production by January 1, 2001.
Given current alternatives, analysis at the University of Florida predicts a 43 percent decline in affected vegetable acreage in Florida.
A 1993 United States Department of Agriculture study finds that the ban will cost as much as $1,500,000,000 in Florida, Georgia, California, North Carolina, and South Carolina, the 5 States where methyl bromide is most utilized.
CONTROL OF METHYL BROMIDE.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``use as a pesticide'' includes farming and post-harvest uses.
The term ``pesticide'' has the same meaning as when used in the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
The term ``control'' means, with respect to any substance, any ban, phase-out, or other restriction on the production, importation, export, consumption, or use of the substance.
The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Restrictions on EPA Authority.--Except as provided in subsection (c) or (d), the Administrator may not-- (1) control the production, importation, or export of the substance methyl bromide pursuant to title VI of the Clean Air Act (42 United States Code section 7671-7671q) for consumption or use as a pesticide; (2) control the consumption or use of methyl bromide as a pesticide; or (3) require the labelling of any agricultural product treated with methyl bromide.
Existence of Substitutes or Alternatives.--The Administrator may take any action described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (b), or any combination of such actions, if the Secretary of Agriculture has certified by rule that there exist viable, cost- effective substitutes or other alternatives to the consumption or use of methyl bromide as a pesticide for specified agricultural commodities and products.
If the Secretary has made a certification under this paragraph, a control permitted pursuant to such certification shall apply only with respect to those specified applications and to those specified commodities and products for which the certification is made.
Montreal Protocol.--The Administrator may take any action described in paragraph (1), (2), or (3) of subsection (b), or any combination of such actions, if the United States is required by the Montreal Protocol to implement a control on the production, importation, or export of methyl bromide for consumption or use as a pesticide or a control on the consumption or use of methyl bromide as a pesticide.
The applicability, contents and timing of any such control-- (1) shall be no more stringent or restrictive than specifically required by the Montreal Protocol, (2) shall be equally required of all parties to the Montreal Protocol; and (3) shall include all exemptions, exceptions, and other flexibility (including exemptions for production, importation, export, and consumption, for both preshipment and quarantine uses) allowed by the Montreal Protocol.
Inconsistent EPA Actions.--All rules, standards and other regulatory actions promulgated, published, or otherwise issued by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency before the date of enactment of this Act are repealed to the extent they impose a control which is not specifically required by the Montreal Protocol.
Savings Clause.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to affect the provisions of 40 Code of Federal Regulations Sec.
82.9, 82.10, 82.11, and 82.12 (relating to Article 5 parties and transfers), or any other regulatory provisions granting exemptions, exceptions, or other flexibility not prohibited by the Montreal Protocol.