This Act may be cited as the ``Maximum Economic Growth for America Through Innovative Finance Act or MEGA Innovate''.
CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF QUALIFIED HIGHWAY BONDS.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to credits against tax) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart H--Nonrefundable Credit for Holders of Qualified Highway Bonds ``Sec.
54. Credit to holders of qualified highway bonds.
54. CREDIT TO HOLDERS OF QUALIFIED HIGHWAY BONDS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of a taxpayer who holds a qualified highway bond on a credit allowance date of such bond which occurs during the taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for such taxable year an amount equal to the sum of the credits determined under subsection (b) with respect to credit allowance dates during such year on which the taxpayer holds such bond.
Amount of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount of the credit determined under this subsection with respect to any credit allowance date for a qualified highway bond is 25 percent of the annual credit determined with respect to such bond.
Annual credit.--The annual credit determined with respect to any qualified highway bond is the product of-- ``(A) the applicable credit rate, multiplied by ``(B) the outstanding face amount of the bond.
Applicable credit rate.--For purposes of paragraph (2), the applicable credit rate with respect to an issue is the rate equal to an average market yield (as of the day before the date of sale of the issue) on outstanding long-term corporate debt obligations (determined in such manner as the Secretary prescribes).
Credit allowance date.--For purposes of this section, the term `credit allowance date' means-- ``(A) March 15, ``(B) June 15, ``(C) September 15, and ``(D) December 15.
Such term includes the last day on which the bond is outstanding.
Special rule for issuance and redemption.--In the case of a bond which is issued during the 3-month period ending on a credit allowance date, the amount of the credit determined under this subsection with respect to such credit allowance date shall be a ratable portion of the credit otherwise determined based on the portion of the 3-month period during which the bond is outstanding.
A similar rule shall apply when the bond is redeemed.
Limitation Based on Amount of Tax.-- ``(1) In general.--The credit allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the excess of-- ``(A) the sum of the regular tax liability (as defined in section 26(b)) plus the tax imposed by section 55, over ``(B) the sum of the credits allowable under this part (other than this subpart and subpart C).
Carryover of unused credit.--If the credit allowable under subsection (a) exceeds the limitation imposed by paragraph (1) for such taxable year, such excess shall be carried to the succeeding taxable year and added to the credit allowable under subsection (a) for such taxable year.
Credit Included in Gross Income.--Gross income includes the amount of the credit allowed to the taxpayer under this section (determined without regard to subsection (c)) and the amount so included shall be treated as interest income.
Qualified Highway Bond.--For purposes of this part, the term `qualified highway bond' means any bond issued as part of an issue if-- ``(1) 95 percent or more of the proceeds from the sale of such issue are transferred to the Highway Trust Fund for expenditure under the requirements of such Trust Fund, ``(2) the bond is issued by the Secretary, is in registered form, and meets the bond limitation requirements under subsection (f), ``(3) the issuer designates such bond for purposes of this section, ``(4) the term of each bond which is part of such issue does not exceed 20 years, and ``(5) the payment of principal with respect to such bond is the obligation of the United States Government.
Limitation on Amount of Bonds Designated.--The Secretary shall issue qualified highway bonds equal to the qualified highway bond limitation for each calendar year.
Such limitation is $3,000,000,000 for 2004, 2005, 2006, 2007, and 2008, and $1,000,000,000 for 2009.
Other Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Bond.--The term `bond' includes any obligation.
Partnership; s corporation; and other pass-thru entities.--In the case of a partnership, trust, S corporation, or other pass-thru entity, rules similar to the rules of section 41(g) shall apply with respect to the credit allowable under subsection (a).
Bonds held by regulated investment companies.--If any qualified highway bond is held by a regulated investment company, the credit determined under subsection (a) shall be allowed to shareholders of such company under procedures prescribed by the Secretary.''.
Amendments to Other Code Sections.-- (1) Reporting.--Subsection (d) of section 6049 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to returns regarding payments of interest) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Reporting of credit on qualified highway bonds.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `interest' includes amounts includible in gross income under section 54(d) and such amounts shall be treated as paid on the credit allowance date (as defined in section 54(b)(4)).
Reporting to corporations, etc.--Except as otherwise provided in regulations, in the case of any interest described in subparagraph (A), subsection (b)(4) shall be applied without regard to subparagraphs (A), (H), (I), (J), (K), and (L)(i) of such subsection.
Regulatory authority.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as are necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this paragraph, including regulations which require more frequent or more detailed reporting.''.
Treatment for estimated tax purposes.-- (A) Individual.--Section 6654 of such Code (relating to failure by individual to pay estimated income tax) is amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) the following new subsection: ``(m) Special Rule for Holders of Qualified Highway Bonds.--For purposes of this section, the credit allowed by section 54 to a taxpayer by reason of holding a qualified highway bond on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.''.
Corporate.--Section 6655 of such Code (relating to failure by corporation to pay estimated income tax) is amended by adding at the end of subsection (g) the following new paragraph: ``(5) Special rule for holders of qualified highway bonds.--For purposes of this section, the credit allowed by section 54 to a taxpayer by reason of holding a qualified highway bond on a credit allowance date shall be treated as if it were a payment of estimated tax made by the taxpayer on such date.''.
Transfer of bond proceeds to highway trust fund.-- (A) In general.--Section 9503(b) of such Code (relating to transfer to Highway Trust Fund of amounts equivalent to certain taxes) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Qualified highway bond proceeds.--There are hereby appropriated to the Highway Trust Fund amounts equivalent to the proceeds from the issuance of qualified highway bonds under section 54.
Such proceeds shall, for all purposes, be treated as taxes received in the Treasury.''.
Conforming amendment.--The heading for subsection (b) of section 9503 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``(b) Transfers to Highway Trust Fund.--''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of subparts for part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Subpart H. Nonrefundable Credit for Holders of Qualified Highway Bonds.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to obligations issued after December 31, 2003.