This Act may be cited as the ``Anti-Pyramid Promotional Scheme Act of 2002''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Pyramid promotional schemes, chain letters, and related schemes are enterprises-- (A) that finance returns to participants through sums taken from newly attracted participants; (B) in which new participants are promised large returns for their investments; and (C) involve fraud and deceptive sales tactics, and lead to the victimization of unwitting individuals of limited means.
Pyramid promotional schemes, chain letters, and related schemes constitute a threat in interstate commerce and to the financial well-being of the citizens of the United States.
The advent of the global Internet makes pyramid promotional schemes international threats.
In this Act: (1) Compensation.--The term ``compensation''-- (A) subject to subparagraph (B), means a payment of any money, thing of value, or financial benefit conferred in return for inducing another person to become a participant in a pyramid promotional scheme; and (B) does not include payments that are based on sales of goods or services by a person to others, including anyone who is purchasing the goods or services for actual use or consumption.
Consideration.--The term ``consideration''-- (A) subject to subparagraph (B), means the payment of cash or the purchase of goods, services, or intangible property; and (B) does not include-- (i) the purchase of goods or services furnished at cost to be used in making sales and not for resale; or (ii) time and effort spent in pursuit of sales or recruiting activities.
Participant.--The term ``participant'' means a person who gives consideration for the opportunity to receive compensation in return for inducing others to join a pyramid promotional scheme.
Person.--The term ``person'' means an individual, a corporation, a partnership, or any association or unincorporated organization.
Promote.--The term ``promote'' means to contrive, prepare, establish, plan, operate, advertise, or to otherwise induce or attempt to induce another person to be a participant in a pyramid promotional scheme.
Pyramid promotional scheme.--The term ``pyramid promotional scheme''-- (A) means any plan or operation by which a participant gives consideration for the opportunity to receive compensation that is derived primarily from the introduction of other persons into the plan or operation rather than from the sale and consumption of goods, services, or intangible property by a participant or other persons introduced into the plan or operation; and (B) includes such a plan or operation under which-- (i) the number of persons who may participate is limited either expressly or by the application of conditions affecting the eligibility of a person to receive compensation under the plan or operation; or (ii) a participant, on giving any consideration, obtains any goods, services, or intangible property in addition to the right to receive compensation.
RULES TO PROHIBIT OPERATING PYRAMID PROMOTIONAL SCHEME.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Federal Trade Commission shall promulgate a rule under section 18(a) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)) providing that it shall be an unfair or deceptive act or practice under section 5 of such Act (15 United States Code 45) for any person, by the use of any means or instrumentality of transportation or communication in interstate or foreign commerce, to promote, offer, sell, or attempt to sell a participation or the right to participate in a pyramid promotional scheme.
Actions Under State Law.--Nothing in this Act or the Federal Trade Commission Act prohibits an authorized State official from proceeding in State court on the basis of an alleged violation of any civil or criminal statute of such State.
Actions Under Federal Law.--The attorney general of any State or territory of the United States may, upon finding any person is engaged or is about to engage in any act or practice that constitutes a pyramid promotional scheme in violation of the rule promulgated under section 4, bring an action in the appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin such act or practice and to obtain other appropriate relief on behalf of residents of such State.
Such court may grant a temporary restraining order, or a preliminary or permanent injunction.