This Act may be cited as the ``Steel Industry National Historic Park Act of 2000''.
TITLE I--STEEL INDUSTRY NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK SEC.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) certain sites and structures in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania symbolize in physical form the heritage of the steel industry of the United States; (2) a very large proportion of the buildings and other structures in the Commonwealth are nationally significant historical resources, including the United States Steel Homestead Works, the Carrie Furnace complex, and the Hot Metal Bridge; (3) despite substantial efforts for cultural preservation and historical interpretation by the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and by individuals and public and private entities in the region, these buildings and other structures may be lost without the assistance of the Federal Government.
Purposes.--The purposes of this title are to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the nationally significant historical and cultural sites and structures as described in subsection (a) for the benefit and inspiration of present and future generations.
STEEL INDUSTRY NATIONAL HISTORIC PARK.
Establishment.--There is established in the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania the Steel Industry National Historic Park as a unit of the National Park System.
Description.--The historic park shall be comprised of the following properties, each of which relate to the former United States Steel Homestead Works: (1) The historic location of the Battle of Homestead site in the borough of Munhall, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 3 acres of land, including the pumphouse and water tower and related structures, within the property bounded by the Monongahela River, the CSX railroad, Waterfront Drive, and the Damascus-Marcegaglia Steel Mill.
The historic location of the Carrie Furnace complex in the boroughs of Swissvale and Rankin, Pennsylvania, consisting of approximately 35 acres of land, including blast furnaces 6 and 7, the ore yard, the cast house, the blowing engine house, the AC power house, and related structures, within the property bounded by the CSX railroad, the Monongahela River, and a property line drawn northeast to southwest approximately 100 yards east of the AC power house.
The historic location of the Hot Metal Bridge, consisting of the Union railroad bridge and its approaches, spanning the Monongahela River and connecting the mill sites in the boroughs of Rankin and Munhall, Pennsylvania.
All other property included in the historic park by Federal law or acquired by the Secretary for inclusion in the historic park pursuant to section 103 or other Federal law.
To further the purposes of this title, the Secretary may acquire, by donation, property for inclusion in the historic park as follows: (1) Any land or interest in land with respect to the property identified in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 102(b).
Up to 10 acres of land adjacent to or in the general proximity of the property identified in paragraphs (1), (2), or (3) of section 102(b), for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities.
Personal property associated with, and appropriate for, the interpretation of the historic park.
In General.--The Secretary shall administer the historic park in accordance with this title and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) In general.--To further the purposes of this title, the Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with any interested individual, public or private agency, organization, or institution.
Contrary purposes.--Any payment made by the Secretary pursuant to a cooperative agreement under this subsection shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purpose of this title, as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States to reimbursement of all funds made available to such a project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such funds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
Technical and Preservation Assistance.--The Secretary may provide to any person technical assistance for the preservation of historic structures of, the maintenance of the cultural landscape of, and local preservation planning for, the historic park.
In General.--Not later than the last day of the third fiscal year beginning after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, in consultation with the officials described in subsection (b), prepare a general management plan for the historic park.
Officials Consulted.--The officials described in this subsection are-- (1) an appropriate official of each appropriate political subdivision of the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania that has jurisdiction over all or a portion of the historic park; and (2) an appropriate official of the Steel Industry Heritage Corporation.
Submission of Plan to Congress.--Upon the completion of the general management plan, the Secretary shall submit a copy of the plan to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
For purposes of this title, the following definitions shall apply: (1) Historic park.--The term ``historic park'' means the Steel Industry National Historic Park established by section 102.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this title.
TITLE II--EXTENSION OF POTOMAC HERITAGE NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL SEC.
DESIGNATION OF ALLEGHENY TRAIL ALLIANCE TRAILS AS COMPONENTS OF POTOMAC HERITAGE NATIONAL SCENIC TRAIL.
Section 5(a)(11) of the National Trails System Act (16 United States Code 1244(a)(11)) is amended by inserting before the last sentence the following: ``Consistent with the preceding sentence, the Secretary of the Interior shall designate the approximately 214-mile system of trails between Cumberland, Maryland, and Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, known as the Allegheny Trail Alliance Trails, as depicted on the map entitled `Cumberland and Pittsburgh Trail' and dated July 24, 2000, as official components of the Potomac Heritage National Scenic Trail.