This Act may be cited as the ``Geothermal Energy Control Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that the exploration for and the commercial development of geothermal energy in the United States, and the marketing of any energy developed from such geothermal energy, is a part of the interstate commerce of the United States.
The Congress further finds that geothermal energy is a national resource of the United States and that it is in the national interest for the Congress to control and conserve the development of this national resource.
NATIONAL GEOTHERMAL ENERGY COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the National Geothermal Energy Commission (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'') which shall be composed of 9 Commissioners who shall be appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate, one of whom shall be designated by the President as Chairman and shall be the principal executive officer of the Commission.
Each Chairman, when so designated, shall act as such until the expiration of his term of office.
Terms.--The Commissioners first appointed under this section shall continue in office for terms of 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5 years, respectively, from the date of their appointment by the President.
The term of each such Commissioner first appointed shall be designated by the President at the time of his appointment.
The successor of each such Commissioner first appointed and of each such Commissioner appointed thereafter shall be appointed for a term of 5 years from the date of the expiration of the term for which his predecessor was appointed, except that any person appointed to fill a vacancy occurring prior to the expiration of the term for which his predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the expiration of such term.
Not more than 5 of the Commissioners serving at any one time shall have been appointed from the same political party.
No individual in the employ of or holding any official relation to any person licensed under this Act, or owning stocks or bonds of such person, or in any manner pecuniarily interested in such persons, shall hold the office of Commissioner.
No Commissioner shall engage in any other business, vocation, or employment, except for his duties under this Act.
No vacancy in the Commission shall impair the right of the remaining Commissioners to exercise all the powers of the Commission.
Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business, and the Commission shall have an official seal of which judicial notice shall be taken.
The Commission shall annually elect a Vice Chairman to act in case of the absence or disability of the Chairman or in case of a vacancy in the office of Chairman.
Expenses.--Each Commissioner shall receive necessary traveling and subsistence expenses, or per diem allowance in lieu thereof, within the limitation prescribed by law, while away from the principal office of the Commission upon official business.
Meetings.--The principal office of the Commission shall be in the District of Columbia, where its general sessions shall be held; but whenever the convenience of the public or of the parties may be promoted or delay or expense prevented thereby, the Commission may hold special session in any part of the United States.
Director.--The Commission shall have a Director who shall be appointed by the Chairman of the Commission, and who shall be paid at the rate of basic pay in effect for grade GS-18 of the General Schedule.
Personnel.--Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the Director may appoint and fix the pay of such personnel as he deems desirable.
Pay.--The Director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5 of the United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and such staff may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51, subchapter III of chapter 53 and chapter 54 of such title relating to classification and pay rates.
Consultants.--Subject to such rules as may be adopted by the Commission, the Director may procure temporary and intermittent services to the same extent as is authorized by section 3109(b) of title 5 of the United States Code.
Detail of Personnel.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal agency is authorized to detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of such agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearing and Testimony.--The Commission may for the purpose of carrying out this Act hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission may deem advisable.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Agents.--When so authorized by the Commission, any member or agent of the Commission may take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Information.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
Mail.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and upon the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
PROSPECTS FOR GEOTHERMAL STEAM.
Determination.--Within a year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Commission shall determine (for all lands in the United States which are not included in the geothermal leasing authority of section 3 of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1002) or any geothermal development program conducted under any authority granted to any Secretary of a military department) all areas in which the geology, nearby discoveries, competitive interests, or other indicia would, in the opinion of the Commission, engender a belief in people who are experienced in the subject matter that the prospects for the extraction of geothermal steam and associated geothermal resources are good enough to warrant expenditures of money for that purpose.
The Commission shall divide all such areas into parcels of satisfactory size for the purposes of licensing for exploration and development under subsection (b).
List of Parcels.--Immediately after the Commission divides areas into parcels under subsection (a), it shall publish the list of such parcels in the Federal Register.
At any time after such publication, any person who wants to explore for geothermal steam and associated geothermal resources in any such parcel shall apply to the Commission for a license for such exploration.
The Commission shall grant a license for any such parcel to the first person who applies for a license for such parcel who the Commission determines is capable of carrying out a complete exploration in such parcel for geothermal steam and associated geothermal resources.
The Commission may refuse to grant a license to such person if-- (1) such person has already been granted what the Commission determines to be an excessive number of licenses under this subsection in the same State as his present license application, and (2) there is another eligible applicant for such license who has not been granted such an excessive number of licenses in such State.
A person may only commercially develop geothermal steam and associated geothermal resources on any such parcel if he has been granted a license for such parcel under this subsection, and then only during the period of the license's validity as determined under subsection (c).
Term of License.--Any license granted under subsection (b) shall be valid for a period of 99 years.
If geothermal steam and associated geothermal resources are found on the parcel for which such license is granted, and if such steam and resources are developed in commercial quantities within such 99-year period, such license may be extended at the option of the licensee for as long as such steam and resources are so developed.
However, all extensions under the preceding sentence shall not exceed ninety-nine years.
If such steam and resources are being commercially developed at the end of such ninety- nine-year extension, the licensee shall have a preferential right to renew the lease for another ninety-nine-year period under such terms and conditions as the Commission may prescribe.
Exclusive Rights.--Any license granted for a parcel under subsection (b) or extended or renewed under subsection (c) shall be the exclusive license for such parcel as long as such license is valid.
Termination.--Any license granted under subsection (b), extended or renewed under subsection (c), or transferred under section 8 may, after a hearing on the record, be terminated by the Commission for a violation of the terms of the license which the Commission may prescribe.
However, such terms may not be inconsistent with any of the provisions of this Act.
Before the termination of a license under this subsection, the Commission shall give the licensee an opportunity to correct such violation within a reasonable period of time.
The Commission shall establish regulations for regranting licenses terminated under this subsection.
In General.--Any person who holds a license granted under section 6(b) for a parcel may apply to the Commission for a license to market the geothermal steam and associated geothermal resource found in such parcel, but such steam and resource must be marketed in the same energy form as such steam and resource was extracted from such parcel, or be marketed as water.
The Commission shall grant such a license for marketing for a geographic area which the Commission determines is the most reasonable area to market successfully such steam and resource.
There shall only be one license for marketing granted under this section for any geographic area.
Validity.--Any license for marketing granted under subsection (a) shall be valid for as long as the person holding such license also holds his license for the same parcel granted under section 6(b).
Any person granted a license under section 6 may transfer such license to another person for the commercial development of the geothermal steam and associated geothermal resource which the person granted such license discovered under such license.
Any person granted a license for the marketing of such steam and resource may transfer such license to another person for such marketing.
However, the person proposing a transfer of a license under this section shall inform the Commission concerning the transfer within seven working days before the transfer.
The Commission shall approve the transfer if the transferee is eligible under section 9(a).
CITIZENSHIP; SALE OF ENERGY.
Citizenship.--Any person granted a license by the Commission under section 6, and any other person to whom such a license is transferred under section 8, shall be a United States citizen or shall be a person owned or controlled by a United States citizen.
Sale of Energy.--If any holder of a license under this Act converts any geothermal steam and associated geothermal resource covered by such license to electrical or any other form of energy, he may only sell such electrical or other form of energy (for transmission to consumers) to an existing utility company or other person which is licensed, or in any other way has the authority, to transmit the electricity or any other form of energy.
Also, such licenseholder may sell such steam and resource to such an existing utility company or other person for conversion into electricity or any other form of energy.
OTHER PROVISIONS OF LAW.
Nothing contained in this Act shall relieve any person from the operation of sections 1 to 13, 14 to 19, 20, 21, 22 to 27, 41 to 46, and 47 to 58 of title 15 of the United States Code and sections 52 and 53 of title 29.
In the event a licensee is found by a court of competent jurisdiction, either in an original action in that court or in a proceeding to enforce or review the findings or orders of any Government agency having jurisdiction under the sections cited above, to have violated any of the provisions of such sections in the conduct of the licensed activity, the Commission may suspend, revoke, or take such other action as it may deem necessary with respect to any license issued by the Commission under the provisions of this Act.
For the purposes of this Act, the term ``geothermal steam and associated geothermal resources'' shall have the same meaning as such term has in section 2(c) of the Geothermal Steam Act of 1970 (30 United States Code 1001(c)).