This Act may be cited as the ``Terrorist Notification Act of 2010''.
PROVISION OF CERTAIN INTELLIGENCE RELATED TO MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES AND CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES AND CONTRACTORS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE TO THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE.
In General.--Title I of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 402 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``provision of certain intelligence related to members of the armed forces and civilian employees and contractors of the department of defense to the department of defense ``Sec.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the head of an element of the intelligence community shall provide to the Secretary of Defense any intelligence information obtained by such element that indicates that a member of the Armed Forces, a civilian employee of the Department of Defense, or a Department of Defense contractor employee has communicated with a person that seeks to harm the United States or United States interests.
Exception.--The head of an element of the intelligence community may withhold information required to be provided under subsection (a) if such head determines that providing such information in accordance with such subsection would negatively affect an ongoing investigation.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of contents in the first section of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 119 the following new item: ``Sec.
Provision of certain intelligence related to members of the Armed Forces and civilian employees and contractors of the Department of Defense to the Department of Defense.''.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE RESPONSE TO INTELLIGENCE INQUIRIES REGARDING MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES, CIVILIAN EMPLOYEES, AND CONTRACTOR PERSONNEL.
Prompt Response to Inquiries.--Chapter 80 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1564a the following new section: ``Sec.
Response to intelligence inquiries regarding members, civilian employees, and contractor personnel ``(a) Prompt Response Required.--The Secretary of Defense shall prescribe a process for expediting an official response to any information submitted by an element of the intelligence community indicating that a member of the armed forces, a civilian employee of the Department of Defense, or a Department of Defense contractor employee has communicated with a person that seeks to harm the United States or United States interests.
Response Goal.--To the maximum extent practicable, the process prescribed under subsection (a) shall seek to achieve a response time of not more than 24 hours after receiving information from an element of the intelligence community described in such subsection.
At a minimum, the Secretary of Defense shall notify the element of the intelligence community whether the contact of the member of the armed forces, civilian employee of the Department of Defense, or Department of Defense contractor employee with a person that seeks to harm the United States or United States interests is directly related to the duties and assignments of the member or employee within the Department of Defense.
Annual Review.--The Secretary of Defense shall conduct an annual review of the process prescribed under subsection (a) and shall revise that process as determined necessary in relation to ongoing Department of Defense missions.
Consultation Requirement.--The Secretary of Defense shall consult with the Secretaries of the military departments and the heads of Defense Agencies in carrying out this section.
Report.--The Secretary of Defense shall annually submit to Congress a report containing-- ``(1) the number of instances in which an element of the intelligence community has provided information to the Secretary of Defense indicating that a member of the armed forces, a civilian employee of the Department of Defense, or a Department of Defense contractor employee has communicated with a person that seeks to harm the United States or United States interests during the preceding year; and ``(2) the results of each investigation conducted by the Secretary with respect to the instances referred to in paragraph (1).
Intelligence Community Defined.--In this section, the term `intelligence community' has the meaning given such term in section 3(4) of the National Security Act of 1947 (50 United States Code 401a(4)).''.
Initial Report.--The first report required under section 1564b(e) of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a) of this section, shall be submitted not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1564a the following new item: ``1564b.
Response to intelligence inquiries regarding members, civilian employees, and contractor personnel.