This Act may be cited as the ``Illegal Worker Prevention Act.''
DEBARMENT OF FEDERAL CONTRACTORS NOT IN COMPLIANCE WITH IMMIGRATION AND NATIONALITY ACT EMPLOYMENT PROVISIONS.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States that-- (1) the heads of executive agencies in procuring goods and services should not contract with an employer that has not complied with paragraphs (1)(A) and (2) of section 274A(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(a)) (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``INA employment provisions''), which prohibit unlawful employment of aliens; and (2) the Attorney General should fully and aggressively enforce the antidiscrimination provisions of the Immigration and Nationality Act.
Enforcement.-- (1) Authority.-- (A) In general.-- Using the procedures established pursuant to section 274A(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(e)), the Attorney General may conduct such investigations as are necessary to determine whether a contractor or an organizational unit of a contractor is not complying with the INA employment provisions.
Complaints and hearings.--The Attorney General-- (i) shall receive and may investigate any complaint by an employee of any such entity that alleges noncompliance by such entity with the INA employment provisions; and (ii) in conducting the investigation, shall hold such hearings as are necessary to determine whether that entity is not in compliance with the INA employment provisions.
Actions on determinations of noncompliance.-- (A) Attorney general.--Whenever the Attorney General determines that a contractor or an organizational unit of a contractor is not in compliance with the INA employment provisions, the Attorney General shall transmit that determination to the head of each executive agency that contracts with the contractor and the heads of other executive agencies that the Attorney General determines it appropriate to notify.
Head of contracting agency.--Upon receipt of the determination, the head of a contracting executive agency shall consider the contractor or an organizational unit of the contractor for debarment, and shall take such other action as may be appropriate, in accordance with applicable procedures and standards set forth in the Federal Acquisition Regulation.
Nonreviewability of determination.--The Attorney General's determination is not reviewable in debarment proceedings.
Debarment.-- (1) Authority.--The head of an executive agency may debar a contractor or an organizational unit of a contractor on the basis of a determination of the Attorney General that it is not in compliance with the INA employment provisions.
Scope.--The scope of the debarment generally should be limited to those organizational units of a contractor that the Attorney General determines are not in compliance with the INA employment provisions.
Period.--The period of a debarment under this subsection shall be one year, except that the head of the executive agency may extend the debarment for additional periods of one year each if, using the procedures established pursuant to section 274A(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324a(e)), the Attorney General determines that the organizational unit of the contractor concerned continues not to comply with the INA employment provisions.
Listing.--The Administrator of General Services shall list each debarred contractor and each debarred organizational unit of a contractor on the List of Parties Excluded from Federal Procurement and Nonprocurement Programs that is maintained by the Administrator.
No debarred contractor and no debarred organizational unit of a contractor shall be eligible to participate in any procurement, nor in any nonprocurement activities, of the Federal Government.
Regulations and Orders.-- (1) Attorney general.-- (A) Authority.--The Attorney General may prescribe such regulations and issue such orders as the Attorney General considers necessary to carry out the responsibilities of the Attorney General under this section.
Consultation.--In proposing regulations or orders that affect the executive agencies, the Attorney General shall consult with the Secretary of Defense, the Secretary of Labor, the Administrator of General Services, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Administrator for Federal Procurement Policy, and the heads of any other executive agencies that the Attorney General considers appropriate.
Federal acquisition regulation.--The Federal Acquisition Regulatory Council shall amend the Federal Acquisition Regulation to the extent necessary to provide for implementation of the debarment responsibility and other related responsibilities assigned to heads of executive agencies under this section.
Interagency Cooperation.--The head of each executive agency shall cooperate with, and provide such information and assistance to, the Attorney General as is necessary for the Attorney General to perform the duties of the Attorney General under this section.
Delegation.--The Attorney General, the Secretary of Defense, the Administrator of General Services, the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, and the head of any other executive agency may delegate the performance of any of the functions or duties of that official under this section to any officer or employee of the executive agency under the jurisdiction of that official.
Implementation Not To Burden Procurement Process Excessively.-- This section shall be implemented in a manner that least burdens the procurement process of the Federal Government.
Construction.-- (1) Antidiscrimination.--Nothing in this section relieves employers of the obligation to avoid unfair immigration-related employment practices as required by-- (A) the antidiscrimination provisions of section 274B of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1324b), including the provisions of subsection (a)(6) of that section concerning the treatment of certain documentary practices as unfair immigration-related employment practices; and (B) all other antidiscrimination requirements of applicable law.
Contract terms.--This section neither authorizes nor requires any additional certification provision, clause, or requirement to be included in any contract or contract solicitation.
No new rights and benefits.--This section may not be construed to create any right or benefit, substantive or procedural, enforceable at law by a party against the United States, including any department or agency, officer, or employee of the United States.
Judicial review.--This section does not preclude judicial review of a final agency decision in accordance with chapter 7 of title 5, United States Code.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Executive agency.--The term ``executive agency'' has the meaning given that term in section 4 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 403).
Contractor.--The term ``contractor'' means any individual or other legal entity that-- (A) directly or indirectly (through an affiliate or otherwise), submits offers for or is awarded, or reasonably may be expected to submit offers for or be awarded, a Federal Government contract, including a contract for carriage under Federal Government or commercial bills of lading, or a subcontract under a Federal Government contract; or (B) conducts business, or reasonably may be expected to conduct business, with the Federal Government as an agent or representative of another contractor.