This Act may be cited as the ``Fairness in IRS Debt Payment Act of 1999''.
INTEREST ON TAX PORTION OF UNDERPAYMENT TO BE COMPOUNDED ANNUALLY.
In General.--Section 6622 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to interest compounded daily) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Interest on Tax Portion of Underpayment To Be Compounded Annually.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of interest or other amount referred to in subsection (a) which is required to be paid by the taxpayer, such interest and such amount shall be compounded annually.
The preceding sentence shall only apply to the extent that the amount on which such interest and amount are imposed is tax.
Interest and penalties not treated as tax.-- Notwithstanding sections 6601(e) and 6665, interest and additions to the tax, additional amounts, and penalties provided by chapter 68 shall not be treated as tax for purposes of paragraph (1).
Allocation of payments.--For purposes of paragraph (1), payments on any underpayment shall be allocated first to amounts which are not treated as tax under paragraph (2) and then to amounts of tax.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to interest for periods after December 31, 1999.
ALLOCATION OF PAYMENTS TO UNDERPAYMENTS.
In General.--Chapter 77 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ALLOCATION OF PAYMENTS TO UNDERPAYMENTS.
``In the case of a taxpayer having underpayments for more than 1 taxable period, payments by the taxpayer against those underpayments shall be allocated by the Secretary of the Treasury equally among such underpayments or in such other manner as may be directed by the taxpayer.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for chapter 77 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Allocation of payments to underpayments.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to payments made after December 31, 1999.
PROHIBITION ON MODIFICATION OF INSTALLMENT AGREEMENTS.
In General.--Section 6159 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to agreements for payment of tax liability in installments) is amended by redesignating subsections (d) and (e) as subsection (e) and (f), respectively, and by inserting after subsection (c) the following new subsection: ``(d) Prohibition of Certain Modifications of Installment Agreements.--If the Secretary enters into an installment agreement with a taxpayer under this section (other than under subsection (c))-- ``(1) such agreement shall serve as a closing agreement with respect to the amount of the liability specified in the installment agreement for the periods to which such liability relates, and ``(2) except as provided in subsection (b)(2), such installment agreement may not be altered, modified, or terminated other than by reason of a failure to make a timely payment of any installment under such agreement.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Subsection (b) of section 6159 of such Code is amended by striking paragraphs (3) and (4) and by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (3).
Paragraph (3) of section 6159(b) of such Code (as redesignating by paragraph (1)) is amended by striking ``, (3), or (4)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to agreements entered into after December 31, 1999.
LIMITATION ON AGGREGATE INTEREST AND PENALTIES.
In General.--Section 6404 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to abatements) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(j) Abatement of Excessive Interest and Penalties.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall abate the excessive portion of interest and penalties.
Excessive portion.--The excessive portion of interest and penalties is the amount by which the aggregate interest, penalties, and additions to the tax with respect to any tax exceeds the amount of such tax.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.
GUIDELINES AND CRITERIA FOR PENALTY ABATEMENT; REQUIRED EXPLANATION OF REFUSAL TO ABATE PENALTIES.
In General.--Section 6404 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to abatements) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Guidelines and Criteria for Penalty Abatement; Required Explanation of Refusal To Abate Penalties.-- ``(1) Guidelines and criteria.--The Secretary shall prescribe guidelines and criteria which will be used by the Secretary in determining whether to abate any penalty or addition to the tax.
Explanations.--If-- ``(A) a taxpayer requests (in such form and manner as the Secretary prescribes) that the Secretary abate any portion of a penalty or an addition to the tax, and ``(B) the Secretary does not grant such request in full, the Secretary shall provide a written explanation to the taxpayer of the reason for not granting such request.''
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.