This Act may be cited as the ``Ecosystem Management Act of 1994''.
Definitions.--Section 103 of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(q) The term `Indian tribe' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community (including any Alaska Native village or Regional Corporation established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes)) that is recognized as eligible for the special services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
The term `systems approach', with respect to an ecosystem, means an interdisciplinary scientific method of analyzing the ecosystem as a whole that takes into account the interconnections of the ecosystem.
The term `tribal organization' has the meaning given such term in section 4(l) of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 United States Code 450b(l)).''.
Ecosystem Management.--Title II of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1711 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new sections: ``ecosystem management ``Sec.
It is the policy of the Federal Government to carry out ecosystem management with respect to public lands in accordance with the following principles: ``(1) Human populations form an integral part of ecosystems.
It is important to address human needs in the context of other environmental attributes-- ``(A) in recognition of the dependency of human economies on viable ecosystems; and ``(B) in order to ensure diverse, healthy, productive, and sustainable ecosystems.
A systems approach to ecosystem management furthers the goal of conserving biodiversity.
Ecosystem management provides for the following: ``(A) The promotion of the stewardship of natural resources.
The formation of partnerships of public and private interests to achieve shared goals for the stewardship of natural resources.
The promotion of public participation in decisions and activities related to the stewardship of natural resources.
The use of the best available scientific knowledge and technology to achieve the stewardship of natural resources.
The establishment of cooperative planning and management activities to protect and manage ecosystems that cross jurisdictional boundaries.
The implementation of cooperative, coordinated planning activities among Federal, tribal, State, local, and private landowners.
``ecosystem management commission ``Sec.
Establishment.--There is established an Ecosystem Management Commission (referred to in this section as the `Commission').
Purposes of the Commission.--The purposes of the Commission are as follows: ``(1) To advise the Secretary and Congress concerning policies relating to ecosystem management on public lands.
To examine opportunities for and constraints on achieving cooperative and coordinated ecosystem management strategies that provide for cooperation between the Federal Government and Indian tribes, States and political subdivisions of States, and private landowners to incorporate a multijurisdictional approach to ecosystem management.
Members.--The Commission shall consist of the following 16 individuals: ``(1) From the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate: ``(A) The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member).
The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member) of the Subcommittee on Public Lands, National Parks and Forests.
From the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate: ``(A) The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member).
The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member) of the Subcommittee on Interior and Related Agencies.
From the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives: ``(A) The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member).
The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member) of the Subcommittee on National Parks, Forests, and Public Lands.
From the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives: ``(A) The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member).
The Chairman (or a designee of the Chairman) and the Ranking Minority Member (or a designee of the Member) of the Subcommittee on Interior.
Chairman.--The Commission shall elect a Chairman from among the members of the Commission.
Duties of the Commission.--The duties of the Commission are as follows: ``(1) To conduct studies to accomplish the following: ``(A) To develop, in a manner consistent with section 216, a definition of the term `ecosystem management'.
To identify appropriate geographic scales for coordinated ecosystem-based planning.
To identify, with respect to the Federal Government, the governments of Indian tribes, States and political subdivisions of States, and private landowners, constraints on, and opportunities for, ecosystem management in order to facilitate the coordination of planning activities for ecosystem management among the governments and private landowners.
To identify strategies for implementing ecosystem management that recognize the following: ``(i) The role of human populations in the operation of ecosystems.
The dependency of human populations on sustainable ecosystems for the production of goods and the provision of services.
To examine this Act, and each other Federal law or policy that directly or indirectly affects the management of public lands, including Federal lands that have been withdrawn from the public domain, to determine whether any legislation or changes to administrative policies, practices, or procedures are necessary to facilitate ecosystem management by the Federal Government in accordance with section 216.
To examine the budget and operation of each Federal department or agency with responsibilities related to ecosystem management to determine whether changes are needed to facilitate ecosystem management.
To identify incentives, such as trust funds, to encourage Indian tribes, States and political subdivisions of States, and private landowners to assist the Federal Government in the development of ecosystem management strategies.
To identify disincentives that may be used to discourage the entities described in subparagraph (G) from refusing to assist the Federal Government in the development of ecosystem management strategies.
To determine the necessity for one or more governmental entities-- ``(i) to establish a new river basin commission or other regional entity, ``(ii) to enter into a new interstate compact, or ``(iii) to take any other related action, in order to facilitate the implementation of ecosystem management and to ensure the coordination of planning activities with other governmental entities in a manner consistent with section 216 and this section.
To identify, through the use of case studies that represent different regions of the United States (including the Columbia River Basin in the Western United States and the New York-New Jersey Highlands area in the Eastern United States), opportunities for and constraints on the coordination of planning activities of the Federal Government, Indian tribes, State governments, and the governments of political subdivisions of States, and private landowners to accomplish the following: ``(i) To implement ecosystem management.
To serve as a framework for cooperative planning efforts across the United States.
To develop recommendations concerning the findings of the studies described in paragraph (1).
To submit to Congress and the Secretary, not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Ecosystem Management Act of 1994, a report that contains the findings of the studies conducted pursuant paragraph (1) and the recommendations developed pursuant to paragraph (2).
Meetings.-- ``(1) Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the Ecosystem Management Act of 1994, the Commission shall hold its initial meeting.
Subsequent meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Powers of the Commission .--(1) The Commission may hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate to carry out this section.
The Commission may secure directly from any Federal department or agency such information as the Commission considers necessary to carry out the duties of the Commission, specified in subsection (e).
Upon request of the Chairman of the Commission, the head of such Federal department or agency shall furnish such information to the Commission.
The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal departments or agencies.
The Commission may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Personnel and Services.--The Secretary shall detail without reimbursement such personnel, and provide such services without reimbursement to the Commission as the Commission may require to carry out the duties specified in subsection (e).
An employee of the Federal Government detailed to the Commission under this subsection shall serve without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Travel Expenses.--The members of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Advisory Committee.--(1) Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of the Ecosystem Management Act of 1994, the Secretary shall establish an Ecosystem Management Advisory Committee (referred to in this section as the `Advisory Committee') to assist the Commission in preparing and reviewing the report required by subsection (e)(3).
The Secretary shall appoint 13 members to the Advisory Committee by the date specified in paragraph (1) as follows: ``(A) Two members shall be selected from nominations submitted by tribal organizations located in States that have a significant amount of public lands (as determined by the Secretary).
Three members shall be officials of a government of a State or political subdivision of a State or a community organization (as determined by the Secretary) selected from nominations from the Governors of States described in subparagraph (A) or from the Western Governors Association.
Two members shall be representatives of conservation groups who have substantial experience and expertise in public land policies.
Two members shall be representatives of industrial concerns who have substantial experience and expertise in public land policies.
Two members shall be representatives of scientific or professional societies who are familiar with the concept of ecosystem management.
Two members shall be representatives from the legal community with recognized legal expertise in the areas of-- ``(i) constitutional or land use law; and ``(ii) public land policy.
The Advisory Committee shall select a Chairman from among the members of the Advisory Committee.
The Advisory Committee shall hold an initial meeting not later than 30 days after the Commission holds its initial meeting pursuant to subsection (f)(1).
Subsequent meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairman.
The Advisory Committee shall have same authorities granted to the Commission under paragraphs (1) through (4) of subsection (h).
The members of the Advisory Committee shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Advisory Committee.
Termination of Commission and Advisory Committee.--The Commission and Advisory Committee shall terminate on the date that is 30 days after the Commission submits a report to the Secretary and to Congress under subsection (e)(3).
Exemption From Federal Advisory Committee Act.--The Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.)
shall not apply to the Commission or to the Advisory Committee.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Department of the Interior $10,000,000 to carry out this section.''.
Amendment to Table of Contents.--The table of contents at the beginning of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 is amended by adding at the end of the items relating to title II the following new items: ``Sec.
Authority with respect to certain withdrawals.
Technical Amendment.--Before section 215 of such Act (43 United States Code 1723) insert the following new heading: ``authority with respect to certain withdrawals''.