This Act may be cited as the ``Trading With the Communist Chinese Military Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The People's Liberation Army is the principal instrument of repression within the People's Republic of China, responsible for massacring an unknown number of students, workers, and other demonstrators for democracy in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989.
The People's Liberation Army is responsible for occupying Tibet since 1950 and implementing the official policy of the People's Republic of China to eliminate the unique cultural, linguistic, and religious heritage of the Tibetan people.
The People's Liberation Army has operational control of the People's Armed Police, an internal security force of over 1,000,000 troops, whose primary purpose is to suppress the legitimate protests of Chinese workers.
The People's Liberation Army is engaged in a massive effort to modernize its military capabilities.
The People's Liberation Army owns and operates hundreds of companies and thousands of factories the profits from which in some measure are used to support military activities.
Companies owned by the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police export to the United States such products as toys, clothing, frozen fish, lighting fixtures, garlic, glassware, yarn, footwear, chemicals, machinery, metal products, furniture, decorations, gloves, tents, and tools.
Companies owned by the People's Liberation Army and People's Armed Police regularly solicit investment in joint ventures with United States companies.
The People's Liberation Army and People's Armed Police have established in the United States over the past decade at least 23 different companies.
The people of the United States are unaware that certain products they are purchasing in retail stores are produced by companies owned and operated by the People's Liberation Army or the People's Armed Police of China.
The purchase of these products by American consumers places them in the position of unwittingly subsidizing the operations of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police.
The Government of the People's Republic of China, with the assistance of the People's Liberation Army and the People's Armed Police, continues to deny its citizens basic human rights enumerated in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, persecutes those who seek to freely practice their religion, and denies workers the right to establish free and independent trade unions.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States to prohibit any entity owned, operated, or controlled by the People's Liberation Army of China or the People's Armed Police of China from operating in the United States or conducting certain business with persons subject to the jurisdiction of the United States.
DETERMINATION OF COMMUNIST CHINESE MILITARY COMPANIES.
In General.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall compile a list of persons who are Communist Chinese military companies and who are operating directly or indirectly in the United States or any of its territories and possessions, and shall publish the list of such persons in the Federal Register.
Every 6 months, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall make such additions to or deletions from the list as are necessary, based on the latest information available.
Communist Chinese Military Company.--For purposes of making the determination required by subsection (a), the term ``Communist Chinese military company''-- (1) means a person that is-- (A) engaged in providing commercial services, manufacturing, producing, or exporting; and (B) owned, operated, or controlled by the People's Liberation Army of China or the People's Armed Police of China; and (2) includes, but is not limited to, any person identified in the United States Defense Intelligence Agency publication numbered VP-1920-271-90, dated September 1990, or PC-1921-57- 95, dated October 1995, and any updates of such report under subsection (c).
Updating of Reports.--The United States Defense Intelligence Agency shall update the report described in subsection (b)(2) by not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act and not later than every 6 months thereafter, for purposes of identifying Communist Chinese military companies.
Officers, Directors, etc.--It shall be unlawful for any person to serve as an officer, director, or other manager of any office or business anywhere in the United States or its territories or possessions that is owned, operated, or controlled by a Communist Chinese military company.
Divestiture.--The President shall by regulation require the closing and divestiture of any office or business in the United States or its territories or possessions that is owned, operated, or controlled by a Communist Chinese military company.
Importation.--No goods or services that are the growth, product, or manufacture of a Communist Chinese military company may enter the customs territory of the United States.
Contracts, Loans, Ownership Interests.--It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States knowingly-- (1) to make any loan or other extension of credit to any Communist Chinese military company; or (2) to acquire an ownership interest in any Communist Chinese military company.
Exports.--It shall be unlawful for any person subject to the jurisdiction of the United States to export any item on the United States Munitions List to a Communist Chinese military company.
Exception For Humanitarian Items.--Subsections (a) through (e) shall not apply with respect to a transaction if the President determines that the transaction involves the transfer of food, clothing, medicine, or emergency supplies intended to relieve human suffering, and the President transmits that determination to the Congress.
The President shall issue such regulations as are necessary to carry out this Act.
Any person who knowingly violates section 4 or any regulation issued thereunder-- (1) in the case of the first offense, shall be fined not more the $100,000, or imprisoned not more than 1 year, or both; and (2) in the case of any subsequent offense, shall be fined not more than $1,000,000, or imprisoned not more than 4 years, or both.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``People's Liberation Army'' means the land, naval, and air military services and the military intelligence services of the Communist Government of the People's Republic of China, and any member of any such service; and (2) the term ``People's Armed Police'' means the paramilitary service of the Communist Government of the People's Republic of China, whether or not such service is subject to the control of the People's Liberation Army, the Public Security Bureau of that government, or any other governmental entity of the People's Republic of China.