In General.--Title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after chapter 7 the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 8--EMPLOYMENT DISCRIMINATION ``Sec.
Office of Employment Discrimination Complaints Resolution.
Final agency decision; hearings.
``806. Review of final agency decisions.
Unlawful employment discrimination defined.
Scope of chapter ``(a) The procedures established in this chapter shall be implemented in a manner consistent with procedures applicable under regulations prescribed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
In the case of an employee of the Department who alleges that the employee has been subjected to unlawful employment discrimination (as defined in section 807), the allegation shall be considered under the procedures applicable to the Merit Systems Protection Board under title 5 (rather than under the procedures set forth in this chapter) if the action (or failure to act) of which the employee complains is an employment action or practice that is otherwise appealable to the Merit Systems Protection Board.
Nothing in this chapter supersedes-- ``(1) the rights and remedies available to employees under title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et seq.
), including the rights and remedies provided in section 1977A of the Revised Statutes (42 United States Code 1981a); or ``(2) any right or obligation of an employee to elect (in lieu of using procedures under this chapter) to raise an allegation of unlawful employment discrimination under grievance procedures established under a collective bargaining agreement.
Office of Employment Discrimination Complaints Resolution ``(a)(1) There shall be in the Department an Office of Employment Discrimination Complaints Resolution (referred to in this chapter as the `Office'), which shall be headed by a Director.
The Director shall report only to the Secretary and Deputy Secretary.
Subject to the direction of the Secretary and the Deputy Secretary, the Director shall have sole responsibility within the Department for administering the procedures under this chapter for resolving complaints of unlawful employment discrimination arising within the Department.
In addition to the functions of the Director described in paragraph (2), the Director shall perform such other functions as the Secretary may prescribe consistent with the functions of the Director described in paragraph (2).
The Secretary shall employ within the Office for the purposes of this chapter administrative law judges appointed in accordance with section 3105 of title 5 and such other personnel as the Office may require.
In appointing administrative law judges, the Secretary shall consider the composition of the persons appointed, taken as a group, in terms of race, sex, and veterans status, compared with the composition of the total Department workforce in terms of race, sex, and veterans status.
The Secretary shall ensure that the Director is furnished sufficient resources to enable the Director to carry out the functions of the Office under this chapter in a timely manner.
The Secretary shall include in the documents submitted to Congress by the Secretary in support of the President's budget for each fiscal year-- ``(1) detailed information on the budget for the Office; ``(2) the Secretary's opinion as to whether the resources (including the number of employees) proposed in the budget for that fiscal year are adequate to enable the Secretary to comply with statutory and regulatory deadlines for the administration of the procedures under this chapter and other provisions of law relating to the resolution of complaints of unlawful employment discrimination involving the Department; and ``(3) a report on the activities of the Office during the preceding fiscal year, including-- ``(A) a statement of the number and nature of complaints of unlawful employment discrimination received and the number and nature of complaints resolved, and the results of any appellate review of proceedings involving the complaints, during the year; ``(B) a description of the timeliness of the resolution of the complaints during the year; and ``(C) a statement of significant decisions and trends affecting the work of the Office.
(1) The Director shall prescribe-- ``(A) standards of timeliness for the expeditious resolution of complaints of unlawful employment discrimination under this chapter; ``(B) qualifications and training requirements for employees of the Office; ``(C) requirements for recordkeeping pertaining to counseling and investigations by employees of the Office; and ``(D) standards for the conduct of investigations under section 804.
Regulations prescribed under paragraph (1) shall be consistent with regulations prescribed by the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, except that, in the interest of the expeditious resolution of complaints, the Director may prescribe shorter time periods than the periods specified in such regulations with respect to any deadline or administrative period that is applicable only to the time within which the Government may (or is required to) act.
Informal complaint resolution ``Employees of the Office shall counsel employees of the Department, and applicants for employment with the Department, who file a complaint with the Department stating that the employees of the Department and applicants have been subject to unlawful employment discrimination by an officer or employee of the Department.
The Office shall seek to resolve such complaints in an expeditious and impartial manner through informal investigation and conciliation using procedures prescribed by the Director.
Investigation of complaints ``(a) If a complaint of unlawful employment discrimination is filed with the Department under section 803 and the complaint is not resolved through the informal resolution process under section 803, the Director shall assign the complaint to an administrative law judge, who shall determine whether the complaint shall be accepted for investigation.
(1) The administrative law judge assigned to a complaint shall make the determination in accordance with regulations of the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, except that if the administrative law judge determines that the complaint is without merit, the administrative law judge may determine that the complaint is not to be accepted for investigation.
A decision that a complaint is not to be accepted for investigation is a final agency decision of the matter.
(1) If the administrative law judge determines that the complaint is to be accepted, the Director shall promptly provide for an investigation of the complaint, which shall be carried out by employees of the Office (or by contract personnel acquired by the Director).
The employee (or contractor) conducting the investigation shall submit to the Director a complete written report of the results of the investigation.
If a portion of a complaint is accepted for investigation and a portion is not accepted, the individual filing the complaint or the Department may request the administrative law judge to direct the suspension of the investigation of the portion of the complaint accepted for investigation pending the results of any review of the decision not to accept the other portion.
The Director shall furnish a copy of the investigative report (including a copy of the investigative file involved) to the administrative law judge, the individual who filed the complaint, and the Secretary.
The administrative law judge may direct that an additional investigation be made if the administrative law judge determines that an additional investigation is warranted.
Final agency decision; hearings ``(a) The final agency decision on a complaint of unlawful employment discrimination filed under section 803, in a case not resolved through informal procedures under section 803 of this title, shall be made by an administrative law judge.
The individual filing the complaint may request a hearing on the matter involved.
Any such request shall be made in such time and manner as may be prescribed by the Director.
The administrative law judge shall grant the request for a hearing unless, after giving appropriate notice and allowing an opportunity to respond to such notice, the administrative law judge determines that there is no genuine dispute as to a material fact.
If the administrative law judge grants a request of the individual filing the complaint for a hearing, the administrative law judge-- ``(1) may conduct the hearing on the matter; or ``(2) may refer the matter for a hearing by a hearing examiner.
In any hearing under this section, the administrative law judge or hearing examiner presiding at the hearing shall have the authorities set forth in section 556(c) of title 5.
806. Review of final agency decisions ``(a) If the final agency decision in a case involving a complaint filed under section 803 of unlawful employment discrimination by an officer or employee of the Department is adverse to the individual filing the complaint, the individual may appeal the decision to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission or may institute an action regarding the complaint in the appropriate United States district court, as provided by law.
If the final agency decision in such a case is adverse to the Department, the Secretary may appeal the decision to the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Any such appeal shall be made within 30 days after the date of the receipt by the Secretary of the decision.
The Equal Employment Opportunity Commission may act on such an appeal in the same manner as in the case of an appeal by a Federal employee or an applicant for Federal employment against a final agency decision regarding unlawful employment discrimination.
Unlawful employment discrimination defined ``For purposes of this chapter, the term `unlawful employment discrimination' means any action, or failure to act, that is a violation of any of the following: ``(1) Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et sequentes).
The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 621 et sequentes).
Section 6(d) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 206(d)).
Section 501 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (29 United States Code 791).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The tables of chapters at the beginning of title 38, United States Code, and at the beginning of part I of such title, are amended by inserting after the item relating to chapter 7 the following new item: ``8.
Chapter 8 of title 38, United States Code, as added by section 2, shall apply with respect to complaints of unlawful employment discrimination that are filed after the end of the 6-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.
Any complaint filed before the end of such period shall be resolved in accordance with the procedures in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
WHISTLEBLOWER PROTECTION FOR TITLE 38 EMPLOYEES.
In General.-- (1) Application.--Chapter 74 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting at the end of subchapter V the following new section: ``Sec.
Disclosures of violations of law, gross mismanagement, and certain other matters: protection of employees (a) Section 2302(b)(8) of title 5 shall apply with respect to an employee, or applicant for employment, in a position covered by this chapter in the same manner as if that position were a `covered position' within the meaning of section 2302(a)(2)(B) of title 5.
Subsection (a) shall apply for purposes of applying to such an employee or applicant the provisions of subchapters II and III of chapter 12 of title 5 that relate to any authority to conduct investigations, or to seek or administer any corrective action, disciplinary action, or other remedy in connection with a prohibited personnel practice described in section 2302(b)(8) of such title.''.
Table of sections.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 7464 the following new item: ``7465.
Disclosures of violations of law, gross mismanagement, and certain other matters: protection of employees.''.
Effective Date.-- (1) Application.--Subject to paragraph (2), section 7465 of title 38, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to personnel actions occurring before, on, or after the date of enactment of this Act, if an action for relief relating to the personnel action is commenced prior to the applicable deadline.
Administrative proceedings.--Such section shall not affect any administrative proceeding pending on the date of enactment of this Act, and orders shall be issued in any such proceeding, and appeals shall be taken from the orders, as if such section had not been enacted.