This Act may be cited as the ``Santa Fe National Forest Boundary Adjustment Act of 1994''.
The boundary of the Santa Fe National Forest is hereby modified and expanded as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Santa Fe National Forest Boundary Expansion 1994'', dated July 19, 1994.
The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Chief, Forest Service, Washington, DC.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to exchange public lands and interests in lands managed by the Bureau of Land Management for private lands and interests therein depicted on the map referenced in section 2.
Withdrawal.--Upon the acquisition of lands under subsection (a) by the Secretary of the Interior, and subject to valid existing rights, such lands are hereby withdrawn from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws; and from disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and geothermal leasing.
INTERCHANGE OF FEDERAL LANDS IN NEW MEXICO.
Identification of Lands.--In conjunction with the land exchange under section 3, the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall identify federally-owned lands and interests in lands currently situated within the Santa Fe National Forest which are suitable for transfer to and administration by the Bureau of Land Management.
The identification of National Forest lands available for such transfer shall utilize criteria which are mutually agreeable to both of the Secretaries.
Lands Acquired for the Bureau of Land Management.-- (1) Transfer by secretary of agriculture.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall transfer, to the Bureau of Land Management, those lands and interests in lands identified pursuant to subsection (a).
The transfer shall be effective upon publication in the Federal Register of notice of such transfer that identifies such lands and interests.
Boundary modification.--The boundary of the Santa Fe National Forest shall be modified as of the date of notice under paragraph (1) to exclude such lands transferred to the Secretary of the Interior.
Management.--Lands transferred under paragraph (1) shall be added to and administered by the Bureau of Land Management as part of the public lands (as defined in section 103(e) of the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976 (43 United States Code 1702(e))).
Lands Acquired for the Forest Service.-- (1) Addition to sante fe national forest.--Lands or interests in lands-- (A) acquired by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to section 3, or (B) acquired by the Secretary of Agriculture within the areas identified as ``potential acquisition'' on the map referenced in section 2, shall, upon acquisition, be added to and administered as part of the Santa Fe National Forest in accordance with the laws relating to the National Forests.
Management prescription.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall manage the lands and interests in lands referred to in paragraph (1) primarily to preserve open space and scenic values and to preclude development.
Availability of certain funds.--For purposes of section 7(a)(1) of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 4601-9(a)(1)), the boundary of the Santa Fe National Forest, as modified pursuant to this Act, shall be treated as if it were the boundary as of January 1, 1965.
Nothing in this Act shall affect the authorities of the Secretary of Agriculture to acquire lands in New Mexico by purchase or exchange and, notwithstanding the Act of June 15, 1926 (16 United States Code 471a), all such lands heretofore or hereafter acquired by the exchange of National Forest lands shall be managed as a part of the National Forest System.
The procedures used in carrying out the land transfers by this Act shall be those procedures agreed to between the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Agriculture.
As provided in section 4(c) of the Wilderness Act, mechanical transport, including motor vehicles, motorized equipment, and the landing of fixed-wing and rotary aircraft, shall be permitted anywhere within the boundaries of the Santa Fe National Forest with respect to any emergency involving the health or safety to an individual within the national forest.
Passed the House of Representatives August 8, 1994.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.