This Act may be cited as the ``Restoration of Natural Resources Laws on the Public Lands Act of 1996''.
REPEAL OF EMERGENCY SALVAGE TIMBER SALE PROGRAM.
Definition of Secretary Concerned.--In this section, the term ``Secretary concerned'' means-- (1) the Secretary of Agriculture, with respect to an activity involving land in the National Forest System; and (2) the Secretary of the Interior, with respect to an activity involving land under the jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management.
Repeal.--Section 2001 of Public Law 104-19 (109 United States Statutes at Large 240; 16 United States Code 1611 note) is repealed.
Suspension.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding any outstanding judicial order or administrative decision interpreting section 2001 of Public Law 104-19 (109 United States Statutes at Large 240; 16 United States Code 1611 note) (as in existence prior to the date of enactment of this Act), the Secretary of Agriculture and the Secretary of the Interior shall suspend each activity that was being undertaken in whole or in part under the authority provided in the section, unless the Secretary concerned determines that the activity would have been undertaken even in the absence of the subsection.
Resumption of an activity.--The Secretary concerned may not resume an activity suspended under paragraph (1) until the Secretary concerned determines that the activity (including any modification after the date of enactment of this Act) complies with environmental and natural resource laws.
Purpose.--The purpose of this section is to provide factual information useful to the President and Congress in setting funding and operational levels for the public forests in order to ensure that the public forests are operated so that the health of forest resources is secured with ecological and financial effectiveness.
Nature and Extent of the Situation.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of Agriculture, through the research branch of the Forest Service, shall undertake a study to report on the nature and extent of the forest health situation in the National Forest System.
Nature.--The nature of forest health shall be categorized into types of situations, including-- (A) overstocked stands of unmerchantable-size trees; (B) stands with excessive fuel loads; (C) mixed conifer stands with an inappropriate mix of tree species; and (D) combinations of the situations described in subparagraphs (A) through (C).
Extent.--The extent of forest health shall include acreage estimates of each situation type and shall distinguish variations in severity.
Representative sample measurements.--If feasible, the Secretary shall use representative sample measurements with a specified degree of confidence in extending the measurements to the whole population.
Presentation.--The report shall present data at the national forest or a comparable level and shall be displayed geographically and tabularly.
Review.--The report shall be properly reviewed by the scientific community prior to transmission under paragraph (7).
Transmission.--The report shall be transmitted to Congress not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Ecological Efficacy of Activities.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall enter into a contract with the National Academy of Sciences for the purpose of conducting a study of the ecological and forest health consequences of various activities intended, at least in part, to improve forest health.
Activities examined.--The activities examined under paragraph (1) shall include-- (A) site preparation for reforestation, artificial reforestation, natural regeneration, stand release, precommercial thinning, fertilization, other stand improvement activities, salvage harvesting, and brush disposal; (B) historical as well as recent examples and a variety of conditions in ecological regions; and (C) a comparison of various activities within a watershed, including activities conducted by other Federal land management agencies.
Transmission.--The report shall be transmitted to the Chief of the Forest Service and to Congress not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Economic Efficacy of Activities.-- (1) In general.--The Comptroller General of the United States, through the General Accounting Office, shall conduct a study of the Federal, State, and local fiscal and other economic consequences of activities intended, at least in part, to improve forest health.
Coordination.--The study conducted under this subsection shall be coordinated with the study conducted under subsection (c)-- (A) to ensure that the same groups of activities in the same geographic area are examined; and (B) to develop historic as well as recent effects that illustrate financial and economic trends.
Federal fiscal effects.--In assessing the Federal fiscal effects, the Comptroller General shall distinguish the net effects on the Treasury of the United States from changes in the balances in the various special accounts and trust funds, including appropriated funds used to conduct the planning, execution, sale administration, support from other programs, regeneration, site restoration, agency overhead, and payments in lieu of taxes associated with timber cutting.
Transmission.--The study shall be transmitted to the Chief of the Forest Service and to Congress not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Improvement of Activities.--In response to the findings of the National Academy of Sciences and the Comptroller General under subsections (c) and (d), the Chief of the Forest Service shall assess opportunities for improvement of, and progress in improving, the ecological, economic, and fiscal consequences and efficacy for each national forest.
Forest Service Study.-- (1) In general.--The Chief of the Forest Service shall conduct a study of alternative systems for administering forest health-related activities, including, modification of special account and trust fund management and reporting, land management service contracting, and government logging.
Similarities and differences.--The study shall compare and contrast the various alternatives with systems in existence on the date of the study, including-- (A) ecological effects; (B) forest health changes; (C) Federal, State, and local fiscal and other economic consequences; and (D) opportunities for the public to be involved in decisionmaking before activities are undertaken.
Requirements of study.--To ensure the validity of the study, in measuring the effect of the use of contracting, the study shall specify the costs that contractors would bear for health care, retirement, and other benefits afforded public employees performing the same tasks.
Transmittal.--The report shall be transmitted to Congress not later than 1 year after the studies conducted under subsections (c) and (d) are transmitted to Congress.
Public Availability.--The reports conducted under this section shall be published in a form available to the public at the same time the reports are transmitted to Congress.
Both a summary and a full report shall be published.