This Act may be cited as the ``Mountaintown National Scenic Area Act of 2007''.
MOUNTAINTOWN NATIONAL SCENIC AREA, CHATTAHOOCHEE NATIONAL FOREST, GEORGIA.
Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Chattahoochee National Forest in the State of Georgia the Mountaintown National Scenic Area (in this section referred to as the ``scenic area'') consisting of approximately 13,382 acres, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Mountaintown Proposed Scenic Area--Chattahoochee National Forest, Georgia'' and dated May 3, 2006.
Map and Descriptions.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Agriculture shall submit to Congress a final map and boundary description of the scenic area.
The map and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the map and boundary description.
The map and boundary description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the Office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
In the case of any discrepancy between the acreage and the map referred to in subsection (a) and the map and boundary description required by this subsection, the map and boundary description required by this subsection shall control.
Management.-- (1) Purposes.--The Secretary shall manage the scenic area for the purposes of-- (A) ensuring the appropriate protection and preservation of the scenic quality, water quality, natural characteristics, and water resources of the area; (B) protecting and managing vegetation in the area to provide wildlife and fish habitat, consistent with subparagraph (A); (C) providing parcels within the area that may develop characteristics of old-growth forests; and (D) providing a variety of recreation opportunities, consistent with the preceding purposes.
Priority.--In the case of a conflict between the management purposes specified in paragraph (1) and the laws and regulations generally applicable to the National Forest System, the management purposes shall take precedence.
Management Plan.--Not later than three years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall develop a management plan for the scenic area as an amendment to the land and resource management plan for the Chattahoochee National Forest.
The amendment shall conform to the requirements of this section.
Nothing in this section shall require the Secretary to revise the land and resource management plan for the Chattahoochee National Forest pursuant to section 6 of the Forest and Rangeland Renewable Resources Planning Act of 1974 (16 United States Code 1604).
Roads.--After the date of the enactment of this Act, no new roads shall be constructed or established within the scenic area, except that this prohibition shall not be construed to deny access to private lands or interests therein in the scenic area.
Vegetation Management.--No timber harvest shall be allowed within the scenic area, except as may be necessary in the control of fire, insects, and diseases and to provide for public safety and trail access.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Secretary may engage in vegetation manipulation practices for maintenance of existing wildlife clearings and visual quality.
Firewood may be harvested for personal use along perimeter roads under such conditions as the Secretary may impose.
Motorized Travel.--Motorized travel shall not be permitted within the scenic area, except that the Secretary may authorize motorized travel within the scenic area as necessary for administrative use in furtherance of the management purposes specified in subsection (c)(1) and in support of wildlife management projects in existence as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
Fire.--Wildfires in the scenic area shall be suppressed in a manner consistent with the management purposes specified in subsection (c)(1), using such means as the Secretary considers appropriate.
Insects and Disease.--Insect and disease outbreaks may be controlled in the scenic area to maintain scenic quality, prevent tree mortality, reduce hazards to visitors, or protect private lands.
Water.--The scenic area shall be administered so as to maintain or enhance existing water quality.
Mining Withdrawal.--Subject to valid existing rights, all federally owned lands in the scenic area are hereby withdrawn from location, entry, and patent under the mining laws of the United States and from leasing claims under the mineral and geothermal leasing laws of the United States, including amendments to such laws.