.--Section 301(a) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (2 United States Code 632(a)) is amended by striking paragraph (4) and inserting the following: ``(4) subtotals of new budget authority and outlays for nondefense discretionary spending, defense discretionary spending, Medicare, Medicaid and other health-related spending, other direct spending (excluding interest), contingencies, and net interest;''.
Long-Term Budgeting.--Section 301 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(k) Long-Term Budgeting.--In addition to the levels required to be included in a concurrent resolution on the budget under subsection (a), such concurrent resolution shall set forth appropriate levels, as a percent of the current gross domestic product of the United States, for total Federal revenues, total outlays, debt held by the public, and the surplus or deficit in the budget for the fiscal year 10 years, 20 years, and 30 years after the last fiscal year of the concurrent resolution on the budget.''.
Long-Term Reconciliation.--Section 310 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Long-Term Reconciliation Directives in a Concurrent Resolution on the Budget.-- ``(1) Long-term reconciliation directives.--In addition to a reconciliation measure as set forth in subsection (a), a concurrent resolution on the budget for any fiscal year, to the extent necessary to effectuate the spending levels as set forth for such categories in section 301(a) (providing for long-term spending levels as a percentage of gross domestic product) of such resolution, may-- ``(A) specify the total amount by which Medicare, Medicaid, the OASDI Trust Funds, and other direct spending outlays are to be reduced within the jurisdiction of a committee as a percentage of gross domestic product of such fiscal year; and ``(B) direct that committee to determine and recommend changes to accomplish a reduction of such total amount for such categories as a percentage of gross domestic product.
Limitation on amendments to long-term reconciliation legislation.--(A) It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider any amendment to a reconciliation bill or reconciliation resolution if such amendment decreases outlay reductions below the level of such outlay reductions provided (for the fiscal years covered) in the reconciliation instructions which relate to such long-term reconciliation bill.
It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any amendment to a reconciliation bill or reconciliation resolution if such amendment decreases outlay reductions below the level of such outlay reductions provided (for the fiscal years covered) in the reconciliation instructions which relate to such long-term reconciliation bill.
Subparagraphs (A) and (B) shall not apply if a declaration of war by the Congress is in effect.
For purposes of this section, the levels of outlays as a percentage of a gross domestic product for a fiscal year shall be determined on the basis of estimates made by the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives or of the Senate.
In the Senate, a motion to strike a provision shall always be in order.
Subject matter.--Subject matter included in a long- term reconciliation bill may be any of the following: ``(A) Any part of the Medicare Program.
Medicaid and other health-related spending.
The Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Trust Fund to make the program solvent.
Application.--Subsections (b)(1)(E) and (F) of section 313 and subsections (c), (d), and (g) of this section shall not apply to long-term reconciliation measures reported under this subsection.
Reforms that are necessary for the fundamental restructuring of any program included in any such measure shall not be deemed to be extraneous for purposes of such section 313.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 310(b) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by striking ``subsection (a)'' and inserting ``subsections (a) and (h)''.
LONG-TERM SPENDING INCREASE POINT OF ORDER.
In General.--Title III of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 (as amended by section 6) is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``long-term spending increase point of order ``Sec.
Congressional Budget Office Analysis of Proposals.--The Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall, to the extent practicable, prepare for each bill and joint resolution reported from committee, and amendments thereto and conference reports thereon, an estimate of whether the measure causes, relative to current law, a net increase in direct spending in excess of $5,000,000,000 in any of the four ten fiscal-year periods beginning in the first fiscal year after the last fiscal year covered in the most recently enacted concurrent resolution on the budget.
In the Senate.--It shall not be in order in the Senate to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that causes a net increase in deficits in excess of $5,000,000,000 in any of the four ten fiscal-year periods beginning in the first fiscal year after the last fiscal year covered in the most recently enacted concurrent resolution on the budget.
In the House of Representatives.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives to consider any bill, joint resolution, amendment, motion, or conference report that causes a net increase in deficits in excess of $5,000,000,000 in any of the four ten fiscal-year periods beginning in the first fiscal year after the last fiscal year covered in the most recently enacted concurrent resolution on the budget.
Determinations of Budget Levels.--For purposes of this section, the levels of net deficit increases shall be determined on the basis of estimates provided by the chairmen of the Senate and House Committees on the Budget, as applicable.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget and Impoundment Control Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 319 the following new item: ``Sec.
Long-term spending increase point of order.''.
CBO AND OMB PROJECTIONS.
Congressional Budget Office.--Section 308 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(e) Long-Term Projections.--Each year, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall issue a report projecting total spending, revenue, deficits, and debt for at least 40 years beginning with the first fiscal year after the last fiscal year covered in the most recently enacted concurrent resolution on the budget as a percentage of current projected gross domestic product annually based on current law and current law levels as modified to maintain current policy.
CBO Spending Review Report Issuance.--As a component of the report required by subsection (e), the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall issue a Spending Review Report and transmit such report to the Committees on the Budget of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
Content of Spending Review Report.--The content of the Spending Review Report referred to in subsection (f) shall include analyses of the following: ``(1) OASDI.--The solvency of the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Trust Fund.
Medicare.--The long-range sustainability of the spending levels of Medicare.
Medicaid and other health-related spending.--The long-range sustainability of the spending levels of Medicaid and other health-related spending.
Other direct spending.--The long-range sustainability of spending levels of other direct spending.
Long-term sustainability.--The long-term sustainability of total Government outlays, deficit, and debt.
Net interest.--Projections of net interest.
Definitions.--For purposes of the development of the Spending Review Report referred to in subsection (f): ``(1) Solvency of the oasdi.--The term `solvency' as used in this section means the solvency of the Old-Age Security and Disability Insurance Trust Funds over a 75-year period beginning in the year the Spending Review Report is reported and in the last year of that period.
Sustainability.--The term `sustainability' means that the projected growth in the Medicare program, the Medicaid program or other health-related spending, or any other direct spending program (other than the Old-Age Security and Disability Insurance Trust Funds or the Medicare or Medicaid program), beginning with the first fiscal year after the last fiscal year covered in the most recently enacted concurrent resolution on the budget, does not exceed the annual rate of growth of the gross domestic product of the United States.''.
Office of Management and Budget.--Section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by redesignating the second paragraph (37) as paragraph (39) and by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(40) long-term projections of total spending over 30 years (or 75 years in the case of Social Security) as a percentage of gross domestic product annually and the impact of proposed policies over that period.''.
LONG-TERM ANALYSIS BY CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE OF LEGISLATION.
Long-Term Analysis by Congressional Budget Office.--(1) Part A of title IV of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``long-term analysis by congressional budget office of legislation ``Sec.
Analysis.--The Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall, to the extent practicable, prepare-- ``(1) for major legislation reported by any committee of the House of Representatives or the Senate; and ``(2) for any bill or resolution so requested by the chairman or ranking member of the Committee on the Budget or the chairman or ranking member of the committee of jurisdiction, and submit to such committee or to the chairman of the Committee on the Budget making such request an estimate of the costs which would be incurred in carrying out such bill or resolution for the ten fiscal- year period beginning with the first fiscal year after the last fiscal year covered by the most recently enacted concurrent resolution on the budget subject to the analysis of such bill or resolution by the Director under section 402, together with the basis for each such estimate.
The estimates, comparison, and description so submitted shall be included in the report accompanying such bill or resolution if timely submitted to such committee before such report is filed.
Definition.--As used in this section, the term `major legislation' means any bill or joint resolution if the gross spending or revenue effect of such bill or resolution for any fiscal year for which an estimate was made under section 402 is greater than .25 percent of the estimated gross domestic product (GDP) of the United States for the fiscal year.''.
The table of contents set forth in section 1(b) of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 406 the following new item: ``Sec.
Long-term analysis by Congressional Budget Office of legislation.''.
Analysis by Congressional Budget Office.--Paragraph (1) of section 402 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by striking ``in each of the 4 fiscal years following such fiscal year'' and inserting ``in at least each of the 9 fiscal years following such fiscal year''.
LONG-TERM BUDGETING REFLECTED IN PRESIDENT'S BUDGET SUBMISSIONS.
Paragraphs (5), (6), and (12)(B) of section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, are amended by striking ``4 fiscal years after that year'' and inserting ``9 fiscal years after that year and the ten fiscal-year period beginning thereafter''.
GAO AND OMB STATEMENTS OF THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT'S FINANCIAL CONDITION.
Government Accountability Office.--Not later than 6 weeks after the President's budget submission under section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, or 6 weeks after the President submits his budget review, the Government Accountability Office shall submit a report on the financial condition of the Government, including the long-term unfunded obligations.
Definition of Long-Term Unfunded Obligations.--Section 3 of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(12) The term `unfunded obligations' means the dollar sum of the Total Net Position as displayed in the United States Government Balance Sheets contained within the most recently published Financial Report of the United States Government; plus the 75-year actuarial balances, using the intermediate open-group assumption, of Medicare's Hospital Insurance, Supplementary Medical Insurance, and Prescription Drug programs contained within the most recently published Annual Report of the Boards of Trustees of the Federal Hospital Insurance and Federal Supplementary Medical Insurance Trust Funds; plus the 75-year actuarial balance, using the intermediate open group assumption, of the Old-Age Survivors and Disability Insurance program contained within the most recently published Annual Report of the Board of Trustees of the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance and Federal Disability Insurance Trust Funds; plus the 75-year actuarial balance of the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund (20-8144-0-7-601); plus the 75-year actuarial balance of the Rail Industry Pension Fund (60-8011-0- 7-601) under section 255(g)(1)(B) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.''.
President's Budget Submission.--Section 1105(a) of title 31, United States Code, (as amended by section 8(b)) is further amended by adding at the end the following: ``(41) a report on the financial condition of the Government, including the long-term unfunded obligations.''.
Section 803.--Section 803 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173) is amended-- (1) in subsection (b)-- (A) in paragraph (3)(A), by striking ``; and'' and inserting a semicolon; (B) in paragraph (3)(B), by striking the period at the end and inserting a semicolon; (C) in paragraph (3), by adding at the end the following new subparagraphs: ``(C) the most recent report of the Medicare Trustees (including any illustrative scenario prepared by the Office of the Actuary); ``(D) an analysis by the Chief Actuary of Medicare on the proposed legislation; and ``(E) the assessment of the Committee on the Budget of the report of the Trustees and the analysis by the Chief Actuary of Medicare on the proposed legislation.
''; and (D) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Effective certification.--The certification referred to in paragraph (3) shall have no force or effect unless and until all of the criteria set forth therein are inserted in the Congressional Record.
''; (2) by amending subsection (c) to read as follows: ``(c) Fallback Procedure for Floor Consideration if the House Fails To Vote on Final Passage by July 30.--After July 30 of any year during which the President is required to submit proposed legislation to Congress under section 1105(h) of title 31, United States Code, unless the House of Representatives has voted on final passage of any medicare funding legislation for which there is an affirmative certification under subsection (b)(3)(A), then, after the expiration of 30 calendar days (and concurrently 5 legislative days), the medicare funding legislation shall be discharged from any committee to which it has been referred.
''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Inapplicability of Procedures to Certain Legislation.-- Procedures set forth in this section shall not apply to any legislation including-- ``(1) changes in budget authority and outlays not within function 570 (spending outside the medicare program); or ``(2) revenue increases other than those receipts from a dedicated medicare financing source.''.
Section 804.--Section 804 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173) is amended-- (1) in subsection (d)(1), by striking ``, then any Senator'' and all that follows and inserting ``, then the medicare funding legislation measure shall be discharged from the committee.
''; and (2) in subsection (e), by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``The motion to proceed shall be nondebatable.''.
Section 805.--(1) Subtitle A of title VIII of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
``The chairman of the Committee on the Budget of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as appropriate, shall adjust the appropriate allocations, aggregates, and other levels to reflect the budget impact achieved by legislation introduced pursuant to section 803(a) for purposes of the Congressional Budget Act of 1974, the Balanced Budget Emergency and Deficit Control Act of 1985, the Rules of the House of Representatives, or the Standing Rules of the Senate.''.
The table of contents set forth in section 1(d) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 804 the following new item: ``Sec.