This Act may be cited as the ``Family Savings and Investors Protection Act of 1994''.
INDEXING OF CERTAIN ASSETS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING GAIN OR LOSS.
In General.--Part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis rules of general application) is amended by inserting after section 1021 the following new section: ``SEC.
INDEXING OF CERTAIN ASSETS FOR PURPOSES OF DETERMINING GAIN OR LOSS.
General Rule.-- ``(1) Indexed basis substituted for adjusted basis.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, if an indexed asset which has been held for more than 1 year is sold or otherwise disposed of, for purposes of this title the indexed basis of the asset shall be substituted for its adjusted basis.
Exception for depreciation, etc.--The deduction for depreciation, depletion, and amortization shall be determined without regard to the application of paragraph (1) to the taxpayer or any other person.
Indexed Asset.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `indexed asset' means-- ``(A) stock in a corporation, and ``(B) tangible property (or any interest therein), which is a capital asset or property used in the trade or business (as defined in section 1231(b)).
Certain property excluded.--For purposes of this section, the term `indexed asset' does not include: ``(A) Creditor's interest.--Any interest in property which is in the nature of a creditor's interest.
Options.--Any option or other right to acquire an interest in property.
Net lease property.--In the case of a lessor, net lease property (within the meaning of subsection (i)(3)).
Certain preferred stock.--Stock which is fixed and preferred as to dividends and does not participate in corporate growth to any significant extent.
Stock in foreign corporations.--Stock in a foreign corporation.
Stock in s corporations.--Stock in an S corporation.
Exception for stock in foreign corporation which is regularly traded on national or regional exchange.--Paragraph (2)(E) shall not apply to stock in a foreign corporation the stock of which is listed on the New York Stock Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, the national market system operated by the National Association of Securities Dealers, or any domestic regional exchange for which quotations are published on a regular basis other than-- ``(A) stock of a foreign investment company (within the meaning of section 1246(b)), ``(B) stock in a passive foreign investment company (as defined in section 1296), and ``(C) stock in a foreign corporation held by a United States person who meets the requirements of section 1248(a)(2).
Indexed Basis.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) General rule.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the indexed basis for any asset is-- ``(A) the adjusted basis of the asset, multiplied by ``(B) the applicable inflation ratio.
Applicable inflation ratio.--The applicable inflation ratio for any asset is the percentage arrived at by dividing-- ``(A) the gross national product deflator the calendar quarter in which the disposition takes place, by ``(B) the gross national product deflator for the calendar quarter in which the asset was acquired by the taxpayer (or, if later, the calendar quarter ending on December 31, 1994).
The applicable inflation ratio shall not be taken into account unless it is greater than 1.
The applicable inflation ratio for any asset shall be rounded to the nearest one-tenth of 1 percent.
Gross national product deflator.--The gross national product deflator for any calendar quarter is the implicit price deflator for the gross national product for such quarter (as shown in the first revision thereof).
Short Sales.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a short sale of an indexed asset with a short sale period in excess of 1 year, for purposes of this title, the amount realized shall be an amount equal to the amount realized (determined without regard to this paragraph) multiplied by the applicable inflation ratio.
In applying subsection (c)(3) for purposes of the preceding sentence, the date on which the property is sold short shall be treated as the date on which the holding period for the asset begins and the closing date for the sale shall be treated as the date of disposition.
Short sale of substantially identical property.--If the taxpayer or the taxpayer's spouse sells short property substantially identical to an asset held by the taxpayer, the asset held by the taxpayer and the substantially identical property shall not be treated as indexed assets for the short sale period.
Short sale period.--For purposes of this subsection, the short sale period begins on the day after property is sold and ends on the closing date for the sale.
Treatment of Regulated Investment Companies and Real Estate Investment Trusts.-- ``(1) Adjustments at entity level.-- ``(A) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the adjustment under subsection (a) shall be allowed to any qualified investment entity (including for purposes of determining the earnings and profits of such entity).
Exception for qualification purposes.--This section shall not apply for purposes of sections 851(b) and 856(c).
Adjustments to interests held in entity.-- ``(A) In general.--Stock in a qualified investment entity shall be an indexed asset for any calendar month in the same ratio as the fair market value of the assets held by such entity at the close of such month which are indexed assets bears to the fair market value of all assets of such entity at the close of such month.
Ratio of 90 percent or more.--If the ratio for any calendar month determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 90 percent or more, such ratio for such month shall be 100 percent.
Ratio of 10 percent or less.--If the ratio for any calendar month determined under subparagraph (A) would (but for this subparagraph) be 10 percent or less, such ratio for such month shall be zero.
Valuation of assets in case of real estate investment trusts.--Nothing in this paragraph shall require a real estate investment trust to value its assets more frequently than once each 36 months (except where such trust ceases to exist).
The ratio under subparagraph (A) for any calendar month for which there is no valuation shall be the trustee's good faith judgment as to such valuation.
Qualified investment entity.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified investment entity' means-- ``(A) a regulated investment company (within the meaning of section 851), and ``(B) a real estate investment trust (within the meaning of section 856).
Other Pass-Thru Entities.-- ``(1) Partnerships.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of a partnership, the adjustment made under subsection (a) at the partnership level shall be passed through to the partners.
Special rule in the case of section 754 elections.--In the case of a transfer of an interest in a partnership with respect to which the election provided in section 754 is in effect-- ``(i) the adjustment under section 743(b)(1) shall, with respect to the transferor partner, be treated as a sale of the partnership assets for purposes of applying this section, and ``(ii) with respect to the transferee partner, the partnership's holding period for purposes of this section in such assets shall be treated as beginning on the date of such adjustment.
S corporations.--In the case of an S corporation, the adjustment made under subsection (a) at the corporate level shall be passed through to the shareholders.
Common trust funds.--In the case of a common trust fund, the adjustment made under subsection (a) at the trust level shall be passed through to the participants.
Dispositions Between Related Persons.-- ``(1) In general.--This section shall not apply to any sale or other disposition of property between related persons except to the extent that the basis of such property in the hands of the transferee is a substituted basis.
Related persons defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `related persons' means-- ``(A) persons bearing a relationship set forth in section 267(b), and ``(B) persons treated as single employer under subsection (b) or (c) of section 414.
Transfers To Increase Indexing Adjustment.--If any person transfers cash, debt, or any other property to another person and the principal purpose of such transfer is to secure or increase an adjustment under subsection (a), the Secretary may disallow part or all of such adjustment or increase.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Treatment as separate asset.--In the case of any asset, the following shall be treated as a separate asset: ``(A) A substantial improvement to property.
In the case of stock of a corporation, a substantial contribution to capital.
Any other portion of an asset to the extent that separate treatment of such portion is appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.
Assets which are not indexed assets throughout holding period.--The applicable inflation ratio shall be appropriately reduced for periods during which the asset was not an indexed asset.
Net lease property defined.--The term `net lease property' means leased property where-- ``(A) the term of the lease (taking into account options to renew) was 50 percent or more of the useful life of the property, and ``(B) for the period of the lease, the sum of the deductions with respect to such property which are allowable to the lessor solely by reason of section 162 (other than rents and reimbursed amounts with respect to such property) is 15 percent or less of the rental income produced by such property.
Treatment of certain distributions.--A distribution with respect to stock in a corporation which is not a dividend shall be treated as a disposition.
Section cannot increase ordinary loss.--To the extent that (but for this paragraph) this section would create or increase a net ordinary loss to which section 1231(a)(2) applies or an ordinary loss to which any other provision of this title applies, such provision shall not apply.
The taxpayer shall be treated as having a long-term capital loss in an amount equal to the amount of the ordinary loss to which the preceding sentence applies.
Acquisition date where there has been prior application of subsection (a)(1) with respect to the taxpayer.--If there has been a prior application of subsection (a)(1) to an asset while such asset was held by the taxpayer, the date of acquisition of such asset by the taxpayer shall be treated as not earlier than the date of the most recent such prior application.
Collapsible corporations.--The application of section 341(a) (relating to collapsible corporations) shall be determined without regard to this section.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part II of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1021 the following new item: ``Sec.
Indexing of certain assets for purposes of determining gain or loss.''
Adjustment To Apply for Purposes of Determining Earnings and Profits.--Subsection (f) of section 312 of such Code (relating to effect on earnings and profits of gain or loss and of receipt of tax- free distributions) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(3) Effect on earnings and profits of indexed basis.-- For substitution of indexed basis for adjusted basis in the case of the disposition of certain assets, see section 1022(a)(1).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to dispositions after December 31, 1994, in taxable years ending after such date.