This Act may be cited as the ``Energy Efficiency and Conservation Incentives Act of 2001''.
ALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR QUALIFIED ENERGY MANAGEMENT DEVICES AND RETROFITTED QUALIFIED METERS.
In General.--Part VI of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to itemized deductions for individuals and corporations) is amended by inserting after section 179A the following new section: ``SEC.
DEDUCTION FOR QUALIFIED ENERGY MANAGEMENT DEVICES AND RETROFITTED METERS.
Allowance of Deduction.--There shall be allowed as a deduction-- ``(1) an amount equal to $30 for each qualified energy management device originally placed in service during the taxable year, and ``(2) for each qualified retrofitted meter originally placed in service during the taxable year, an amount equal to the lesser of-- ``(A) $30, or ``(B) the adjusted basis of such meter.
Definitions.-- ``(1) Qualified energy management device.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified energy management device' means any meter or metering device acquired and used by an electric energy or natural gas supplier or service provider to enable consumers or others to manage their purchase, sale, or use of electricity or natural gas in response to energy price and usage signals.
Qualified retrofitted meter.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified retrofitted meter' means an electric energy or natural gas meter or metering device that has been modified by the addition of equipment designed to enable users to manage the purchase, sale, or use of electricity and natural gas in response to energy price and usage signals.
Placed in service.--For purposes of this section, the term `placed in service' means interconnected with other devices in a manner that permits reading of energy price and usage signals on at least a daily basis.
Cost of meters includes cost of installation.--The cost of any qualified energy management device or qualified retrofitted meter referred to in paragraph (1) or (2) shall include the cost of the original installation of such property.
Devices Installed Outside the United States Not Qualified.-- No deduction shall be allowed under subsection (a) with respect to any qualified energy management device or qualified retrofitted meter placed in service outside the United States.
Basis Reduction.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this title, the basis of any property shall be reduced by the amount of the deduction with respect to such property which is allowed by subsection (a).
Ordinary income recapture.--For purposes of section 1245, the amount of the deduction allowable under subsection (a) with respect to any property that is of a character subject to the allowance for depreciation shall be treated as a deduction allowed for depreciation under section 167.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 263(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (G), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (H) and inserting ``, or'', and by inserting after subparagraph (H) the following new subparagraph: ``(I) expenditures for which a deduction is allowed under section 179B.''.
Section 312(k)(3)(B) of such Code is amended by striking ``or 179A'' each place it appears in the heading and text and inserting ``, 179A, or 179B''.
Section 1016(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (26), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (27) and inserting ``, and'', and by inserting after paragraph (27) the following new paragraph: ``(28) to the extent provided in section 179B(d)(1),''.
Section 1245(a) of such Code is amended by inserting ``179B,'' after ``179A,'' both places it appears in paragraphs (2)(C) and (3)(C).
The table of contents for subpart B of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 179A the following new item: ``Sec.
Deduction for qualified energy management devices and retrofitted meters.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to qualified energy management devices placed in service after the date of the enactment of this Act and to qualified retrofitted meters that are placed in service after, or that are in use as of, the date of the enactment of this Act.
YEAR APPLICABLE RECOVERY PERIOD FOR DEPRECIATION OF QUALIFIED ENERGY MANAGEMENT DEVICES.
In General.--Subparagraph (A) of section 168(e)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to classification of property) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii), by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(iv) any qualified energy management device.''.
Definition of Qualified Energy Management Device.--Section 168(i) of such Code (relating to definitions and special rules) is amended by inserting at the end the following new paragraph: ``(15) Qualified energy management device.--The term `qualified energy management device' means a meter or metering device that is acquired and used by an electric energy or natural gas supplier or service provider to enable consumers and others to manage their purchase, sale, and use of electricity or natural gas in response to energy price and usage signals that are readable on at least a daily basis.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the cost of any qualified energy management device shall (at the election of the taxpayer) include the cost of the original installation of such property.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service after December 31, 2000.