This Act may be cited as the ``Los Padres National Forest Land Exchange Act of 2003''.
LAND EXCHANGE, LOS PADRES NATIONAL FOREST, CALIFORNIA.
Exchange Authorized.-- (1) In general.--If the United Water Conservation District of California (in this section referred to as the ``District'') conveys to the Secretary of Agriculture (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary'') all of right, title, and interest of the District in and to the lands described in subsection (b)(1), the Secretary shall convey to the District, in exchange for such lands, all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to the National Forest System lands described in subsection (b)(2).
Existing rights.--The conveyance of National Forest System lands under this section shall be subject to valid existing rights and to such terms, conditions, and reservations as may be required by this section or considered necessary by the Secretary.
Time for exchange.--The Secretary and the District shall endeavor to complete the exchange in a timely manner.
Exchange Lands.-- (1) Lands to be conveyed by district.--The lands to be conveyed by the District under this section consist of approximately 340 acres as follows: (A) ``Tract A''--Approximately 40 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 16, NE1/4SE1/ 4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract B''--Approximately 40 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 16, SE1/4NE1/ 4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract C''--Approximately 80 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 16, S1/2SE1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract D''--Approximately 160 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 21, NE1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract E''--Approximately 20 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 15, N1/2SW1/ 4SW1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
Lands to be conveyed by secretary.--The National Forest System lands to be conveyed by the Secretary under this section consist of approximately 420 acres as follows: (A) ``Tract 1''--Approximately 80 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 10, E1/2SW1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 2''--Approximately 40 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 15, NE1/4NW1/ 4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 3''--Approximately 40 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 15, SW1/4SE1/ 4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 4''--Approximately 10 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 22, SW1/4SW1/ 4NE1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 5''--Approximately 20 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 22, W1/2NW1/ 4SE1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 6''--Approximately 40 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 22, SW1/4SE1/ 4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 7''--Approximately 80 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 22, E1/2SW1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 8''--Approximately 20 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 22, N1/2NW1/ 4SW1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 9''--Approximately 80 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 27, W1/2NE1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
``Tract 10''--Approximately 10 acres, located in township 5 north, range 18 west, section 27, NE1/ 4SW1/4NW1/4, San Bernardino base and meridian.
Corrections to legal descriptions.--By mutual agreement, the Secretary and the District may adjust the legal descriptions contained in this subsection to correct errors or to make minor adjustments in the lands to be exchanged.
Processing of Land Exchange.-- (1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the Secretary shall process the land exchange under this section in accordance with Forest Service land exchange regulations in subpart A of part 254 of title 36, Code of Federal Regulations.
Title standards.--The Secretary shall require that title to the District lands acquired by the Secretary under this section is in conformity with the title standards of the Attorney General of the United States.
Easements and Access.-- (1) Reservation.--In the conveyance of the National Forest System lands authorized by this section, the Secretary shall reserve easements for all roads and trails that the Secretary considers to be necessary or desirable to provide for administrative purposes and to ensure public access to National Forest System lands.
In particular, the Secretary shall reserve perpetual unrestricted rights of pedestrian access to the Potholes trailhead of the Los Padres National Forest.
Accessibility.--In the case of the District lands acquired by the Secretary under this section, the Secretary shall provide reasonable access to privately owned inholdings consistent with section 1323(a) of the Alaska National Interest Lands Conservation Act (16 United States Code 3210(a)).
Construction of parking lot.--As a condition on the receipt of National Forest System lands under this section, the District shall agree to construct a gravel parking area upon District lands for the Potholes trailhead of the Los Padres National Forest, subject to the following requirements: (A) The District may reasonably regulate vehicular access to the trailhead in accordance with rules and regulations promulgated in accordance with applicable law.
Foot traffic to the trailhead shall be perpetual and unrestricted.
Special Use Authorization and Easements.--All special use authorizations and term easements issued by the Secretary with respect to the National Forest System lands described in subsection (b)(2) shall not be renewed or reauthorized after the date of enactment of this Act.
Water Rights.--The land exchange authorized by this section does not include any water rights owned by the District or the United States.
Cash Equalization.-- (1) Limits waived.--The District or the Secretary, as appropriate, may equalize the values of the lands to be exchanged under this section by a cash payment without regard to any statutory limit on the amount of such a cash equalization payment.
Disposition and use of funds.--Any cash equalization payment received by the Secretary under this section shall be deposited into the fund established by Public Law 90-171 (commonly known as the Sisk Act; 16 United States Code 484a).
The payment shall be available to the Secretary for expenditure, without further appropriation, for the acquisition, construction, or improvement of administrative or recreational facilities for the Los Padres National Forest in Ventura County, Santa Barbara County, and San Luis Obispo County, California, or for the acquisition of land or interests in land in such counties.
Management of Acquired Lands .--The District lands acquired by the Secretary under this section shall be added to and administered as part of The Los Padres National Forest in accordance with the laws and regulations applicable to that national forest.