This Act may be cited as the ``Commercial Mortgage Capital Availability Act of 1993''.
INSURED DEPOSITORY INSTITUTION CAPITAL REQUIREMENTS FOR TRANSFERS OF MORTGAGE LOANS.
Accounting Principles.--The accounting principles applicable to the transfer of a mortgage loan with recourse contained in reports or statements required to be filed with Federal banking agencies by a qualified insured depository institution shall be consistent with generally accepted accounting principles.
Capital and Reserve Requirements.--With respect to the transfer of a mortgage loan with recourse that is a sale under generally accepted accounting principles, each qualified insured depository institution shall-- (1) establish and maintain a reserve equal to an amount sufficient to meet the reasonable estimated liability of the institution under the recourse arrangement; and (2) treat as an asset (for purposes of applicable capital standards and other capital measures, including risk-based capital requirements) only the maximum amount at risk under the recourse arrangement.
Qualified Institutions Defined.--An insured depository institution is a qualified insured depository institution for purposes of this section if, without regard to the accounting principles or capital requirements referred to in subsections (a) and (b), the institution is-- (1) well capitalized; or (2) with the approval, by regulation or order, of the appropriate Federal banking agency, adequately capitalized.
Aggregate Amount of Recourse.--The total outstanding amount at risk with respect to transfers of mortgage loans under subsections (a) and (b) (together with the amount at risk under any provisions of law substantially similar to subsections (a) and (b)) shall not exceed-- (1) the amount which is equal to 15 percent of the risk- based capital of the institution; or (2) such greater amount, as established by the appropriate Federal banking agency by regulation or order.
Institutions That Cease To Be Qualified or Exceed Aggregate Limits.--If an insured depository institution ceases to be a qualified insured depository institution or exceeds the limits under subsection (d), this section shall remain applicable to any transfer of mortgage loans that occurred at a time when the institution was qualified and had not exceeded such limit.
Prompt Corrective Action not Affected.--The capital of an insured depository institution shall be computed without regard to this section in determining whether the institution is less than well capitalized.
Regulations Required.--Before the end of the 180-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, each appropriate Federal banking agency shall prescribe final regulations implementing this section.
Alternative System Permitted.-- (1) In general.--At the discretion of the appropriate Federal banking agency, this section shall not apply if the regulations of the agency provide that the aggregate amount of capital and reserves required with respect to the transfer of mortgage loans with recourse does not exceed the aggregate amount of capital and reserves that would be required under subsection (b).
Existing transactions not affected.--Notwithstanding paragraph (1), this section shall remain in effect with respect to transfers of mortgage loans with recourse by qualified insured depository institutions occurring before the effective date of regulations referred to in paragraph (1).
Definitions.--The following definitions apply for purposes of this section: (1) Adequately capitalized.--The term ``adequately capitalized'' has the same meaning as in section 38(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Appropriate federal banking agency.--The term ``appropriate Federal banking agency'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Capital standards.--The term ``capital standards'' has the same meaning as in section 38(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Federal banking agencies.--The term ``Federal banking agencies'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Insured depository institution.--The term ``insured depository institution'' has the same meaning as in section 3 of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Other capital measures.--The term ``other capital measures'' has the same meaning as in section 38(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
Recourse.--The term ``recourse'' has the meaning given to such term under generally accepted accounting principles.
Mortgage loan.--The term ``mortgage loan'' means any-- (A) note or certificate of interest or participation in a note (including any rights designed to assure servicing of, or the timeliness of receipt by the holders of such notes, certificates, or participation of amounts payable under such notes, certificates or participation) that is principally secured by an interest in real property; or (B) any security (within the meaning of section 8 of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934) that is secured by one or more notes described in subparagraph (A) or certificates of interest or participation in such notes (with or without recourse to issuers thereof) and that, by its terms, provides for payments of principal in relation to payments, or reasonable projections of payments, on notes described in subparagraph (A) or certificates of interest or participation in such notes.
Well capitalized.--The term ``well capitalized'' has the same meaning as in section 38(b) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act.
AMENDMENT TO DEFINITION OF MORTGAGE RELATED SECURITY.
Section 3(a)(41)(A)(i) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (15 United States Code 78c(a)(41)(A)(i)) is amended by inserting before the semicolon ``, or on 1 or more parcels of real estate upon which is located one or more commercial structures''.
AUTHORITY TO EXEMPT COMMERCIAL MORTGAGE RELATED SECURITIES TRANSACTIONS FROM PROHIBITED TRANSACTION RULES.
The Secretary of Labor, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, shall exempt, either unconditionally or on stated terms and conditions, transactions involving commercial mortgage related securities (as such term is defined in section 3(a)(41) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934, as amended by section 3 of this Act) from-- (1) the restrictions of sections 406(a) and 407(a) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974; and (2) the taxes imposed under section 4975 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
PROVISIONS TO SAFEGUARD THE INTEGRITY OF THE SECURITIZATION PROCESS, AND THE SAFETY AND SOUNDNESS OF FEDERALLY INSURED INSTITUTIONS.
Compliance With Securities Regulations.--Any security relying on the provisions of this Act shall comply with all rules and regulations of Federal securities laws applicable thereto, as determined taking into account the provisions of this Act, including all provisions relating to required disclosure to investors, registrations, reporting and compliance, and all anti-fraud provisions.
Treatment of Bank Issued or Purchased Mortgage Backed Securities for Purposes of Minimum Capital Requirements.-- (1) Mortgages held by bank to back securities.--If an issue of securities backed by mortgage loans represents a liability on the balance sheet of an insured depository institution and the assets backing such obligation represent assets on the balance sheet of such institution, the institution shall maintain minimum adequate capital with regard to such assets as prescribed by all applicable rules and regulations of the banking agencies with supervisory and examination authority over such institution, as determined taking into account the provisions of this Act.
Securities held by bank.--If an insured depository institution purchases a mortgage-related security to which the provisions of this Act apply, the institution shall maintain minimum adequate capital with respect to such security and all other assets as prescribed by all applicable rules and regulations of the banking agencies with supervisory and examination authority over such institution, as determined taking into account the provisions of this Act.