Part A of title III of the Elementary and Secondary Act of 1965 is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart 5--Grants to Schools ``SEC.
``This subpart may be cited as the `Getting Our Girls Ready for the 21st Century Act (Go Girl Act)'.
``Congress finds the following: ``(1) Women have historically been underrepresented in mathematics, science, and technology occupations.
Female students take fewer high-level mathematics and science courses in high school than male students.
Female students take far fewer advanced computer classes and tend to take only the basic data entry and word processing classes compared to courses that male students take.
Female students earn fewer bachelors, masters, and doctoral degrees in mathematics, science, and technology than male students.
Early career exploration is key to choosing a career.
Teachers' attitudes, methods of teaching, and classroom atmosphere affect females' interest in nontraditional fields.
Stereotypes about appropriate careers for females, a lack of female role models, and a lack of basic career information significantly deters girls' interest in mathematics, science, and technology careers.
Females consistently rate themselves significantly lower than males in computer ability.
By the year 2000, 65 percent of all jobs will require technological skills.
Limited access is a hurdle faced by females seeking jobs in mathematics, science, and technology.
Common recruitment and hiring practices make extensive use of traditional networks that often overlook females.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to and enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with local educational agencies to provide subgrants to elementary and secondary schools to encourage the ongoing interest of girls in science, mathematics, and technology and to prepare girls to pursue undergraduate and graduate degrees and careers in science, mathematics, or technology.
Application.-- ``(1) In general.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this subpart, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--The application referred to in paragraph (1) shall contain, at a minimum, the following: ``(A) A specific program description, including the content of the program and the research and models used to design the program.
A description of the collaboration between elementary and secondary schools to fulfill goals of the program.
An explanation regarding the recruitment and selection of participants.
A description of the instructional and motivational activities planned to be used.
Selection.--Local educational agencies shall select elementary schools to provide services that-- ``(1) encourage girls in grades 4 and higher to enjoy and pursue studies in science, mathematics, and technology; ``(2) acquaint girls in grades 4 and higher with careers in science, mathematics, and technology; and ``(3) educate the parents of girls in grades 4 and higher about the difficulties faced by girls to maintain an interest and desire to achieve in science, mathematics, and technology and enlist the help of the parents in overcoming these difficulties.
Uses of funds.--An elementary school that receives a subgrant under this subpart may use such funds for the following: ``(1) Tutoring in reading, science, mathematics, and technology.
Mentoring relationships, both in-person and through the Internet.
To pay the costs of attending events and academic programs in science, mathematics, and technology.
After-school activities designed to encourage the interest of girls in grades 4 and higher in science, mathematics, and technology.
Summer programs designed to encourage interest in and develop skills in science, mathematics, and technology.
Purchasing software designed for girls, or designed to encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, and technology.
Field trips to locations that educate and encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, and technology.
Field trips to locations that acquaint girls with careers in science, mathematics, and technology.
Purchasing and disseminating information to parents of girls in grades 4 and higher that will help parents to encourage their daughters' interest in science, mathematics, and technology.
Subgrants to Secondary Schools.--Local educational agencies shall select secondary schools to provide services that-- ``(1) encourage girls in grades 9 and higher to major in science, mathematics, and technology in a postsecondary institution; ``(2) provide academic advice and assistance in high school course selection; ``(3) encourage girls in grades 9 and higher to plan for careers in science, mathematics, and technology; and ``(4) educate the parents of girls in grades 9 and higher about the difficulties faced by girls to maintain an interest and desire to achieve in science, mathematics, and technology and enlist the help of the parents in overcoming these difficulties.
Uses of Funds.--A secondary school that receives a subgrant under this subpart may use such funds for the following: ``(1) Tutoring in science, mathematics, and technology.
Mentoring relationships, both in-person and through the Internet.
To pay the costs of attending events and academic programs in science, mathematics, and technology.
To pay 50 percent of the cost of an internship in science, mathematics, or technology.
After-school activities designed to encourage the interest of girls in grades 9 and higher in science, mathematics, and technology, including the cost of that portion of a staff salary to supervise these activities.
Summer programs designed to encourage interest in and develop skills in science, mathematics, and technology.
Purchasing software designed for girls, or designed to encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, and technology.
Field trips to locations that educate and encourage girls' interest in science, mathematics, and technology.
Field trips to locations that acquaint girls with careers in science, mathematics, and technology.
Visits to institutions of higher education to acquaint girls with college-level programs in science, mathematics, or technology, and to meet with educators and female college students who will encourage them to pursue degrees in science, mathematics, and technology.
``In this subpart: ``(1) The term `local educational agency' has the same meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801), except that in the case of Hawaii, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the term `local educational agency' shall be deemed to mean the State educational agency.
The term `Secretary' means the Secretary of Education.
``For the purpose of making grants and contracts under this subpart, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the 4 succeeding fiscal years.