This Act may be cited as the ``Military Readiness Investigation Board Act of 2001''.
There is established a task force to be known as the ``Military Readiness Investigation Board'' (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Readiness Board'').
Number and Appointment of Members.--(1) The Readiness Board shall be composed of not more than 12 members, who shall be appointed by the Secretary of Defense.
In selecting persons for appointment as members of the Readiness Board, the Secretary shall consult with the following members of Congress: (A) The chairmen and ranking minority members of the Committees on Armed Services of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
The chairmen and ranking minority members of the Subcommittees on Defense of the Committees on Appropriations of the Senate and the House of Representatives.
Qualifications for Appointment.--(1) Members of the Readiness Board shall be selected from among persons who are experts in analyzing the military readiness of the Armed Forces, performing statistical analyses, or applying best business practices that are relevant or adaptable to readiness-related processes of the Armed Forces.
A member of the Readiness Board shall have or qualify for the security clearance or clearances appropriate for the performance of the duties of the Readiness Board.
The Secretary shall seek to appoint to membership on the Readiness Board retired members of the Armed Forces not on active duty and civilians in a ratio to each other that the Secretary determines appropriate for ensuring that military and nonmilitary perspectives are represented to a significant extent among the members of the Readiness Board.
Periods of Appointment; Vacancies.--(1) The members of the Readiness Board shall be appointed for the life of the Readiness Board.
Any vacancy on the Readiness Board shall not affect its powers, but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Time for Initial Appointments.--The members of the Readiness Board shall be appointed not later than 15 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Chairman.--The Secretary of Defense shall designate one of the members to be the Chairman of the Readiness Board.
In General.--It shall be the duty of the Readiness Board to conduct a comprehensive investigation of the state of mission readiness within all combat and combat support commands within the Armed Forces and to report the results of the investigation to the Secretary of Defense and to Congress.
Purpose.--The investigation and report of the Board shall be designed to provide the Secretary of Defense and Congress with an objective baseline assessment of the current state of the mission readiness of the Armed Forces so as to guide future appropriations and authorizations of appropriations for the Department of Defense.
Investigation.--(1) In carrying out the investigation, the Board shall-- (A) conduct an objective evaluation of the ability of all combat and combat support elements of the Armed Forces currently to execute the tasks, at the levels, experienced by the Armed Forces since the end of the Persian Gulf War and all of the wartime missions within acceptable timelines and levels of casualties; (B) determine whether, and the extent to which, definitional concepts of combat readiness have changed for major combat units and supporting elements since 1993; (C) determine and evaluate prevailing attitudes within the combat and combat support commands of the Armed Forces regarding the accuracy of the readiness levels reported for those commands; and (D) assess the adequacy of improvements to the readiness reporting system used within the Department of Defense and formulate recommendations for actions to improve the system further, including recommendations relating to the authority of a commander to adjust the evaluated readiness level of the commander's unit on the basis of the commander's judgment rather than the strict application of objective criteria.
In carrying out its duties under this Act, the Readiness Board-- (A) shall focus on the current state of readiness of the Armed Forces, but shall also examine-- (i) the trends in readiness for the five years preceding the year in which the Board is established; (ii) patterns of deployment of the Armed Forces during those five years; and (iii) the readiness trends that are projected in the future-years defense program submitted to Congress in that year under section 221 of title 10, United States Code; (B) may consider what if any additional equipment and supplies are needed to improve readiness, but may not consider any issue regarding the acquisition of major weapon systems for future use by the Armed Forces; and (C) shall accept as being appropriate the baseline threat assessments that are current during the conduct of the investigation and may not examine or reassess any of the existing levels of technological, military, or unconventional threats that the United States and its allies may potentially confront.
Completion and Report.--(1) Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Readiness Board shall complete the investigation and submit, in a classified and an unclassified version, a report on the results of the investigation to the Secretary of Defense and to Congress.
The report shall include detailed findings and conclusions, together with any recommendations for legislation or for administrative actions that the Board considers appropriate for improving the mission readiness of the Armed Forces or for improving the evaluation and reporting of readiness to the Secretary of Defense and to Congress.
Schedule.--(1) The Readiness Board shall meet at the call of the chairman.
The Readiness Board shall hold its first meeting not later than 15 days after the date on which all members have been appointed.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Readiness Board shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may take an action described in section 6(a) as authorized under that section.
Investigation.--The Readiness Board may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, conduct interviews and surveys, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence to the extent that the Readiness Board considers appropriate in carrying out its duties under section 4.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Readiness Board may secure information necessary to enable the Readiness Board to carry out its duties directly from any Department of Defense agency, command, or unit without approval from superior command authorities, including any classified information commensurate with Readiness Board members' security clearances.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the chairman of the Readiness Board, the Secretary of Defense shall provide the Readiness Board with administrative support, office space, transportation and security services necessary for the Readiness Board to carry out its duties under this Act.
Postal and Printing and Binding Services.--The Readiness Board may use the United States mails and obtain printing and binding services in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
PERSONNEL AND OTHER ADMINISTRATIVE MATTERS.
Compensation of Members.--Each member of the Readiness Board shall be compensated at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the performance of the duties of the Readiness Board.
Travel.--(1) The members of the Readiness Board shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Readiness Board.
To the maximum extent practicable, the members and employees of the Readiness Board shall travel on military aircraft, military ships, military vehicles, or other military conveyances when travel is necessary in the performance of a duty of the Readiness Board, except that no such aircraft, ship, vehicle, or other conveyance may be scheduled primarily for the transportation of any such member or employee when the cost of commercial transportation is less expensive.
Staff.--(1) The chairman of the Readiness Board may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director, and a staff of not more than 12 additional persons, if the Readiness Board determines that an executive director and staff are necessary in order for the Readiness Board to perform its duties effectively.
The employment of an executive director shall be subject to confirmation by the Readiness Board.
The chairman may fix the compensation of the executive director without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of Federal Employees.--A Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Readiness Board without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
The Secretary shall ensure that sufficient personnel are detailed to the Readiness Board to enable the Readiness Board to carry out its duties effectively.
Additional Administrative Support.--The Secretary of Defense shall furnish the Readiness Board any administrative and support services requested by the Readiness Board.
Gifts.--The Readiness Board may accept, use, and dispose of gifts or donations of services or property.
Funding Sources.--The compensation, travel expenses, and per diem allowances of members and employees of the Readiness Board shall be paid out of funds available to the Department of Defense for the payment of compensation, travel expenses, and per diem allowances, respectively, of civilian employees of the department.
The other expenses of the Readiness Board shall be paid out of funds available to the Department of Defense for the payment of similar expenses incurred by the department.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), the Readiness Board shall terminate 30 days after submitting the report under section 4(d).
Temporary Continuation.--(1) To ensure ready accessibility to informed explanation and discussion of the report and the proceedings of the Readiness Board, the service of the Chairman of the Readiness Board and one staff person designated by the Chairman shall continue until the end of the sixth month that begins after the month in which Board terminates under subsection (a).
Funds available for the Readiness Board shall be available for paying the compensation and expenses of the Chairman and the staff member under section 7 during the period of the continued service of the Chairman and staff member under paragraph (1).