This Act may be cited as the ``Open Space Preservation Act of 1993''.
TREATMENT OF LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Gross Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2031 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to the definition of gross estate) is amended by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d) and by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Estate Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this subsection, there shall be excluded from the gross estate the value of land subject to a qualified conservation easement (less the amount of any indebtedness secured by such land).
There shall be included in the gross estate the value of each development right retained by the donor in the conveyance of such qualified conservation easement.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' shall mean land, which was owned by the decedent or a member of the decedent's family during the 3-year period ending on the date of the decedent's death, and with respect to which a qualified conservation contribution of a qualified real property interest (as defined in section 170(h)) has been made by the decedent, the decedent's spouse or the decedent's parent, a lineal ancestor of the decedent, or a lineal descendant of the decedent, the decedent's spouse or the decedent's parent, or a spouse of such lineal descendant.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified real property interest' shall not include a certified historic structure (as defined in section 170(h)(4)(A)(iv)).
For purposes of this subsection, the term `member of the decedent's family' shall have the same meaning as the term `member of the family' in section 2032A.
Payment of tax upon certain disposition of land subject to retained development right.--The tax attributable to the amount included in the gross estate relating to development rights retained by the donor in the conveyance of a qualified conservation easement shall be due upon the disposition (other than by gift or bequest) of such property.''
Carryover Basis.--Section 1014(a) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to basis of property acquired from a decedent) is amended by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3), inserting ``or,'' at the end thereof, and inserting the following new paragraph: ``(4) in the case of the applicability of section 2031(c), the basis in the hands of the decedent.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to land on which qualified conservation easements were granted after December 31, 1992.
GIFT TAX ON LAND SUBJECT TO A QUALIFIED CONSERVATION EASEMENT.
Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--Section 2503 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to taxable gifts) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h) Gift Tax With Respect to Land Subject to a Qualified Conservation Easement.--The transfer by gift of land subject to a qualified conservation easement (other than development rights retained by the donor of such easement) shall not be treated as a transfer of property by gift for purposes of this chapter.
For purposes of this subsection, the term `land subject to a qualified conservation easement' and `qualified real property interest' shall have the same meaning as in section 2031(c) and the term `member of the decedent's family' shall have the same meaning as the term `member of the family' in section 2032A.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to land on which qualified conservation easements were granted after December 31, 1992.
TEMPORARY DEFERRAL OF SCHEDULED REDUCTION IN CERTAIN ESTATE TAX RATES.
In General.--Paragraph (2) of section 2001(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to phase-in of 50 percent maximum rate) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph: ``(E) After 1992 and before 1998.--In the case of decedents dying, and gifts made after 1992 and before 1998, the substitution under this paragraph shall be as follows: ``If the amount with respect to which the tentative tax to be computed is: The tentative tax is: Over $2,500,000................ $1,025,800, plus 53 percent of the excess over $2,500,000.''
Technical Amendment.--Subparagraph (A) of section 2001(c)(2) of such Code is amended by striking ``1993'' and inserting ``1998''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply in the case of decedents dying, and gifts made, after December 31, 1992.
EXCLUSION OF GAIN FROM SALE OF CERTAIN FARMLAND.
General Rule.--Part III of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items specifically excluded from gross income) is amended by redesignating section 137 as section 138 and by inserting after section 136 the following new section: ``SEC.
SALES AND EXCHANGES OF FARMLAND THE USE OF WHICH IS RESTRICTED TO FARMING.
General Rule.--In the case of an operator of farmland, gross income does not include gain from the sale or exchange of eligible farmland if there is in effect on the date of such sale or exchange a qualified covenant which does not permit any use of such farmland for any purpose other than use as farmland.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Eligible farmland.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `eligible farmland' means any farmland with respect to which the land use restrictions imposed by the State, and the land use restrictions imposed by any political subdivision of such State, in which such farmland is located provide that such farmland may be used only as farmland.
Farmland to which no land use restriction applies treated as eligible farmland.--In the case of any farmland with respect to which no land use restriction imposed by a State or political subdivision applies, such farmland shall be treated as eligible farmland.
Date for determining whether farmland is eligible farmland.--The determination of whether farmland is eligible farmland shall be made on the date the qualified covenant with respect to such farmland is entered into.
Farmland.--The term `farmland' means any real property-- ``(A) which is located in the United States, and ``(B) which is used as a farm for farming purposes (within the meaning of section 2032A(e)).
Qualified covenant--The term `qualified covenant' means a covenant-- ``(A) which may not be revoked, ``(B) which, with respect to farmland to which such covenant applies, is entered into by all persons having any ownership interest in such farmland, and ``(C) which binds all future owners of the farmland to which such covenant applies.
Application With Principal Residences.--For purposes of this section, use as farmland includes use as the principal residence of the operator of such farmland.
Verification of Covenant.--Subsection (a) shall not apply by reason of any covenant unless such person-- ``(1) notifies (in such form and manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe) both the Secretary and the Secretary of Agriculture of the political subdivision of the State in which such covenant is recorded, and ``(2) submits to the Secretary a copy of such covenant.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such part is amended by striking out the item relating to section 137 and inserting in lieu thereof the following: ``Sec.
Sales and exchanges of farmland the use of which is restricted to farming.
Cross references to other Acts.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to covenants first recorded after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending after such date.