ASSISTANCE FOR PUBLIC PARTICIPATION IN DEFENSE ENVIRONMENTAL RESTORATION ACTIVITIES.
Establishment of Restoration Advisory Boards.--Section 2705 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding after subsection (c) the following: ``(d) Restoration Advisory Board.--In lieu of establishing a technical review committee under subsection (c), the Secretary may permit the establishment of a restoration advisory board in connection with any installation (or group of nearby installations) where the Secretary is planning or implementing environmental restoration activities.
The Secretary shall prescribe regulations regarding the characteristics, composition, and establishment of restoration advisory boards pursuant to this subsection.
The Secretary shall provide for the payment of routine administrative expenses of a restoration advisory board from funds available for the operation and maintenance of the installation (or installations) for which the board is established.''.
Assistance for Citizen Participation on Technical Review Boards and Restoration Advisory Boards.--Such section is further amended by adding after subsection (d), as added by subsection (a), the following: ``(e) Assistance for Citizen Participation.--(1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall make grants using amounts available under paragraph (5) to facilitate the participation of individuals from the private sector on technical review committees and restoration advisory boards for the purpose of ensuring public input into the planning and implementation of environmental restoration activities at installations where such committees and boards are in operation.
Such grants shall be made through an appropriate trustee selected pursuant to regulations prescribed by the Secretary for that purpose.
A committee or advisory board for an installation is eligible for grants under this subsection only if the committee or board is composed of individuals from the private sector who reside in a community in the vicinity of the installation and who are not potentially responsible parties with respect to environmental hazards at the installation.
Individuals who are local community members of a technical review committee or restoration advisory board may use a grant awarded under this subsection only-- ``(A) to obtain technical assistance in interpreting scientific and engineering issues with regard to the nature of environmental hazards at an installation and the restoration activities proposed or conducted at the installation; and ``(B) to assist such members and affected citizens to participate more effectively in environmental restoration activities at the installation.
The members of a technical review committee or technical advisory board may, in the sole discretion of such members, employ technical or other experts.
The total amount of funds to be provided under this subsection in a fiscal year to a technical review committee or restoration advisory board established for a particular installation (or group of installations) may not exceed the lesser of-- ``(A) one tenth of one percent of the total cost of environmental restoration activities at the installation (or group of installations); or ``(B) $100,000.
(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the Secretary shall make grants under this subsection using funds in the following accounts: ``(i) The Defense Environmental Restoration Account established in section 2703(a) of this title.
In the case of a technical review committee or restoration advisory board established for a military installation to be closed or realigned, the Department of Defense Base Closure Account 1990 established under section 2906(a) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (part A of title XXIX of Public Law 101-510; 10 United States Code 2687 note).
The total amount of funds available for grants under this subsection for a fiscal year may not exceed the lesser of-- ``(i) one quarter of one percent of the appropriated funds available to the Secretary through the accounts referred to in subparagraph (A); or ``(ii) $7,500,000.''.
Involvement of Committees and Boards in Defense Environmental Restoration Program.--Such section is further amended by adding after subsection (e), as added by subsection (b), the following: ``(f) Involvement in Defense Environmental Restoration Program.--If a technical review committee or restoration advisory board is established with respect to an installation, the Secretary shall consult with and seek the advice of the committee or board on the following issues: ``(1) Identifying environmental restoration activities and projects at the installation.
Monitoring progress on these activities and projects.
Collecting information regarding restoration priorities for the installation.
Addressing land use, level of restoration, acceptable risk, and waste management and technology development issues related to environmental restoration at the installation.
Developing environmental restoration strategies for the installation.''.
Implementation Requirements.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense shall-- (1) prescribe the regulations required under subsections (d) and (e)(1) of title 10, United States Code, as added by this section; and (2) take appropriate actions to notify the public of the availability of technical assistance grants under subsection (e) of such section, as so added.