VETERANS EDUCATION OUTREACH PROGRAM.
Establishment.--Chapter 36 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end of subchapter II the following new section: ``Sec.
Veterans education outreach program ``(a) The Secretary shall provide funding for offices of veterans affairs at institutions of higher learning, as defined in section 3452(f), in accordance with this section.
(1)(A) The Secretary shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, make payments to any institution of higher learning, under and in accordance with this section, during any fiscal year if the number of persons eligible for services from offices assisted under this section at the institution is at least 50, determined in the same manner as the number of eligible veterans or eligible persons is determined under section 3684(c).
The persons who are eligible for services from the offices assisted under this section are persons receiving educational assistance administered by the Department of Veterans Affairs, including assistance provided under chapter 106 of title 10.
To be eligible for a payment under this section, an institution of higher learning or a consortium of institutions of higher learning, as described in paragraph (3), shall make an application to the Secretary.
The application shall-- ``(A) set forth such policies, assurances, and procedures that will ensure that-- ``(i) the funds received by the institution, or each institution in a consortium of institutions described in paragraph (3), under this section will be used solely to carry out this section; ``(ii) for enhancing the functions of its veterans education outreach program, the applicant will expend, during the academic year for which a payment is sought, an amount equal to at least the amount of the award under this section from sources other than this or any other Federal program; and ``(iii) the applicant will submit to the Secretary such reports as the Secretary may require or as are required by this section; ``(B) contain such other statement of policies, assurances, and procedures as the Secretary may require in order to protect the financial interests of the United States; ``(C) set forth such plans, policies, assurances, and procedures as will ensure that the applicant will maintain an office of veterans' affairs which has responsibility for-- ``(i) veterans' certification, outreach, recruitment, and special education programs, including the provision of or referral to educational, vocational, and personal counseling for veterans; and ``(ii) providing information regarding other services provided veterans by the Department, including the readjustment counseling program authorized under section 1712A, the programs of veterans employment and training authorized under the Job Training Partnership Act and the Service Members Occupational Conversion and Training Act of 1992, and the programs carried out under chapters 41 and 42; and ``(D) be submitted at such time or times, in such manner, in such form, and contain such information as the Secretary determines necessary to carry out the functions of the Secretary under this section.
An institution of higher learning which is eligible for funding under this section and which the Secretary determines cannot feasibly carry out, by itself, any or all of the activities set forth in paragraph (2)(C), may carry out such program or programs through a consortium agreement with one or more other institutions of higher learning in the same community.
The Secretary shall not approve an application under this subsection unless the Secretary determines that the applicant will implement the requirements of paragraph (2)(C) within the first academic year during which it receives a payment under this section.
Any institution which received funding under section 420A of the Higher Education Act of 1965 during fiscal year 1993 shall be eligible under this section for fiscal year 1994.
(1)(A) Subject to subparagraph (B), the amount of the payment which any institution shall receive under this section for any fiscal year shall be $100 for each person who is described in subsection (b)(1)(B).
The maximum amount of payments to any institution of higher learning, or any branch thereof which is located in a community which is different from that in which the parent institution thereof is located, in any fiscal year is $75,000.
(A) The Secretary shall pay to each institution of higher learning which has had an application approved under subsection (b) the amount which it is to receive under this section.
If the amount appropriated for any fiscal year is not sufficient to pay the amounts which all such institutions are to receive, the Secretary shall ratably reduce such payments.
If any amount becomes available to carry out this section for a fiscal year after such reductions have been imposed, such reduced payments shall be increased on the same basis as they were reduced.
In making payments under this section for any fiscal year, the Secretary shall apportion the appropriation for making such payments, from funds which become available as a result of the limitation on payments set forth in paragraph (1)(B), in an equitable manner.
The Secretary, in carrying out the provisions of this section, shall seek to assure the coordination of programs assisted under this section with other programs carried out by the Department pursuant to this title, and the Secretary shall provide all assistance, technical consultation, and information otherwise authorized by law as necessary to promote the maximum effectiveness of the activities and programs assisted under this section.
(1) From the amounts made available for any fiscal year under subsection (f), the Secretary shall retain one percent or $10,000, whichever is less, for the purpose of collecting information about exemplary veterans educational outreach programs and disseminating that information to other institutions of higher learning having such programs on their campuses.
Such collection and dissemination shall be done on an annual basis.
From the amounts made available under subsection (f), the Secretary may retain not more than two percent for the purpose of administering this section.
There is authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 for each fiscal year to carry out this section.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 36 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 3697A the following new item: ``3697B.
Veterans education outreach program.''.
Passed the House of Representatives May 24, 1993.
Attest: DONNALD K. ANDERSON, Clerk.