This Act may be cited as the ``Thomas Alva Edison Sesquicentennial Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) Thomas Alva Edison, one of America's greatest inventors, was born on February 11, 1847, in Milan, Ohio; (2) the inexhaustible energy and genius of Thomas A. Edison produced more than 1,300 inventions in his lifetime, including the incandescent light bulb and the phonograph; (3) in 1928, Thomas A. Edison received the Congressional gold medal ``for development and application of inventions that have revolutionized civilization in the last century''; and (4) 1997 will mark the sesquicentennial of the birth of Thomas A. Edison.
TITLE I--COMMEMORATIVE COINS SEC.
Denominations.--In commemoration of the sesquicentennial of the birth of Thomas A. Edison, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue-- (1) not more than 350,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper; and (2) not more than 350,000 half dollar coins, each of which shall-- (A) weigh 12.50 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this title only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the many inventions made by Thomas A. Edison throughout his prolific life.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the years ``1847-1997''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Obverse of coin.--The obverse of each coin minted under this title shall bear the likeness of Thomas A. Edison.
Design Competition.--Before the end of the 3-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall conduct an open design competition for the design of the obverse and the reverse of the coins minted under this title.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only 1 facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this title.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this title beginning on and after the date of enactment of this Act.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this title after July 31, 1998.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this title shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this title at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this title before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this title shall include a surcharge of-- (1) $14 per coin for the $1 coin; and (2) $7 per coin for the half dollar coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out this title.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this title from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, the first $7,000,000 of the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this title shall be promptly paid by the Secretary as follows: (1) Museum of arts and history.--Up to \1/7\ to the Museum of Arts and History, in the city of Port Huron, Michigan, for the endowment and construction of a special museum on the life of Thomas A. Edison in Port Huron.
Edison birthplace association.--Up to \1/7\ to the Edison Birthplace Association, Incorporated, in Milan, Ohio, to assist in the efforts of the association to raise an endowment as a permanent source of support for the repair and maintenance of the Thomas A. Edison birthplace, a national historic landmark.
National park service.--Up to \1/7\ to the National Park Service, for use in protecting, restoring, and cataloguing historic documents and objects at the ``invention factory'' of Thomas A. Edison in West Orange, New Jersey.
Edison plaza museum.--Up to \1/7\ to the Edison Plaza Museum in Beaumont, Texas, for expanding educational programs on Thomas A. Edison and for the repair and maintenance of the museum.
Edison winter home and museum.--Up to \1/7\ to the Edison Winter Home and Museum in Fort Myers, Florida, for historic preservation, restoration, and maintenance of the historic home and chemical laboratory of Thomas A. Edison.
Edison institute.--Up to \1/7\ to the Edison Institute, otherwise known as ``Greenfield Village'', in Dearborn, Michigan, for use in maintaining and expanding displays and educational programs associated with Thomas A. Edison.
Edison memorial tower.--Up to \1/7\ to the Edison Memorial Tower in Edison, New Jersey, for the preservation, restoration, and expansion of the tower and museum.
Excess Payable to the National Numismatic Collection.--After payment of the amounts required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall pay the remaining surcharges to the National Museum of American History in Washington, D.C., for the support of the National Numismatic Collection at the museum.
Audits.--Each organization that receives any payment from the Secretary under this section shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this title will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this title unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
TITLE II--CIRCULATING COINS SEC.
AUTHORITY TO REDESIGN HALF DOLLAR CIRCULATING COINS.
Section 5112(d) of title 31, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the 6th sentence the following: ``At the discretion of the Secretary, half dollar coins minted after December 31, 1996, and before July 31, 1998, may bear the same design as the commemorative coins minted under title I of the Thomas Alva Edison Sesquicentennial Commemorative Coin Act, as established under section 103 of that Act.