SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Health Care Infrastructure Investment Act of 2000''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Moratorium on delayed payments under contracts that provide for the disbursement of funds.
Establishment of the Health Care Infrastructure Commission.
Study and final recommendations; timetable for implementation of advanced informational infrastructure.
Application of advanced informational infrastructure to the FEHBP.
MORATORIUM ON DELAYED PAYMENTS UNDER CONTRACTS THAT PROVIDE FOR THE DISBURSEMENT OF FUNDS.
Moratorium.--Section 1842(c)(3) (42 United States Code 1395u(c)(3)) is repealed.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
ESTABLISHMENT OF THE HEALTH CARE INFRASTRUCTURE COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established within the Department of Health and Human Services a Health Care Infrastructure Commission (in this section referred to as the ``Commission'') to coordinate the expertise and programs within and among departments and agencies of the Federal Government for the purposes of designing and implementing an advanced informational infrastructure for the administration of Federal health benefits programs.
Duties.--The Commission shall-- (1) establish an advanced informational infrastructure for the administration of Federal health benefits programs which consists of an immediate claim, administration, payment resolution, and data collection system (in this section referred to as the ``system'') that is initially for use by carriers to process claims submitted by providers and suppliers under part B of the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395j et sequentes) after conducting the study under section 4(a)(1); (2) implement such system in accordance with the final recommendations published under subsection (a)(2) of section 4 and the timetable set forth under subsection (b) of such section; and (3) carry out such other matters as the Secretary of Health and Human Services (in this section referred to as the ``Secretary''), in consultation with the other members of the Commission, may prescribe.
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members as follows: (A) The Secretary, who shall be the chairperson of the Commission.
One shall be appointed from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration by the Administrator.
One shall be appointed from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency by the Director.
One shall be appointed from the National Science Foundation by the Director.
One shall be appointed from the Office of Science and Technology Policy by the Director.
One shall be appointed from the Department of Veterans Affairs by the Secretary.
One shall be appointed from the Office of Management and Budget by the Director.
Requirements.--Each of the members appointed under subparagraphs (B) through (G) of paragraph (1) shall-- (A) have been appointed as an officer or employee of the agency by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate; and (B) be an expert in advanced information technology.
Deadline for initial appointment.--The members of the Commission shall be appointed by not later than 3 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Meetings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall meet at the call of the chairperson, except that it shall meet-- (A) not less than 4 times each year; or (B) on the written request of a majority of its members.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number of members may hold hearings.
Compensation.--Each member of the Commission shall serve without compensation in addition to that received for the services of such member as an officer or employee of the United States.
Staff.-- (1) in general.--The chairperson of the Commission may, without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Compensation.--The chairperson of the Commission may fix the compensation of the executive director and other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for the executive director and other personnel may not exceed the rate payable for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Detail of government employees.--Any Federal Government employee may be detailed to the Commission without reimbursement, and such detail shall be without interruption or loss of civil service status or privilege.
Procurement of Temporary and Intermittent Services.--The chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at rates for individuals which do not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the date on which the system is fully implemented under section 4(b)(3).
STUDY AND FINAL RECOMMENDATIONS; TIMETABLE FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF ADVANCED INFORMATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE.
Study and Final Recommendations.-- (1) Study.--The Commission shall conduct a study during the 3-year period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act on the design and construction of an immediate claim, administration, payment resolution, and data collection system (in this section referred to as the ``system'') that-- (A) immediately advises each provider and supplier of coverage determinations; (B) immediately notifies each provider or supplier of any incomplete or invalid claim, including-- (i) the identification of any missing information; (ii) the identification of any coding errors; and (iii) information detailing how the provider or supplier may develop a claim under such system; (C) allows for proper completion and resubmission of each claim identified as incomplete or invalid under subparagraph (B); (D) allows for immediate automatic processing of clean claims (as defined in section 1842(c)(2)(B)(i) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395u(c)(2)(B)(i)) so that a provider or supplier may provide a written explanation of medical benefits, including an explanation of costs and coverage to any beneficiary under part B of the medicare program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395j et sequentes) at the point of care; and (E) allows for electronic payment of claims to each provider and supplier, including payment through electronic funds transfer, for each claim for which payment is not made on a periodic interim payment basis under such part.
Final recommendations.-- (A) Publication.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the chairperson of the Commission shall publish in the Federal Register final recommendations that reflect input from each interested party, including providers and suppliers, insurance companies, and health benefits management concerns using a process similar to the process used for developing standards under section 1172(c) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1320d-1(c)).
Considerations.--In developing the final recommendations to be published under subparagraph (A), the Commission shall-- (i) make every effort to design system specifications that are flexible, scalable, and performance-based; and (ii) ensure that strict security measures-- (I) guard system integrity; (II) protect the privacy of patients and the confidentiality of personally identifiable health insurance data used or maintained under the system; and (III) apply to any network service provider used in connection with the system.
Timetable.--The timetable set forth under this subsection is as follows: (1) Initial implementation.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the system shall support-- (A) 50 percent of queries regarding coverage determinations; (B) 30 percent of determinations regarding incomplete or invalid claims; and (C) immediate processing at the point of care of 40 percent of clean claims submitted by providers and suppliers under part B of the medicare program.
Intermediate implementation.--Not later than 7 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the system shall support-- (A) 70 percent of queries regarding coverage determinations; (B) 50 percent of determinations regarding incomplete or invalid claims; and (C) immediate processing at the point of care of 60 percent of clean claims submitted by providers and suppliers under part B of the medicare program.
Full implementation.--Not later than 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the system shall support-- (A) 90 percent of queries regarding coverage determinations; (B) 60 percent of determinations regarding incomplete or invalid claims; and (C) immediate processing at the point of care of 40 percent of the total number of claims submitted by providers and suppliers under part B of the medicare program.
APPLICATION OF ADVANCED INFORMATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE TO THE FEHBP.
In General.--The Office of Personnel Management (in this section referred to as the ``Office'') shall-- (1) adapt the immediate claim, administration, payment resolution, and data collection system established under section 3 (in this section referred to as the ``system'') for use under the Federal employees health benefits program under chapter 89 of title 5, United States Code; and (2) require that carriers (as defined in section 8901(7) of such Code) participating in such program use the system to satisfy certain minimum requirements for claim submission, processing, and payment in accordance with the timetable set forth in subsection (b).
Timetable.--The timetable set forth in this subsection is as follows: (1) Initial implementation.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Office shall require that carriers use the system to process not less than-- (A) 50 percent of queries regarding coverage determinations; (B) 30 percent of determinations of incomplete or invalid claims; and (C) immediate processing at the point of care of 10 percent of the total number of claims.
Intermediate implementation.--Not later than 7 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Office shall require that carriers use the system to support not less than-- (A) 70 percent of queries regarding coverage determinations; (B) 50 percent of determinations regarding incomplete or invalid claims; and (C) immediate processing at the point of care of 20 percent of the total number of claims.
Full implementation.--Not later than 10 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Office shall require that carriers use the system to support not less than-- (A) 90 percent of queries regarding coverage determinations; (B) 60 percent of determinations of incomplete or invalid claims; and (C) immediate processing of 35 percent of the total number of claims.
In General.--There are appropriated to the Health Care Infrastructure Commission established under section 3, out of any funds in the Treasury that are not otherwise appropriated, such sums as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act.
Availability.--Any sums appropriated under subsection (a) shall remain available until the termination of the Health Care Infrastructure Commission under section 3(h).