If, after a formal complaint is filed under section 8, the employee and the head of the employing office resolve the issues involved, the employee may withdraw the complaint or the parties may enter into a written agreement, subject to the approval of the Board of Directors.
COLLECTION AND PRESERVATION OF DOCUMENTS.
Beginning on the date a respondent receives a complaint under section 8 and ending on the date final action has been taken on the complaint, the respondent shall collect and preserve all documents and other information relevant to such complaint.
Any intimidation of, or reprisal against, any employee by any Member, officer, or employee of the House of Representatives or the Senate, or by the Architect of the Capitol, or anyone employed by the Architect of the Capitol, as the case may be, because of the exercise of a right under this Act or because of appearance as a witness in a case under this Act constitutes an unlawful employment practice, which may be remedied in the same manner under this Act as is a violation of a law made applicable to Congress under section 2(a) or 4(b).
Counseling.--All counseling shall be strictly confidential except that the Office and the employee may agree to notify the head of the employing office of the allegations.
Mediation.--All mediation shall be strictly confidential.
Hearings.--Except as provided in subsection (d), the hearings, deliberations, and decisions of the hearing board shall be confidential.
Release of Records for Review.--The records and decisions of hearing boards may be made public if required for the purpose of review under section 9 or 10.
TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
Laws Referred to in Section 2(a).-- (1) Fair labor standards act of 1938.-- (A) Definition.--Section 3(e)(2)(A)(iii) of the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 203(e)(2)(A)(iii)) is amended to read as follows: ``(iii) in the Congress or in any unit of the judicial branch of the Government which has positions in the competitive service,''.
Coverage.--Section 8 of the Fair Labor Standards Amendments of 1989 is repealed.
Title vii of the civil rights act of 1964.-- (A) Civil rights act of 1991.--Section 117 and title III of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 (2 United States Code 60l, 120l et sequentes) are repealed.
Equal employment opportunity.--Section 717(a) of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e-16(a)) is amended by striking out ``in those units of the legislative and judicial branches of the Federal Government having positions in the competitive service'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``in all units of the Congress and in those units of the judicial branch of the Federal Government having positions in the competitive service''.
Americans with disabilities act of 1990.--Section 509 of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12209) is repealed and section 101 of such Act (42 United States Code 12111) is amended-- (A) in paragraph (5)(B), by striking out ``the United States'' the first time it appears and inserting in lieu thereof ``the United States (except as provided in paragraph (11))'', and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(11) The Congress shall be deemed an employer engaged in an industry affecting commerce.''.
Age discrimination in employment act of 1967.--Section 11(b) of the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 630(b)) is amended (A) by striking out ``and'' before ``(2)'', (B) by inserting before ``but'' the following: ``and (3) the Congress'', and (C) by striking out ``the United States, or'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``the executive and judicial branch of the United States, or''.
Family and medical leave act of 1993.--Title V of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (2 United States Code 60m, 60n) is repealed.
Laws Referred to in Section 2(b).-- (1) Occupational safety and health.-- (A) Definition of employer.--Section 3(5) of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 652(5)) is amended by striking out ``, but does not include the United States or'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``and includes the Congress (to the extent authorized by a regulation of the Office of Compliance established under section 4(c) of the Congressional Accountability Act) but does not include executive or judicial branch of the Federal Government or''.
Definition of employee.--Section 3(6) of such Act (29 United States Code 652(6)) is amended by inserting before the period a comma and the following: ``and, to the extent authorized by a regulation of the Office of Compliance established under section 4(c) of the Congressional Accountability Act, the employees of the Congress shall be deemed to be employed in a business affecting commerce for the purpose of this Act''.
Freedom of information.--Section 552(f) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``or'' before ``any independent'' and by inserting before the period a comma and the following: ``or the Congress (to the extent authorized by a regulation of the Office of Compliance established under section 4(c) of the Congressional Accountability Act)''.
Privacy.--Section 552a(a)(1) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking out ``552(e)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``552(f)''.
Age discrimination.--Section 309(3) of the Age Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 United States Code 6107) is amended by inserting after ``means'' the following: ``the Congress (to the extent authorized by a regulation of the Office of Compliance established under section 4(c) of the Congressional Accountability Act) and''.
Rule of the House of Representatives.--Rule LI of the House of Representatives is repealed.
POLITICAL AFFILIATION AND PLACE OF RESIDENCE.
In General.--It shall not be a violation of a law made applicable to Congress under section 4 to consider the-- (1) party affiliation, (2) domicile, or (3) political compatibility with the employing office, of an employee with respect to employment decisions.
Definition.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term ``employee'' means-- (1) an employee on the staff of the House of Representatives or Senate leadership; (2) an employee on the staff of a committee or subcommittee; (3) an employee on the staff of a Member of the House of Representatives or Senate; (4) an officer or employee of the House of Representatives or Senate elected by the House of Representatives or Senate or appointed by a Member of the House of Representatives or Senate, other than those described in paragraphs (1) through (3); or (5) an applicant for a position that is to be occupied by an individual described in paragraphs (1) through (4).
No Congressional employee may commence a judicial proceeding to redress practices prohibited under a law made applicable to Congress under section 2(a) or 4(b) except as provided in this Act.
HR 2846 IH----2 HR 2846 IH----3