This Act may be cited as the ``Applied Engineering and Technology Center Investment Act of 1998''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) fully accredited bachelor's degree academic programs in plastics, electronic, mechanical, manufacturing, construction, wood, and automotive engineering technology, and in technology management, are a significant asset for the State and region in which they are located, and for the Nation; (2) graduates of academic programs described in paragraph (1) are experiencing a nearly 100 percent placement rate, entering the work force making significant contributions to the productivity, efficiency, and competitiveness of their particular companies; (3) the future preparation of America's workers, industrial managers, and technicians depends on the use of modern, state- of-the-art instructional equipment that is very expensive and has a rather short relevant life span; and (4) it is sound educational policy to invest Federal dollars in programs and projects that directly benefit and enhance the preparation of tomorrow's leaders in technology and related industries which make the United States more competitive in world markets.
The Director of the National Science Foundation (in this Act referred to as the ``Director'') may make grants to organizations that provide postsecondary education in applied engineering and technology for equipment and capital improvements needed to ensure that such education is provided using state-of-the-art instructional equipment and facilities.
Amounts made available through such grants may be used in support of applied engineering and technology programs for any of the following purposes: (1) Purchase, rental, or lease of scientific or laboratory equipment, including computer hardware and software, for educational purposes, including instructional and research purposes.
Construction, maintenance, renovation, and improvement in classroom, library, laboratory, and other instructional facilities.
Acquisition of library books, periodicals, microfilm, data bases, software, and other educational materials.
Tutoring, counseling, and student service programs designed to improve academic success.
Funds and administrative management, and acquisition of equipment for use in strengthening funds management.
Joint use of facilities, such as laboratories and libraries.
Establishing or improving a development office to strengthen or improve contributions from alumni and the private sector.
Establishing community outreach programs which will encourage elementary and secondary students to develop the academic skills and the interest to pursue postsecondary applied engineering and technology education.
Other activities proposed in the application submitted pursuant to section 4 that-- (A) contribute to carrying out the purposes of this Act; and (B) are approved by the Director as part of the review and acceptance of such application.
Contents.-- (1) In general.--No organization shall receive any grant under section 3 unless that organization submits an application to the Director at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information, as the Director may reasonably require.
Each such application shall-- (A) provide that the payments under this Act will be used for the purposes set forth in section 3; and (B) provide for making an annual report to the Director and for conducting, except as provided in paragraph (2), a financial and compliance audit of the organization, with regard to any funds obtained by it under this Act, at least once every 2 years and covering the period since the most recent audit, to be conducted by a qualified, independent organization or person in accordance with standards established by the Comptroller General for the audit of governmental organizations, programs, and functions, and as prescribed in regulations of the Director, the results of which shall be submitted to the Director.
Audit exception.--An organization which is audited under chapter 75 of title 31, United States Code, shall not be required to perform an audit under paragraph (1)(B) of this subsection for the period covered by such chapter 75 audit.
Approval.--The Director shall approve any application which meets the requirements of subsection (a) and shall not disapprove any application submitted under this Act, or any modification thereof, without first affording the applicant reasonable notice and opportunity for a hearing.
Goals for Financial Management and Academic Programs.--Any application for a grant under this Act shall describe measurable goals for the organization's financial management and applied engineering and technology academic programs and include a plan of how the applicant intends to achieve those goals.