Establishment.--Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Open Container Limitations ``(a) Withholding of Funds for Noncompliance.-- ``(1) General rule.--Beginning with fiscal year 1997, and for each fiscal year thereafter, the Secretary shall withhold 5 percent of the amount required to be apportioned to a State under paragraphs (1), (2), (5), and (6) of section 104(b) for the fiscal year, if, for any period during the immediately preceding fiscal year, the possession of any open alcoholic beverage container, or the consumption of any alcoholic beverage, in the passenger area of any motor vehicle located on a public highway, or the right-of-way of a public highway, in the State is lawful.
Limitation of application to charter buses.--If a State has in effect a law that makes the possession of any open alcoholic beverage container unlawful in the passenger area by the driver (but not by a passenger) of a motor vehicle designed to transport more than 10 passengers (including the driver) while being used to provide charter transportation of passengers, the State shall be deemed in compliance with paragraph (1) with respect to the motor vehicle for each fiscal year during which the law is in effect.
Period of Availability; Effect of Compliance and Noncompliance.-- ``(1) Funds withheld on or before september 30, 1997.-- ``(A) Period of availability.--Any funds withheld under this section from apportionment to any State on or before September 30, 1997, shall remain available for apportionment to the State as follows: ``(i) If, but for this section, the funds would otherwise have been apportioned under section 104(b)(5)(A), the funds shall remain available until the end of the fiscal year for which the funds are made available.
If, but for this section, the funds would otherwise have been apportioned under section 104(b)(5)(B), the funds shall remain available until the end of the second fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the funds are made available.
If, but for this section, the funds would have been apportioned under paragraph (1), (2), or (6) of section 104(b), the funds shall remain available until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the funds are made available.
Funds withheld after september 30, 1997.--No funds withheld under this section from apportionment to a State after September 30, 1997, shall be available for apportionment to the State.
Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.-- If, before the last day of the period for which funds withheld under this section from apportionment are to remain available for apportionment to a State under paragraph (1), the State brings into effect a law that is in compliance with subsection (a), on the day following the effective date of the law, the Secretary shall apportion to the State the withheld funds remaining available for apportionment to the State pursuant to paragraph (1).
Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.-- ``(A) In general.--Any funds apportioned pursuant to paragraph (2) shall remain available for expenditure as follows: ``(i) Funds apportioned under section 104(b)(5)(A) shall remain available until the end of the fiscal year succeeding the fiscal year for which the funds are apportioned.
Funds apportioned under paragraph (1), (2), (5)(B), or (6) of section 104(b) shall remain available until the end of the third fiscal year succeeding the fiscal year for which the funds are apportioned.
Unobligated sums.--Sums that are not obligated on the termination of the period referred to in subparagraph (A) shall-- ``(i) lapse; or ``(ii) in the case of funds apportioned under section 104(b)(5), lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in accordance with section 118(b).
Effect of noncompliance.--If, on the termination of the period for which funds withheld under this section from apportionment are available for apportionment to a State under paragraph (1), the State does not have in effect a State law that is in compliance with subsection (a)-- ``(A) the funds shall lapse; or ``(B) in the case of funds withheld from apportionment under section 104(b)(5), the funds shall lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in accordance with section 118(b).
Definitions.--As used in this section: ``(1) Alcoholic beverage.--The term `alcoholic beverage' has the meaning provided the term in section 158(c).
Motor vehicle.--The term `motor vehicle' has the meaning provided the term in section 154(b).
Open alcoholic beverage container.--The term `open alcoholic beverage container' has the meaning provided the term in section 410.
Passenger area.--The term `passenger area' shall have the meaning provided by the Secretary by regulation.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``161.