This Act may be cited as the ``National Highway System Designation Act of 1995''.
NATIONAL HIGHWAY SYSTEM DESIGNATION.
Section 103 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by inserting after subsection (b) the following: ``(c) National Highway System Designation.-- ``(1) Designation.--The most recent National Highway System (as of the date of enactment of this Act) as submitted by the Secretary of Transportation pursuant to this section is designated as the National Highway System.
Modifications.-- ``(A) In general.--At the request of a State, the Secretary may-- ``(i) add a new route segment to the National Highway System; or ``(ii) delete a route segment in existence on the date of the request; if the total mileage of the National Highway System (including any route segment proposed to be added under this subparagraph) does not exceed 168,000 miles (270,480 kilometers).
Procedures for changes requested by states.-- Each State that makes a request for a change in the National Highway System pursuant to subparagraph (A) shall establish that each change in a route segment referred to in the subparagraph has been identified by the State, in cooperation with local officials, pursuant to applicable transportation planning activities for metropolitan areas carried out under section 134 of this title and statewide planning processes carried out under section 135 of this title.
Approval by the secretary.--The Secretary may approve a request made by a State for a change in the National Highway System pursuant to paragraph (2) if the Secretary determines that the change-- ``(A) meets the criteria established for the National Highway System under this title; and ``(B) enhances the national transportation characteristics of the National Highway System.''.
This title may be cited as the ``Financing Improvement Act of 1995''.
LIMITATION ON ADVANCE CONSTRUCTION.
Section 115(d) of title 23, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(d) Limitation on Advanced Funding.--Secretary may not approve an application under this section unless the project is included in the State's transportation improvement program in accordance with section 135 of this title.''.
PAYMENT TO STATES FOR CONSTRUCTION, FLEXIBLE TAPERED SHARE.
State Matching Share.--Section 120 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding the following new subsection: ``(j) Use of Other Federal Funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this title, a State may use Federal funds from sources other than this title to meet the non-Federal share of a project under this title.''.
Payments.--Section 121(a) of title 23, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(a) The Secretary may in his discretion, from time to time, make payments to a State for costs of construction incurred by the State on a project.
The Federal share may vary during the life of a project, but at no time shall such share exceed the Federal share payable under sections 106(c), 120, and 130 of this title.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 121(d) of such title is amended as follows: ``(d) In making final payment pursuant to this section, the Secretary shall be bound by the limitations with respect to the permissible amounts of such payment contained in sections 106(c), 120, and 130 of this title.''.
TOLL ROADS, BRIDGES, TUNNELS, NON-TOLL ROADS THAT HAVE A DEDICATED REVENUE SOURCE, AND FERRIES.
Section 129 of title 23, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by revising the title to read as follows: ``Sec.
Toll roads, bridges, tunnels, non-toll roads that have a dedicated revenue source, and ferries''; and (2) by revising paragraph 129(a)(7) to read as follows: ``(7) Loans.-- ``(A) In general.--A State may loan an amount equal to all or part of the Federal share of a toll project or a non-toll project that has a dedicated revenue source, specifically dedicated to such project or projects under this section, to a public entity constructing or proposing to construct a toll facility or non-toll facility with a dedicated revenue source.
Dedicated revenue sources for non-toll facilities include: excise taxes, sales taxes, motor vehicle use fees, tax on real property, tax increment financing, or such other dedicated revenue source as the Secretary deems appropriate.
Compliance with federal laws.--As a condition of receiving a loan under this paragraph, the public or private entity that receives the loan shall ensure that the qualifying project complies with the requirements of this title and any other applicable Federal law, including any applicable provision of Federal environmental laws.
Subordination of debt.--The amount of any loan received for a qualifying project under this paragraph may be subordinated to any other debt financing for the project.
Obligation of funds loaned.--Funds loaned pursuant to this paragraph may be obligated for qualifying projects.
Repayment.--The repayment of a loan made pursuant to this paragraph shall commence not later than 5 years after the facility that is the subject of the loan is open to traffic.
Term of loan.--The term of a loan to a public or private entity shall not exceed 30 years from the time the loan was obligated.
Interest.--A loan made pursuant to this paragraph shall bear interest at or below market interest rates, as determined by the State to make the qualifying project that is the subject of the loan feasible.
Reuse of funds.--Amounts repaid to a State from a loan made under this paragraph may be obligated-- ``(i) for any purpose for which the loan funds were available under title 23, United States Code, or Public Law 102-240; and ``(ii) for the purchase of insurance or for use as a capital reserve for other forms of credit enhancement for project debt in order to improve credit market access or to lower interest rates.
Guidelines.--The Secretary shall establish procedures and guidelines for making loans pursuant to this paragraph.''.
Section 302 of title 23, United States Code is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
State highway department ``Any State desiring to avail itself of the provisions of this title shall have a State highway department which shall have adequate powers, and shall be suitably equipped and organized to discharge, to the satisfaction of the Secretary, the duties required by this title.
This section does not restrict the eligibility of costs that may be claimed by a State nor limit a State's authority to engage the services of private professional firms.''.
DONATION OF PRIVATE FUNDS, ASSETS, AND PUBLICLY OWNED RIGHT- OF-WAY FOR FEDERAL-AID PROJECTS.
Section 323 of title 23, United States Code, relating to donations, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (c) as subsection (d); (2) by inserting after subsection (b) the following new subsection: ``(c) Credit for Donation of Private Funds, Assets, and Publicly Owned Right-of-Way.--Nothing in this title, or in any other provision of law should be construed to prevent a person from donating private funds or assets, or a State, county, city, or other political subdivision of a State from donating publicly owned right-of-way, in connection with a specific project constructed under this title.
The State matching share for a project with respect to which Federal assistance is provided may be credited by the amount of the donated funds or the fair market value of publicly owned right-of-way incorporated into the project by the State highway agency under this title.
''; and (3) by amending the first sentence of subsection (d), as so redesignated, to read as follows: ``(d) Procedures.--A gift or donation in accordance with the above subsections may be made at any time during the development of a project.''.
This title may be cited as the ``State Infrastructure Bank Financing Improvement Act of 1995''.
STATE INFRASTRUCTURE BANKS New Program.--Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new section: ``Sec.
State Infrastructure Banks ``(a) In General.--Subject to the requirements of this section, a State may establish a State Infrastructure Bank for making loans and providing other assistance to public or private entities constructing or proposing to construct or initiate transportation projects, programs, or activities that are eligible to receive assistance under this title or under Public Law 102-240, (hereafter also referred to in this section as a `qualifying project').
Deposits.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, a State may deposit up to 15 percent of its apportionments under section 104(b) and 144 for each respective apportionment category under those sections, except for Interstate construction, and up to 15 percent of its allocation under section 157 of this title, after such apportionment or allocation for the fiscal year, into a State Infrastructure Bank, not later than 120 days after the date of apportionment or allocation of such funds and distribution of obligation limitation to the States by the Secretary.
The deposit into a State Infrastructure Bank of any apportionment under section 104(b)(3) of this title shall be derived from the State's statewide flexible surface transportation program apportionment, unless the appropriate metropolitan planning organization agrees that urban or rural funds may be used.
Federal disbursements of capital reserves shall be at a rate consistent with the Federal-aid highway program.
A State may assign, transfer, or loan to another State's Infrastructure Bank, or to multi-State compact or entity, that establishes a State Infrastructure Bank, not more than the amount which a State is otherwise entitled to deposit into its State Infrastructure Bank.
Consultation With MPOs.--A State shall consult with metropolitan planning organizations with regard to the programming of any State Infrastructure Bank projects.
Applicability of Cash Management Requirements.--For funds used as a capital reserve, sections 3335 and 6503 of title 31, United States Code, shall not apply to this section.
Matching Requirements.--A State is required to deposit into the transportation infrastructure bank, from non-Federal or Federal sources other than title 23, United States Code, an amount equal to the proportional non-Federal share that a State would otherwise pay on the basis of section 120(b) of this title.
Investment Income.--Temporary investment income generated by the funds deposited into a transportation infrastructure bank shall be-- ``(1) credited to the transportation infrastructure bank; ``(2) available for use in providing loans and other assistance to qualifying projects, programs, or activities from the transportation infrastructure bank; and ``(3) invested in United States Treasury securities, bank deposits, or such other financing instruments as the Secretary may provide to earn interest to enhance the leveraging of qualifying transportation activities.
Treatment of Federal Deposits.--The deposit of Federal apportionments into a State Infrastructure Bank shall not be construed as a commitment, guarantee, or obligation on the part of the United States to any third party, nor shall any third party have any right against the United States for payment solely by virtue of the deposit.
Furthermore, any security or debt financing instrument issued by a State Infrastructure Bank shall expressly state that the security or instrument does not constitute a commitment, guarantee, or obligation of the United States.
Loans and Other Assistance.-- ``(1) General authority.--From amounts deposited into a transportation infrastructure bank established by a State or multi-State entity under this section, a State or multi-State entity may loan to a public or private entity, an amount equal to all or part of the cost of construction or capital cost of a qualifying transportation project eligible for funding under this section.
Subordination of debt.--The amount of any loan or other assistance received for a qualifying project under this paragraph may be subordinated to any other debt financing for the project.
Repayment.--The repayment of any loan from a State transportation infrastructure bank shall commence not later than 5 years after the facility has opened to traffic or the project, activity or facility has been completed.
Term of loan.--The term for repaying such loan shall not exceed 30 years from the date of obligation of the loan.
Interest.--Any loan from a State Infrastructure Bank shall bear interest as the State determines appropriate to make the qualifying project feasible.
Reuse of funds.--The repayment of a loan or other assistance to a State from any loan under this section may be credited to the transportation infrastructure bank or obligated for any purpose for which the loaned funds were available under this title.
Procedures and guidelines.--The Secretary shall establish procedures and guidelines for establishing, operating, and making loans from a State Infrastructure Bank.
Definition of other assistance.--For purposes of this section, the term `other assistance' includes any use of funds for the purpose of credit enhancements, use as a capital reserve for bond or debt instrument financing, bond or debt instrument financing issuance costs, bond or debt issuance financing insurance, subsidizing of interest rates, letters of credit, credit instruments, bond or debt financing instrument security, and other forms of debt financing that relate to the qualifying project.
Administrative costs.--For each fiscal year, a State may use an amount not to exceed two percent of the Federal funds deposited into a State Infrastructure Bank to provide for the reasonable costs of administering such fund.
Annual reports.--A State or multi-State entity that establishes a transportation infrastructure bank is required to make an annual report to the Secretary on its status no later than September 30 of each year.
Continuing federal deposits.--As a condition of receiving continuing Federal deposits into a transportation infrastructure bank, a State or multi-State entity must maintain an investment grade rating on its debt issuances or have a sufficient level of bond or debt financing instrument insurance to maintain the viability of the fund and must have filed its annual report with the Secretary.