AMENDMENTS TO THE CIVIL SERVICE RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
In General.--(1) Chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 8339 the following new section: ``Sec.
Survivor elections; deposit; offsets ``(a)(1) An individual who makes an election under section 8339(j)(3), (j)(5)(C), or (k)(2) shall deposit into the Fund an amount determined by the Office of Personnel Management (as nearly as may be administratively feasible) to reflect the amount by which the annuity of such individual would have been reduced if the election had been in effect since the date of retirement (or, if later, in the case of an election under section 8339(j)(5)(C), since the date the previous reduction in the annuity of such individual was terminated under section 8339(j)(5) (A) or (B)), plus interest.
Interest under paragraph (1) shall be computed at the rate of 6 percent a year.
(1) The Office shall by regulation provide for payment of any deposit or combination of deposits required under subsection (a) by a reduction in the annuity of the employee or Member.
The reduction shall, to the extent practicable, be designed such that the present value of the future reductions is actuarially equivalent to the present value of the deposit or combination of deposits required under subsection (a), except that the total reduction under this section may not exceed 25 percent of the annuity computed under subsections (a)-(i), (n), (p), and (q) of section 8339, adjusted under section 8340.
A reduction under this section-- ``(A) shall be effective as of the effective date of the election under section 8339(j)(3), (j)(5)(C), or (k)(2), as the case may be; ``(B) shall not be terminated on account of a change in marital status or for any other reason; and ``(C) shall be in addition to any reduction made under section 8339(j)(4) or (k)(1).
Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply with respect to an election under section 8339(j)(5)(C) or (k)(2) if-- ``(1) the employee or Member makes such election after having made an election under section 8339(k)(1); and ``(2) the election under section 8339(k)(1) becomes void under section 8339(j)(5)(C)(iv) or (k)(2)(B).
That the total amount withheld under this section from the annuity of an employee or Member, as of time of death or other annuity- terminating event, is less than the amount described in subsection (a) (including interest) shall not affect either the entitlement of such employee's or Member's survivor to receive the annuity elected for such survivor under section 8339(j)(3), (j)(5)(C), or (k)(2) (as the case may be) or the amount of such survivor annuity.''.
The table of sections for chapter 83 of title 5, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 8339 the following: ``8339a.
Survivor elections; deposit; offsets.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8339(j)(3) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking the second through fourth sentences and inserting the following: ``An election under this paragraph shall be made at the time of retirement or, if later, within 2 years after the date on which the marriage of the former spouse to the employee or Member is dissolved, and shall become effective the first day of the second month after the election is received by the Office.''.
Section 8339(j)(5)(C) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) by amending clause (ii) to read as follows: ``(ii) Such election and reduction shall become effective the first day of the second month after the election is received by the Office, but not less than 9 months after the date of the remarriage.
''; (B) by striking clauses (iii) and (vi); and (C) by redesignating clauses (iv) and (v) as clauses (iii) and (iv), respectively.
Section 8339(k)(2) of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (B)-- (i) by striking clause (ii); (ii) by striking ``(B)(i)'' and the first sentence thereafter and inserting ``(B) The election and reduction shall become effective the first day of the second month after the election is received by the Office, but not less than 9 months after the date of the marriage.
''; and (iii) by redesignating subclauses (I) and (II) (of former clause (i)) as clauses (i) and (ii), respectively; and (B) by striking subparagraphs (C) and (D).
Section 8334(h) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``and by section 8339(j)(5)(C) and the last sentence of section 8339(k)(2) of this title''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE FEDERAL EMPLOYEES' RETIREMENT SYSTEM.
In General.--Section 8418 of title 5, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)(1) by striking ``which is required to be made'' through ``Office'' and inserting ``shall deposit into the Fund an amount determined by the Office of Personnel Management''; and (2) by striking subsections (b) through (d) and inserting the following: ``(b)(1) The Office shall by regulation provide for payment of the deposit under subsection (a) by a reduction in the annuity of the employee or Member.
The reduction shall, to the extent practicable, be designed such that the present value of the future reductions is actuarially equivalent to the present value of the deposit or combination of deposits required under subsection (a), except that the total reduction in the annuity of the employee or Member to pay any such deposit or combination of deposits may not exceed 25 percent of the annuity computed under section 8415, or under section 8452 (including subsection (a)(2) of such section, if applicable), adjusted under section 8462.
A reduction under this section-- ``(A) shall become effective as of the effective date of the election under subsection (b) or (c) of section 8416 or section 8417(b), as the case may be; ``(B) shall not be terminated on account of a change in marital status or for any other reason; and ``(C) shall be in addition to any reduction under section 8419(a) or 8420.
Subsections (a) and (b) shall not apply with respect to an election under section 8416 or 8417(b) if-- ``(1) the employee or Member makes such election after having made an election under section 8420; and ``(2) the election under section 8420 becomes void under section 8416 (b)(3) or (c)(2).
That the total amount withheld under this section from the annuity of an employee or Member, as of time of death or other annuity- terminating event, is less than the amount described in subsection (a) (including interest) shall not affect either the entitlement of such employee's or Member's survivor to receive the annuity elected for such survivor under section 8416 (b) or (c) or section 8417 (as the case may be) or the amount of such survivor annuity.''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--(1) Section 8416(b)(2) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by striking ``be effective'' and inserting ``become effective''.
The first sentence of section 8416(c)(2) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``The election and reduction shall become effective the first day of the second month after the election is received by the Office, but not less than 9 months after the date of the marriage.''.
Section 8417(b)(2) of title 5, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(2) An election under this subsection-- ``(A) shall be made at the time of retirement or, if the marriage is dissolved after the date of retirement, within 2 years after the date on which the marriage of the former spouse to the employee or Member is dissolved; and ``(B) shall become effective the first day of the second month after the election is received by the Office.''.
In General.--The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the first day of the first month beginning at least 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, and shall apply to any amount which first becomes payable on or after that date.
Regulations.--In the case of a deposit (under any of the provisions of law amended by this Act) that has not been fully paid before the effective date of the amendments made by this Act, the Office of Personnel Management shall by regulation establish procedures under which reductions similar to those provided for under such amendments shall be applied with respect to the remaining portion of such deposit.