This Act may be cited as the ``Entrepreneurship Promotion Act of 1994''.
ROLLOVER OF GAIN FROM SALE OF ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS STOCK INTO OTHER ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS STOCK.
In General.--Part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to common nontaxable exchanges) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ROLLOVER OF GAIN FROM SALE OF ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS STOCK INTO OTHER ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS STOCK.
Nonrecognition of Gain.--In the case of the sale of any eligible small business stock with respect to which the taxpayer elects the application of this section, gain from such sale shall be recognized only to the extent that the amount realized on such sale exceeds-- ``(1) the cost of any other eligible small business stock purchased (as defined by section 1043(b)(4)) by the taxpayer during the 18-month period beginning on the date of such sale, reduced by ``(2) any portion of such cost previously taken into account under this section.
This section shall not apply to any gain which is treated as ordinary income for purposes of this subtitle.
Eligible Small Business Stock.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the term `eligible small business stock' means any stock in a C corporation if-- ``(A) as of the date of issuance, such corporation is an eligible small business, and ``(B) such stock is acquired by the taxpayer at its original issue (directly or through an underwriter) in exchange for money or other property (not including stock).
Active business requirement.--Subsection (a) shall not apply to the sale of any eligible small business stock unless, during substantially all of the taxpayer's holding period for such stock, the corporation meets the active business requirements of subsection (d) and such corporation is a C corporation.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a rule similar to the rule of section 1202(c)(2)(B) shall apply.
Special rule for stock issued by s corporations.--In the case of stock which, as of the date of the sale to which subsection (a) applies, is stock of an eligible small business but which, as of the date of issuance, was not stock of an eligible small business solely by reason of the fact that the corporation was an S corporation-- ``(A) such stock shall be treated as meeting the requirement of paragraph (1)(A), but ``(B) subsection (a) shall not apply to so much of the gain which is attributable to the period before such stock became stock of an eligible small business.
Certain purchases by corporation of its own stock.-- Rules similar to the rules of section 1202(c)(3) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Eligible Small Business.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible small business' means any domestic corporation which is a C corporation if the aggregate annual gross receipts of such corporation (or any predecessor thereof) for all taxable years ending before the date of issuance did not exceed $20,000,000.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2) and (3) of section 448(c) shall apply.
Active Business Requirement.--For purposes of subsection (b)(2), the requirements of this subsection are met by a corporation for any period if during such period-- ``(1) at least 80 percent (by value) of the assets of such corporation are used by such corporation in the active conduct of 1 or more trades or businesses, and ``(2) such corporation is an eligible corporation (as defined in section 1202(e)(4)).
For purposes of the preceding sentence, a rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (2), (5), (6), (7) and (8) of section 1202(e) shall apply.
Basis Adjustments.--If gain from any sale is not recognized by reason of subsection (a), such gain shall be applied to reduce (in the order acquired) the basis for determining gain or loss of any eligible small business stock purchased by the taxpayer during the 18- month period described in subsection (a).
This subsection shall not apply for purposes of section 1202.
Statute of Limitations.--If any gain is realized by the taxpayer on any sale to which an election under this section applies, then-- ``(1) the statutory period for the assessment of any deficiency with respect to such gain shall not expire before the expiration of 3 years from the date the Secretary is notified by the taxpayer (in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe) of-- ``(A) the taxpayer's cost of purchasing any eligible small business stock, ``(B) the taxpayer's intention not to purchase such stock within the reinvestment period, or ``(C) a failure to make such purchase within the reinvestment period, and ``(2) such deficiency may be assessed before the expiration of such 3-year period notwithstanding the provisions of any law or rule of law which would otherwise prevent such assessment.''
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (24) of section 1016(a) of such Code is amended-- (1) by striking ``or 1044'' and inserting ``, 1044, or 1045'', and (2) by striking ``or 1044(d)'' and inserting ``, 1044(d), or 1045(e)''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Rollover of gain from sale of eligible small business stock into other eligible small business stock.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to sales on and after the date of the enactment of this Act, in taxable years ending on and after such date.