This Act may be cited as the ``Splash and Dash Correction Act of 2008''.
STATEMENT OF CONSTITUTIONAL AUTHORITY.
The Congress enacts this Act pursuant to clause 1 of section 8 of Article I of the United States Constitution and Amendment XVI of the United States Constitution.
CLARIFICATION OF ELIGIBILITY FOR CERTAIN FUELS CREDITS FOR FUEL WITH INSUFFICIENT NEXUS TO THE UNITED STATES.
In General.-- (1) Alcohol credit.--Subsection (d) of section 40 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Limitation to alcohol with connection to the united states.-- ``(A) Alcohol credit.--No alcohol credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any alcohol unless such alcohol is produced in the United States for consumption in the United States or entered into the United States for consumption in the United States.
Alcohol mixture credit.--No alcohol mixture credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any mixture unless such mixture is produced in the United States for consumption in the United States or entered into the United States for consumption in the United States.
No credits for alcohol destined for export.-- No credit (other than the small ethanol producer credit) shall be determined under this section with respect to any mixture or alcohol if such mixture or alcohol is destined for export from the United States (as determined by the Secretary).''.
Biodiesel credit.--Subsection (d) of section 40A of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(5) Limitation to biodiesel with connection to the united states.-- ``(A) Biodiesel credit.--No biodiesel credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any biodiesel unless such biodiesel is produced in the United States for consumption in the United States or is entered into the United States for consumption in the United States.
Biodiesel mixture credit.--No biodiesel mixture credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any mixture unless such mixture is produced in the United States for consumption in the United States or is entered into the United States for consumption in the United States.
No credits for biodiesel destined for export.--No credit (other than the small agri-biodiesel producer credit) shall be determined under this section with respect to any mixture or biodiesel if such mixture or biodiesel is destined for export from the United States (as determined by the Secretary).''.
Excise tax credits.--Section 6426 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Limitation to Fuels With Connection to the United States.-- ``(1) Mixture credits.--No credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any mixture unless such mixture is produced in the United States for consumption in the United States or is entered into the United States for consumption in the United States.
Alternative fuel credit.--No alternative fuel credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any alternative fuel unless such alternative fuel is produced in the United States for consumption in the United States or is entered into the United States for consumption in the United States.
No credits for fuels destined for export.--No credit shall be determined under this section with respect to any mixture or alternative fuel if such mixture or alternative fuel is destined for export from the United States (as determined by the Secretary).''.
Payments.--Subsection (e) of section 6427 of such Code is amended by redesignating paragraph (5) as paragraph (6) and by inserting after paragraph (4) the following new paragraph: ``(5) Limitation to fuels with connection to the united states.--No amount shall be payable under paragraph (1) or (2) with respect to any mixture or alternative fuel if credit is not allowed with respect to such mixture or alternative fuel by reason of section 6426(h).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to fuel sold or used after the date of the enactment of this Act.