This Act may be cited as the ``Assistive Technology Information Act of 1998''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Assistive technology devices and services enable individuals with disabilities to assume greater control over their lives and to contribute more fully to society.
Rapid advancements in assistive technology continue to provide important new tools to help individuals with disabilities to become more independent and participate in activities related to home, school, work, and community.
Although substantial progress has been made in both the development of new assistive technology devices and the transfer and adaptation of existing assistive technology, information relating to assistive technology devices is often difficult to find and inconsistent.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish a national public Internet site to provide to individuals with disabilities and the general public increased access to information on technology- related assistance and other related disability resources under title II of the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals With Disabilities Act of 1988 (29 United States Code 2231 et sequentes), including information on assistive technology devices and assistive technology services.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL PUBLIC INTERNET SITE FOR INCREASED ACCESS TO INFORMATION UNDER THE TECHNOLOGY-RELATED ASSISTANCE FOR INDIVIDUALS WITH DISABILITIES ACT OF 1988.
In General.--Title II of the Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals With Disabilities Act of 1988 (29 United States Code 2231 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating subtitle C as subtitle D; (2) by redesignating section 221 as section 231; and (3) by inserting after subtitle B the following: ``Subtitle C--Internet Site for Increased Access to Information on Technology-Related Assistance ``SEC.
ESTABLISHMENT OF INTERNET SITE.
In General.--Not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall enter into a contract with an institution of higher education described in subsection (b) to establish a national public Internet site for the purpose of providing to individuals with disabilities and the general public increased access to information on technology-related assistance and other related disability resources under this Act, including information on assistive technology devices and assistive technology services.
Institution of Higher Education.--An institution of higher education described in this subsection is an institution of higher education that has a curriculum focus in science and engineering at the undergraduate and graduate education levels and that has an existing multidisciplinary research center and with demonstrated expertise in-- ``(1) assistive technology and `intelligent agent' interactive information dissemination systems; ``(2) managing libraries of assistive technologies and disability resources; ``(3) delivering education, information, and referral services to individuals with disabilities, including technology-based curriculum development for adults with low- level reading skills; ``(4) developing cooperative partnerships with the private sector, particularly with private sector computer software and hardware and Internet services entities; and ``(5) advanced Internet site development and design.
Features of Internet Site.--The national public Internet site described in subsection (a) shall contain the following features: ``(1) Any member of the public may obtain information posted on the site at any time.
The site shall be constructed with an innovative automated `intelligent agent' that is a diagnostic tool for assisting users in problem definition and the selection of appropriate assistive technology devices and assistive technology services resources.
(A) The site shall include access to a comprehensive working library on assistive technology for all environments, including the home, workplace, transportation, and other environments.
The site shall include resources for the largest number of disabilities, including resources relating to low- level reading skills.
To the extent feasible, relevant private sector resources and information shall be linked to the site under agreements developed between the university and cooperating private sector entities.
``The Secretary may not enter into a contract under section 221 with an institution of higher education unless the institution submits to the Secretary an application in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this subtitle-- ``(1) $1,042,000 for fiscal year 1999; ``(2) $1,023,000 for fiscal year 2000; ``(3) $998,000 for fiscal year 2001; ``(4) $543,000 for fiscal year 2002; and ``(5) $565,000 for fiscal year 2003.
Availability.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a) are authorized to remain available until expended.
``As used in this subtitle, the term `Internet' means the international computer network of both Federal and non-Federal interoperable packet-switched data networks.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 231 of such Act, as redesignated by subsection (a)(2), is amended by inserting ``(except subtitle C)'' after ``to carry out this title''.