This Act may be cited as the ``Lost Creek Land Exchange Act of 1996''.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Agriculture (referred to in this Act as the ``Secretary'') shall acquire by exchange certain land and interests in land owned by R-Y Timber, Inc., its successors and assigns or affiliates (referred to in this Act as ``R-Y''), located in the Lost Creek area and other areas of the Deerlodge National Forest, Montana.
Offer and Acceptance of Land.-- (1) Non-federal land.--If R-Y offers fee title that is acceptable to the United States to approximately 17,567 acres of land owned by R-Y and available for exchange, the Secretary shall accept a warranty deed to the land.
Federal land.-- (A) Conveyance.--On acceptance by the Secretary of title to R-Y's land under paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Interior shall convey to R-Y, subject to reservations and valid existing rights-- (i) by patent, fee title to approximately 3,605 acres in the Deerlodge National Forest; and (ii) by timber deed, the right to harvest approximately 46,628,000 board feet of timber on certain land in the Deerlodge National Forest, Helena National Forest, and Lewis & Clark National Forest.
Timber harvest provisions.-- (i) Practices.--Timber harvest practices used on the national forest land described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be conducted in accordance with Montana Forestry Best Management Practices, the Montana Streamside Zone Management Law (Mont.
77-5- 301 et sequentes), and all other applicable laws of the State of Montana.
Relation to planned sales.--The timber harvest volume described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be in addition to, and not treated in any way as an offset against, the present or future planned timber sale quantities for the Deerlodge National Forest, Helena National Forest, and Lewis & Clark National Forest.
Timber designations.-- (I) Contract.--To ensure the expeditious and efficient designation of the timber described in subparagraph (A)(ii), the Forest Service shall contract with a qualified private person agreed on by the Secretary and R-Y to perform the field work associated with the designations.
Minimum annual designations.-- Not less than 20 percent nor more than 30 percent of the timber described in subparagraph (A)(ii) shall be made available by the end of each fiscal year over a 5-year period beginning with the first fiscal year that begins after the date of enactment of this Act, and R-Y shall be allowed at least 5 years after the end of each fiscal year in which to complete the harvest of timber designated in that fiscal year.
Title.-- (1) Review of title.--Not later than 30 days after receipt of title documents from R-Y, the Secretary shall review the title for the non-Federal land described in subsection (b) and determine whether-- (A) the applicable title standards for Federal land acquisition have been satisfied or the quality of title is otherwise acceptable to the Secretary; (B) all draft conveyances and closing documents have been received and approved; and (C) a current title commitment verifying compliance with applicable title standards has been issued to the Secretary.
Unacceptable quality of title.--If the quality of title does not meet Federal standards and is not otherwise acceptable to the Secretary, the Secretary shall advise R-Y regarding corrective actions necessary to make an affirmative determination.
Conveyance of title.--The Secretary, acting through the Secretary of the Interior, shall effect the conveyance of land described in subsection (b) not later than 60 days after the Secretary has made an affirmative determination of quality of title.
Maps and Documents.-- (1) In general.--Maps pertaining to the land described in section 2 are subject to such minor corrections as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and R-Y.
Notification.--The Secretary shall notify the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives of any corrections made pursuant to this subsection.
Public availability.--The maps and documents described in section 2(b) (1) and (3) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Chief of the Forest Service.
National Forest System Land.--All land conveyed to the United States under this Act shall be added to and administered as part of the Deerlodge National Forest in accordance with the laws pertaining to the National Forest System.
Valuation.--The values of the lands and interests in land to be exchanged under this Act are deemed to be of approximately equal value.
Hazardous Material Liability.--The United States (including its departments, agencies, and employees) shall not be liable under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes), the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code 1251 et sequentes), or any other Federal, State, or local law, solely as a result of the acquisition of an interest in the Lost Creek Tract or due to circumstances or events occurring before acquisition, including any release or threat of release of a hazardous substance.