REQUIREMENTS BEFORE THE PRESIDENT MAY ISSUE AN ORDER.
Definitions.--In this Act, the term-- (1) ``benefit'' means the reasonably identifiable significant favorable effects, quantifiable and nonquantifiable, including social, health, safety, environmental, economic, and distributional effects, that are expected to result from implementation of, or compliance with, an order; (2) ``cost'' means the reasonably identifiable significant adverse effects, quantifiable and nonquantifiable, including social, health, safety, environmental, economic, and distributional effects, that are expected to result from implementation of, or compliance with, an order; (3) ``cost benefit analysis'' means an evaluation of the costs and benefits of an order, quantified to the extent feasible and appropriate and otherwise qualitatively described, that is prepared at the level of detail appropriate and practicable for reasoned decisionmaking on the matter involved, taking into consideration uncertainties, the significance and complexity of the decision, and the need to adequately inform the public; and (4) ``order'' means any Executive order, proclamation, or other written directive that-- (A) is issued by the President; and (B) subject to subsection (b)(1)-- (i) is not based solely on an authority under article II of the United States Constitution; and (ii) is based on a statutory authority.
Authority for Orders.-- (1) Orders.--Subsection (a)(4)(B) shall not apply with respect to the term ``order'' as used in this subsection.
Authority.--The President may only issue an order if such order is authorized under a provision of the United States Constitution or expressly authorized by statute.
Requirements.--Subject to subsection (d), before issuing an order, the President shall-- (1) cite in the order all constitutional and statutory provisions that authorize the order; (2) conduct a cost benefit analysis of the order; (3) publish the order and the cost benefit analysis of the order in the Federal Register; and (4) provide for a period of no less than 30 days after the publication under paragraph (3), for public comment before the order takes effect.
Orders With Classified Information.-- (1) Inapplicability.--Subsection (c) (3) and (4) shall not apply to an order that includes classified information.
Requirement.--Before issuing an order that includes classified information, the President shall submit a copy of the order to the President pro tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the House of Representatives no less than 30 days before the order takes effect.
Effect of Noncompliance.--Any order that is not in compliance with this section shall have no force and effect.
Application to Prior Orders.--An order in effect before the effective date of this Act shall have no force and effect on and after the date that occurs 1 year after such effective date, unless the President reissues such order in compliance with subsections (c) and (d).
Judicial Review.-- (1) Jurisdiction of district courts.--The district courts of the United States shall have jurisdiction of any civil action arising under this Act.
Standing.--The following persons may bring a civil action in an appropriate district court of the United States to challenge an order that is not in compliance with this Act: (A) Congress and members of congress.--The Senate, the House of Representatives, any Senator, and any Representative to the House of Representatives.
State and local governments.--The highest governmental official of any State, commonwealth, district, territory, or possession of the United States, or any political subdivision thereof, or the designee of such person.
Aggrieved persons.--Any person aggrieved in a liberty or property interest adversely affected directly by an order that is not in compliance with this Act.
Appeal and expedited review.-- (A) Appeal to supreme court.--An appeal may be taken directly to the Supreme Court of the United States from any interlocutory or final judgment, decree, or order of a district court in any civil action that the court exercised jurisdiction under paragraph (1).
Expedited review.--The Supreme Court shall, if it has not previously ruled on the question, accept jurisdiction over the appeal referred to under subparagraph (A), advance the appeal on the docket, and expedite the appeal to the greatest extent possible.
Effective Date.--This Act shall take effect 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.