This Act may be cited as the ``Nutritional Advertising Coordination Act of 1993''.
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION RULES REGARDING UNFAIR AND DECEPTIVE ACTS AND PRACTICES IN CONNECTION WITH FOOD ADVERTISING.
Regulations.--Section 5 of the Federal Trade Commission Act (15 United States Code 45) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(n) The Commission shall prescribe rules to prohibit unfair and deceptive acts and practices in food advertising.
Such rules shall require that claims in advertising for food-- ``(1) characterizing the level of any nutrient in the food of the type required by section 403(q)(1) or 403(q)(2) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act to be in the labeling of the food, or ``(2) characterizing the relationship of any such nutrient to a disease or health related condition, shall be consistent, to the fullest extent feasible, with section 403(r) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act and with the regulations of the Secretary of Health and Human Services implementing such section and the corresponding regulations issued by the Secretary of Agriculture.''.
Rulemaking.-- (1) Section 18 rule.--A rule issued under section 5(n) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (added by subsection (a)) shall be treated as a rule issued under section 18(a)(1)(B) of such Act (15 United States Code 57a(a)(1)(B)).
Time and procedure.-- (A) Time period.--The Federal Trade Commission shall issue proposed rules under section 5(n) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (as added by subsection (a)) within 180 days of the date of the enactment of this Act and shall issue final rules under such section within 360 days of such enactment.
Procedure.--The Federal Trade Commission shall issue rules under section 5(n) of the Federal Trade Commission Act (as added by subsection (a)) in accordance with section 553 of title 5, United States Code.
In General.--Whenever an attorney general of any State has reason to believe that the interests of the residents of that State have been or are being threatened or adversely affected because any person has engaged or is engaging in a pattern or practice which violates any rule of the Federal Trade Commission under section 5(n) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, the State may bring a civil action on behalf of its residents in an appropriate district court of the United States to enjoin such pattern or practice, to enforce compliance with such rule of the Commission, to obtain damages on behalf of their residents, or to obtain such further and other relief as the court may deem appropriate.
Notice.--A State shall serve prior written notice of any civil action under subsection (a) upon the Federal Trade Commission and provide the Commission with a copy of its complaint, except that if it is not feasible for the State to provide such prior notice, the State shall serve such notice immediately upon instituting such action.
Upon receiving a notice respecting a civil action, the Commission shall have the right (1) to intervene in such action, (2) upon so intervening, to be heard on all matters arising therein, and (3) to file petitions for appeal.
Venue.--Any civil action brought under subsection (a) in a district court of the United States may be brought in the district where the defendant transacts business or where the violation occurred.
Investigatory Powers.--For purposes of bringing any civil action under subsection (a), nothing in this section shall prevent the attorney general from exercising the powers conferred on the attorney general by the laws of such State to conduct investigations, including administering oaths or affirmations, compeling the attendance of witnesses, or the production of documentary and other evidence.
Limitation.--Whenever the Federal Trade Commission has instituted a civil action for violation of any rule under section 5(n) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, no State may, during the pendency of such action instituted by the Commission, subsequently institute a civil action against any defendant named in the Commission's complaint for violation of any such rule as alleged in the Commission's complaint.
Actions by Other State or Local Officials.-- (1) In general.--Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit an official authorized by a State or locality from proceeding in a court of a State or locality on the basis of an alleged violation of any general civil or criminal statute of such State or locality.
Other officials.--In addition to actions brought by an attorney general of a State under subsection (a), such an action may be brought by other officials authorized by a State or locality to bring actions in such State for protection of consumers and who are designated by the Commission to bring an action under subsection (a) against persons that the Commission has determined have or are engaged in a pattern or practice which violates a rule of the Commission under section 2(a).
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: (1) The term ``attorney general'' means the chief legal officer of a State.
The term ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any territory or possession of the United States.
The term ``locality'' means any political subdivision of a State as defined in paragraph (2).