This Act may be cited as the ``Stronger Tobacco Warning Labels To Save Lives Act''.
AMENDMENT TO FEDERAL CIGARETTE AND LABELING ADVERTISING ACT.
Amendment.--The Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 United States Code 1331 et sequentes) is amended by striking section 4 and inserting the following: ``SEC.
General Rule.-- ``(1) Label on package.--It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, or import for sale or distribution within the United States any cigarettes the package of which fails to bear, in accordance with the requirements of this section, a warning label.
Label in advertising.--It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer or importer of cigarettes to advertise or cause to be advertised within the United States any cigarette unless the advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements of this section, one of the warning labels required under paragraph (1).
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Stronger Tobacco Warning Labels To Save Lives Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations describing the warning labels required under subsection (a).
Content of Label.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that the text of each warning label required under subsection (a) consists of the following: ``(1) 1 or more of the following statements: ``(A) WARNING: Cigarettes Are Highly Addictive.
WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Can Harm Your Children.
WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Fatal Lung Disease.
WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Cancer.
WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Fatal Heart Disease.
WARNING: Cigarettes Cause Strokes.
WARNING: Smoking During Pregnancy Can Seriously Harm Your Baby.
WARNING: Smoking Can Kill You.
WARNING: Tobacco Smoke Causes Fatal Lung Disease in Nonsmokers.
WARNING: Quitting Smoking Now Greatly Reduces Serious Risks To Your Health.
WARNING: Children See, Children Do--Your Children are Twice as Likely to Smoke if You Do.
At the election of the Secretary, such additional statement as the Secretary determines effective in deterring smoking.
Graphics.-- ``(1) In general.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that each warning label required under subsection (a) contains a color graphic (such as a picture) that illustrates or emphasizes the message of the text of the corresponding warning label.
Contents.--The graphics described in paragraph (1) shall enhance the message of the text of the warning label and shall include a color picture of 1 of the following: ``(A) A diseased lung, heart, or mouth.
An individual suffering from addiction.
Children watching an adult smoke a cigarette.
An individual adversely affected by secondhand smoke from a cigarette, such as a pregnant woman or infant.
Requirements for Products.-- ``(1) Location.--The text of each warning label required under subsection (a)(1) shall be located on the upper portion of the front panel of the cigarette package (such as a carton) and occupy not less than 50 percent of such front panel.
Type and color.--Each label statement required under subsection (a)(1) shall be printed in at least 17 point type with adjustments as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
All the letters in the label statement shall appear in conspicuous and legible type, appear in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material on the package, and be printed in a black-on-white or white-on-black format as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Requirements for Advertising.-- ``(1) Location.--The text of each warning label required under subsection (a)(2) shall occupy not less than 50 percent of the area of the advertisement involved.
Type and color.-- ``(A) Type.--Each label statement required under subsection (a)(2) shall be printed in a point type that is not less than the following types: ``(i) With respect to whole page advertisements on broadsheet newspaper--45 point type.
With respect to half page advertisements on broadsheet newspaper--39 point type.
With respect to whole page advertisements on tabloid newspaper--39 point type.
With respect to half page advertisements on tabloid newspaper--27 point type.
With respect to double page spread magazine advertisements--31.5 point type.
With respect to whole page magazine advertisements--31.5 point type.
With respect to 28 cm x 3 column advertisements--22.5 point type.
With respect to 20 cm x 2 column advertisements--15 point type.
Type size revisions.--The Secretary may revise the required type sizes described in subparagraph (A) as the Secretary determines appropriate within the 50 percent requirement described in paragraph (1).
Color.--All the letters in the label statement shall appear in conspicuous and legible type, appear in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material in the advertisement, and be printed in alternating black-on-white and white-on- black formats as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Rotation of Label Statements.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), the label statements required under paragraph (1) or (2) of subsection (a) shall be rotated by each manufacturer or importer of cigarettes covered by that paragraph quarterly in alternating sequence on packages of each brand of the cigarettes and in the advertisements for each such brand of cigarettes, in accordance with a plan submitted by the manufacturer or importer and approved by the Federal Trade Commission.
The Federal Trade Commission shall approve such a plan submitted by a manufacturer or importer of cigarettes that will provide the rotation required under this subsection and that assures that all of the label statements required under subsection (a) will be displayed by the manufacturer or importer at the same time.
Application of other rotation requirements.-- ``(A) Application.-- ``(i) In general.--A manufacturer or importer of cigarettes may apply to the Federal Trade Commission to have the label rotation described in subparagraph (C) apply with respect to a brand style of cigarettes manufactured or imported by such manufacturer or importer if-- ``(I) the number of cigarettes of such brand style sold or distributed by the manufacturer or importer in the fiscal year preceding the submission of the application is less than \1/4\ of 1 percent of all the cigarettes sold in the United States in such year; and ``(II) more than \1/2\ of the cigarettes manufactured or imported by such manufacturer or importer for sale or distribution in the United States are packaged into brand styles that meet the requirements of subclause (I).
Approval.--If such an application is approved by the Commission, the label rotation described in subparagraph (C) shall apply with respect to the applicant during the 1-year period beginning on the date of the approval of the application.
Plan.--An applicant manufacturer or importer under subparagraph (A) shall include in its application a plan under which the label statements required under subsection (a) shall be rotated by the applicant in accordance with the label rotation described in subparagraph (C).
Other rotation requirements.--Under the label rotation that the manufacturer or importer with such an approved application may put into effect, each of the label statements specified in subsection (c)(1) shall appear on the packages of each brand style of cigarettes with respect to which the application was approved an equal number of times within the 1-year period beginning on the date of the approval of the application.
Application of Requirement.--Subsection (a) does not apply to a distributor or a retailer of cigarettes who does not manufacture, package, or import cigarettes for sale or distribution within the United States.
Cigars; Pipe Tobacco.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall promulgate such regulations as may be necessary to establish warning labels for cigars and pipe tobacco.
Such regulations shall-- ``(A) require content-specific messages regarding health hazards posed by cigars and pipe tobacco; ``(B) include graphics for such content messages, as required under subsection (d); and ``(C) be formatted in a clear and unambiguous manner, as required under subsection (e)(2).
Definitions.--In this subsection: ``(A) Cigar.--The term `cigar' means any roll of tobacco wrapped in leaf tobacco or in any substance containing tobacco (other than any roll of tobacco that is a cigarette or cigarillo).
Pipe tobacco.--The term `pipe tobacco' means any loose tobacco that, because of the appearance, type, packaging, or labeling of such tobacco, is likely to be offered to, or purchased by, consumers as a tobacco to be smoked in a pipe.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this section.
AMENDMENT TO THE COMPREHENSIVE SMOKELESS TOBACCO HEALTH EDUCATION ACT OF 1986.
Amendment.--The Comprehensive Smokeless Tobacco Health Education Act of 1986 (15 United States Code 4401 et sequentes) is amended by striking section 3 and inserting the following: ``SEC.
General Rule.-- ``(1) Label on package.--It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, package, or import for sale or distribution within the United States any smokeless tobacco product unless the product package bears, in accordance with the requirements of this section, a warning label.
Label in advertising.--It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer or importer of smokeless tobacco products to advertise or cause to be advertised within the United States any smokeless tobacco product unless the advertising bears, in accordance with the requirements of this Act, one of the warning labels required under paragraph (1).
Regulations.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of the Stronger Tobacco Warning Labels To Save Lives Act, the Secretary shall promulgate regulations describing the warning labels required under subsection (a).
Content of Label.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that the text of each warning label required under subsection (a) consists of the following: ``(1) 1 or more of the following statements: ``(A) WARNING: This Product May Cause Mouth Cancer.
WARNING: This Product May Cause Gum Disease and Tooth Loss.
WARNING: This Product Is Not a Safe Alternative to Cigarettes.
WARNING: Smokeless Tobacco Is Highly Addictive.
At the election of the Secretary, such additional statement as the Secretary determines effective in deterring the use of smokeless tobacco.
Graphics.-- ``(1) In general.--The regulations promulgated under subsection (b) shall ensure that each warning label required under subsection (a) contains a color graphic (such as a picture) that illustrates or emphasizes the message of the text of the corresponding warning label.
Contents.--The graphics described in paragraph (1) shall enhance the message of the text of the warning label and shall include a color picture of 1 of the following: ``(A) A diseased mouth or other physical effect of using a smokeless tobacco product.
An individual using a smokeless tobacco product.
Children watching an adult use a smokeless tobacco product.
Requirements for Products.-- ``(1) Location.--The text of each warning label required under subsection (a)(1) shall be located on the principal display panel of the product and occupy not less than 50 percent of such panel.
Type and color.--Each label statement required under subsection (a)(1) shall be printed in at least 17 point type with adjustments as determined appropriate by the Secretary to reflect the length of the required statement.
All the letters in the label statement shall appear in conspicuous and legible type, appear in contrast by typography, layout, or color with all other printed material on the package, and be printed in alternating black-on-white and white-on-black formats as determined appropriate by the Secretary.
Requirements for Advertising.--The provisions of section 4(f) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 United States Code 1333(f)) shall apply to labels in advertisements required under subsection (a)(2).
Rotation of Label Statements.--The provisions of section 4(g)(1) of the Federal Cigarette Labeling and Advertising Act (15 United States Code 1333(g)(1)) shall apply to labels on packages and labels in advertisements required under paragraphs (1) and (2), respectively, of subsection (a).
Application of Requirement.--Subsection (a) does not apply to a distributor or a retailer of smokeless tobacco products who does not manufacture, package, or import such products for sale or distribution within the United States.
Television and Radio Advertising.--It shall be unlawful to advertise a smokeless tobacco product or cigars on any medium of electronic communications subject to the jurisdiction of the Federal Communications Commission.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect 1 year after the date of enactment of this section.