This Act may be cited as the ``Entrepreneurial New and Small Business Capital Formation Act of 1995''.
ROLLOVER OF CAPITAL GAINS ON CERTAIN SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENTS.
In General.--Part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to common nontaxable exchanges) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ROLLOVER OF GAIN ON SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENTS.
Nonrecognition of Gain.--In the case of the sale of any eligible small business investment with respect to which the taxpayer elects the application of this section, gain from such sale shall be recognized only to the extent that the amount realized on such sale exceeds-- ``(1) the cost of any other eligible small business investment purchased by the taxpayer during the 6-month period beginning on the date of such sale, reduced by ``(2) any portion of such cost previously taken into account under this section.
This section shall not apply to any gain which is treated as ordinary income for purposes of this subtitle.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Purchase.--The term `purchase' has the meaning given such term by section 1043(b)(4).
Eligible small business investment.--Except as otherwise provided in this section, the term `eligible small business investment' means any stock in a domestic corporation, and any partnership interest in a domestic partnership, which is originally issued after December 31, 1994, if-- ``(A) as of the date of issuance, such corporation or partnership is a qualified small business entity, and ``(B) such stock or partnership interest is acquired by the taxpayer at its original issue (directly or through an underwriter)-- ``(i) in exchange for money or other property (not including stock), or ``(ii) as compensation for services (other than services performed as an underwriter of such stock or partnership interest).
A rule similar to the rule of section 1202(c)(3) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Active business requirement.--Stock in a corporation, and a partnership interest in a partnership, shall not be treated as eligible small business investment unless, during substantially all of the taxpayer's holding period for such stock or partnership interest, such corporation or partnership meets the active business requirements of subsection (c).
A rule similar to the rule of section 1202(c)(2)(B) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Qualified small business entity.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified small business entity' means any domestic corporation or partnership if-- ``(i) for the taxable year of such entity in which the stock or partnership interest was issued and each prior taxable year, such entity (and any predecessor thereof) had gross receipts of less than $20,000,000, ``(ii) at all times before such issuance, such entity (and any predecessor thereof) had aggregate gross assets (as defined in section 1202(d)(2)) of less than $25,000,000, and ``(iii) at all times before such issuance, the excess of the fair market value of the assets of such entity (and any predecessor thereof) over the liabilities of such entity was less than $10,000,000.
Aggregation rules.--All persons treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as one person for purposes of subparagraph (A).
Special rules for determining gross receipts.--The rules of subparagraphs (B) and (C) of section 448(c)(3) shall apply for purposes of subparagraph (A)(i).
Active Business Requirement.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (b)(3), the requirements of this subsection are met by a qualified small business entity for any period if-- ``(A) the entity is engaged in the active conduct of a trade or business, and ``(B) at least 80 percent (by value) of the assets of such entity are used in the active conduct of a trade or business.
Special rule for certain activities.--For purposes of paragraph (1), if, in connection with any future trade or business, an entity is engaged in-- ``(A) startup activities described in section 195(c)(1)(A), ``(B) activities resulting in the payment or incurring of expenditures which may be treated as research and experimental expenditures under section 174, or ``(C) activities with respect to in-house research expenses described in section 41(b)(4), such entity shall be treated with respect to such activities as engaged in (and assets used in such activities shall be treated as used in) the active conduct of a trade or business.
Any determination under this paragraph shall be made without regard to whether the entity has any gross income from such activities at the time of the determination.
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (5), (6), (7), and (8) of section 1202(e) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Certain Other Rules To Apply.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (f), (g), (h), and (j) of section 1202 (without regard to any 5-year holding period requirement) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Basis Adjustments.--If gain from any sale is not recognized by reason of subsection (a), such gain shall be applied to reduce (in the order acquired) the basis for determining gain or loss of any eligible small business investment which is purchased by the taxpayer during the 6-month period described in subsection (a).
Statute of Limitations.--If any gain is realized by the taxpayer on the sale or exchange of any eligible small business investment and there is in effect an election under subsection (a) with respect to such gain, then-- ``(1) the statutory period for the assessment of any deficiency with respect to such gain shall not expire before the expiration of 3 years from the date the Secretary is notified by the taxpayer (in such manner as the Secretary may by regulations prescribe) of-- ``(A) the taxpayer's cost of purchasing other eligible small business investment which the taxpayer claims results in nonrecognition of any part of such gain, ``(B) the taxpayer's intention not to purchase other eligible small business investment within the 6- month period described in subsection (a), or ``(C) a failure to make such purchase within such 6-month period, and ``(2) such deficiency may be assessed before the expiration of such 3-year period notwithstanding the provisions of any other law or rule of law which would otherwise prevent such assessment.
Regulations.--The Secretary shall prescribe such regulations as may be appropriate to carry out the purposes of this section, including regulations to prevent the avoidance of the purposes of this section through splitups, shell corporations, partnerships, or otherwise.''
Conforming Amendment.--Paragraph (23) of section 1016(a) of such Code is amended-- (1) by striking ``or 1044'' and inserting ``, 1044, or 1045'', and (2) by striking ``or 1044(d)'' and inserting ``, 1044(d), or 1045(e)''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part III of subchapter O of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Rollover of gain on small business investments.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 1994.
LOSSES ON ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENTS.
In General.--Part IV of subchapter P of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to special rules for determining gains and losses) is amended by inserting after section 1244 the following new section: ``SEC.
LOSSES ON ELIGIBLE SMALL BUSINESS INVESTMENTS.
``If-- ``(1) a loss is on any eligible small business investment (as defined in section 1045(b)), and ``(2) such loss would (but for this section) be a loss from the sale or exchange of a capital asset, then such loss shall be treated as an ordinary loss.
For purposes of section 172 (relating to the net operating loss deduction), any amount of loss treated by reason of this section as an ordinary loss shall be treated as attributable to a trade or business of the taxpayer.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for such part IV is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1244 the following new item: ``Sec.
Losses on eligible small business investments.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after December 31, 1994.