This Act may be cited as the ``Geologic Research Enhancement Act''.
For the purposes of this Act: (1) Association.--The term ``Association'' means the Association of American State Geologists.
Director.--The term ``Director'' means the Director of the United States Geological Survey.
Federal component.--The term ``Federal component'' means the Federal component of the High Plains Aquifer Comprehensive Hydrogeologic Characterization, Mapping, Modeling, and Monitoring Program described in section 3(c).
High plains aquifer.--The term ``High Plains Aquifer'' is the groundwater reserve depicted as Figure 1 in the United States Geological Survey Professional Paper 1400-B, entitled ``Geohydrology of the High Plains Aquifer in Parts of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.''.
High plains aquifer states.--The term ``High Plains Aquifer States'' means the States of Colorado, Kansas, Nebraska, New Mexico, Oklahoma, South Dakota, Texas, and Wyoming.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State component.--The term ``State component'' means the State component of the High Plains Aquifer Comprehensive Hydrogeologic Characterization, Mapping, Modeling, and Monitoring Program described in section 3(d).
Program.--The Secretary, working through the United States Geological Survey, and in cooperation with the State geological surveys and the water management agencies of the High Plains Aquifer States, shall establish and carry out the High Plains Aquifer Comprehensive Hydrogeolgoic Characterization, Mapping, Modeling, and Monitoring Program, for the purposes of the characterization, mapping, modeling, and monitoring of the High Plains Aquifer.
The program shall undertake, on a county-by-county level or at the largest scales and most detailed levels determined to be appropriate on a State-by-State and regional basis, the following: (1) mapping of the hydrogeological configuration of the High Plains Aquifer; and (2) with respect to the High Plains Aquifer, analyses of the current and past rates at which groundwater is being withdrawn and recharged, the net rate of decrease or increase in High Plains Aquifer storage, the factors controlling the rate of horizontal and vertical migration of water within the High Plains Aquifer, and the current and past rate of loss of saturated thickness within the High Plains Aquifer.
The program shall also develop, as needed, regional data bases and groundwater flow models.
Funding.--The Secretary shall make available 50 percent of the funds available pursuant to this Act for use in carrying out the State component of the program, as provided under subsection (d).
Federal Program Component.-- (1) Priorities.--The program shall include a Federal component, developed in consultation with the Federal Review Panel provided under subsection (e), which shall have as its priorities-- (A) coordinating Federal, State, and local, data, maps, and models into an integrated physical characterization of the High Plains Aquifer; (B) supporting State and local activities with scientific and technical specialists; and (C) undertaking activities and providing technical capabilities not available at the State and local levels.
Interdisciplinary studies.--The Federal component shall include interdisciplinary studies that add value to hydrogeologic characterization, mapping, modeling, and monitoring for the High Plains Aquifer.
State Program Component.-- (1) Priorities.--The program shall include a State component which shall have as its priorities hydrogeologic characterization, mapping, modeling, and monitoring activities in areas of the High Plains Aquifer that will assist in addressing issues relating to groundwater depletion and resource assessment of the Aquifer.
Priorities under the State component shall be based upon the recommendations of State panels representing a broad range of users of hydrogeologic data and information, which shall be appointed by the Governor of the State or the Governor's designee.
Awards.--Twenty percent of the Federal funds available under the State component shall be equally divided among the State geological surveys of the High Plains Aquifer States to carry out the purposes of the program provided under this Act.
The remaining funds under the State component shall be competitively awarded to State or local agencies or entities in the High Plains Aquifer States, including State geological surveys, State water management agencies, institutions of higher education, or consortia of such agencies or entities.
Such funds shall be awarded by the Director only for proposals that have been recommended by the State panels referred to in paragraph (1), subject to independent peer review, and given final recommendation by the Federal Review Panel established under subsection (e).
Proposals for multi-State activities must be recommended by the State panel of at least one of the affected States.
Federal Review Panel.-- (1) Establishment.--There shall be established a Federal Review Panel to evaluate the proposals submitted for funding under the State component under subsection (d)(2) and to recommend approvals and levels of funding.
The Federal Review Panel shall review and coordinate the Federal component priorities under subsection (c)(1), Federal interdisciplinary studies under subsection (c)(2), and the State component priorities under subsection (d)(1).
Composition and support.--Not later than 3 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall appoint to the Federal Review Panel the following: (A) Two representatives of the United States Geological Survey, at least one of which shall be a hydrologist or hydrogeologist.
Three representatives of the geological surveys and water management agencies of the High Plains Aquifer States from lists of nominees provided by the Association and the Western States Water Council, so that there is representation of both the State geological surveys and the State water management agencies.
Appointment to the Panel shall be for a term of 3 years.
The Director shall provide technical and administrative support to the Federal Review Panel.
Expenses for the Federal Review Panel shall be paid from funds available under the Federal component of the program.
Limitation.--The United States Geological Survey shall not use any of the Federal funds to be made available under the State component for any fiscal year to pay indirect, servicing, or program management charges.
Recipients of awards granted under subsection (d)(2) shall not use more than 18 percent of the Federal award amount for any fiscal year for indirect, servicing, or program management charges.
The Secretary, acting through the Director, shall, with the participation and review of the Association, the Western States Water Council, the Federal Review Panel, and the State panels, prepare a plan for the High Plains Aquifer Hydrogeologic Characterization, Mapping, Modeling, and Monitoring Program.
The plan shall address overall priorities for the program and a management structure and program operations, including the role and responsibilities of the United States Geological Survey and the States in the program, and mechanisms for identifying priorities for the Federal component and the State component.
Report on Program Implementation.--One year after the date of enactment of this Act, and every 2 years thereafter through fiscal year 2011, the Secretary shall submit a report on the status of implementation of the program established by this Act to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives, and the Governors of the High Plains Aquifer States.
Report on High Plains Aquifer.--One year after the date of enactment of this Act and every year thereafter through fiscal year 2011, the Secretary shall submit a report to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives, and the Governors of the High Plains Aquifer States on the status of the High Plains Aquifer, including aquifer recharge rat