This Act may be cited as the ``State Threat Alert Reimbursement (STAR) Act of 2003''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) States and local governments are acting on behalf of the Federal Government to protect and defend our homeland.
States and local governments are in the midst of the worst budget crisis since the Great Depression.
Cash-strapped States and local governments are further burdened by expenditures relating to increased homeland security threat alert mitigation.
According to a survey by the United States Conference of Mayors, cities nationwide with populations of between 30,000 and 8,000,0000 are spending more than $70,000,000 per week on additional homeland security measures during the effective period of a high threat condition (Code Orange) or severe threat condition (Code Red) declared by the Secretary of Homeland Security.
These direct costs are in addition to existing homeland security spending (or spending commitments) since the terrorist attacks on New York City and the Washington metropolitan area on September 11, 2001.
In General.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall pay to a State in accordance with this section reimbursement for the direct expenses and losses incurred by State or local government entities of the State in the course of duty during the effective period of an increased threat alert, that are in excess of normal operating expenses.
Submission of Requests.-- (1) In general.--The Governor of any State may submit to the Secretary of Homeland Security a request for reimbursement under this section-- (A) by not later than 90 days after the declaration of an elevated threat condition with respect to which the reimbursement is requested; and (B) in the case of such a condition that is in effect for more than 90 days, at such times thereafter as may be prescribed by the Secretary.
Supporting information.--A Governor shall include in a request under this subsection such supporting information as the Secretary may prescribe.
Application by internet.--The Secretary shall provide for the submission of requests under this subsection by use of the Internet.
Determination and Payment.-- (1) In general.--Upon receipt of a request under subsection (b), the Secretary shall-- (A) determine the amount of direct expenses and losses that may be reimbursed under this section pursuant to the request; and (B) pay that amount to the State.
Subject to appropriations.--The requirement to make payments under this section is subject to the availability of appropriations for such payments.
Congressional notification.--Before making any payment to a State under this section in an amount greater than $20,000,000, the Secretary shall notify-- (A) the Select Committee on Homeland Security of the House of Representatives; and (B) the Committee on Governmental Affairs of the Senate.
In this Act: (1) Direct expenses and losses.--The term ``direct expenses and losses''-- (A) means expenses and losses that would not have been incurred if there had not been in effect an elevated threat condition; and (B) includes (subject to subparagraph (A))-- (i) salaries for specially employed personnel; (ii) overtime pay; (iii) the cost of supplies expended; and (iv) the depreciated value of equipment destroyed or damaged; and (C) does not include-- (i) the costs of ordinary wages of personnel of a State or local government entity; (ii) overhead costs; or (iii) depreciation (if calculated in ways other than use during an emergency).
In excess of normal operating expenses.--The term ``in excess of normal operating expenses''-- (A) means costs, losses, and expenses that-- (i) are not ordinarily and necessarily associated with the maintenance, administration, and day-to-day operations of a State or local government entity; and (ii) would not have been incurred if there were not in effect an elevated threat condition; (B) includes (subject to subparagraph (A)-- (i) administrative expenses; (ii) costs of employee benefits, insurance, disability, death, litigation, or health care; and (iii) costs associated with obtaining a payment under this Act.
State or local government entity.--The term ``State or local government entity'' means any agency or authority of-- (A) a State government; or (B) any county, city, or other local governmental administrative body that has fiscal responsibility and budgetary authority over the provision of governmental services.
Elevated threat condition.--The term ``elevated threat condition'' means any high threat condition (Code Orange) or severe threat condition (Code Red) declared by the Secretary of Homeland Security.
Normal operating costs.--The term ``normal operating costs'' means costs ordinarily incurred in performing functions of a State or local government entity.