Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Trinity River Restoration Fund Act of 2007''.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this Act: (1) Appendix c.--The term ``Appendix C'' means Appendix C of the Final Environmental Impact Statement/Environmental Impact Report for the Trinity River Mainstem Fishery.
Record of decision.--The term ``Record of Decision'' means the Record of Decision issued by the Secretary with the concurrence of the Hoopa Valley Tribe on December 19, 2000, on ``Trinity River Mainstem Fishery Restoration''.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF FUND.
Establishment, Purpose.--There is hereby established in the United States Treasury a fund, to be known as the ``Trinity River Restoration Fund'', to be available to the Secretary for expenditure without further appropriation or fiscal year limitation, and which the Secretary shall use solely for the purpose of implementing the preferred alternative identified in the Record of Decision.
Authorization To Accept and Expend Funds.--The Secretary is authorized to accept and expend funds without further appropriation or fiscal year limitation from public and private sources to assist in the implementation of the Record of Decision.
Use for Specific Purposes.--Amounts deposited into the Trinity River Restoration Fund for specific purposes shall be expended for those purposes only and shall not be subject to appropriation.
The following shall be deposited in the Trinity River Restoration Fund: (1)(A) Out of the capital component of payments made pursuant to long-term contracts with the Bureau of Reclamation by Central Valley Project water and power contractors (excluding payments made by Friant Division long-term contractors) and beginning the first full fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act and continuing each subsequent fiscal year for 5 years, such amount per year as is necessary to yield on an average annual basis over 5 years $6,500,000 (October 2007 price levels), to be used to complete the construction and associated administrative activities that the Record of Decision incorporated pursuant to the Implementation Plan for Trinity River restoration.
For purposes of this paragraph, construction activities include portions or all of the Mechanical Rehabilitation, Coarse and Fine Sediment Management Program, and Infrastructure Modifications described in sections 2, 3, and 4 of Appendix C. (2)(A) Out of the capital component of payments made pursuant to long-term contracts with the Bureau of Reclamation by Central Valley Project water and power contractors (excluding payments made by Friant Division long-term contractors) and beginning the first fiscal year after the date of the enactment of this Act and continuing through the conclusion of the Central Valley Project repayment pursuant to Public Law 99-546, such amount per year required to yield a 3- year rolling average of $11,000,000 (October 2007 price levels), to fund operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement, and associated administrative activities necessary for the implementation of the Record of Decision.
For purposes of this paragraph-- (i) operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement activities-- (I) are activities necessary to maintain the physical infrastructure constructed under paragraph (1); and (II) those activities associated with Coarse and Fine Sediment Management, Infrastructure Modifications, Watershed Protection, and Adaptive Environmental Assessment and Management, described in sections 3, 4, 5, and 6 of Appendix C; and (ii) associated administrative activities are those described in Organizing to Implement the Trinity River Restoration Program in section 7 of Appendix C. (3) Non-Federal funds contributed to the United States for implementation of the Record of Decision or Federal funds appropriated to the Trinity River Restoration Fund.
The Federal costs of implementing paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3 shall be nonreimbursable under Federal reclamation law.
Nothing in this section shall-- (1) limit or be construed to limit the use of the funds assessed and collected pursuant to section 3407(d)(2) of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Public Law 102-575; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4706, 4727) for implementation of the Record of Decision; or (2) be construed to limit or modify existing or future Central Valley Project Ratesetting Policies.
FUNDING IN THE EVENT CENTRAL VALLEY PROJECT CAPITAL REPAYMENTS ARE UNAVAILABLE.
For any fiscal year in which the capital component of payments made pursuant to long-term contracts with the Bureau of Reclamation by Central Valley Project water and power contractors (excluding payments made by Friant Division long-term contractors) falls below the amounts determined to be necessary for construction activities, operation, maintenance, repair, and replacement costs, and associated administrative costs under paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 3; or the said capital component payments have been completed, the Secretary shall deposit annually in the Trinity River Restoration Fund an amount sufficient to make up the shortfall from the following sources, to be available for expenditure without further appropriation or fiscal year limitation-- (1) reimbursements pursuant to section 3406(b)(23) of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Public Law 102-575; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4706, 4720); (2) receipts to the Central Valley Project Restoration Fund established by section 3407 of the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Public Law 102-575; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4706, 4726); and (3) such other Federal funds appropriated to the Trinity River Restoration Fund.
Not later than 90 days after the beginning of the second full fiscal year after date of the enactment of this Act and every 2 years thereafter, the Secretary shall submit a summary report to the Committees on Indian Affairs and Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives.
Summary reports under this section shall contain the following: (1) A description of the progress in implementing the Trinity River Restoration Program and any barriers to the achievement of restoration goals.
The separate views of the Hoopa Valley Tribe, the Yurok Tribe, State and local governments, or other entities participating in the implementation of the Record of Decision, if any of these entities provide their views in writing to the Secretary not later than 30 days before the beginning of the fiscal year.
In the first report submitted pursuant to this section following completion of the capital component of payments made pursuant to long-term contracts with the Bureau of Reclamation by Central Valley Project water and power contractors referred to in section 3, the Secretary, after consultation with the Hoopa Valley Tribe, the Yurok Tribe, State and local governments, or other entities participating in the implementation of the Record of Decision, shall set forth recommendations, if any, with respect to adjustment of the amount referred to in section 3(2).
Beginning in the second full fiscal year beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act, each dollar amount specified in this Act shall be adjusted to reflect changes for the 1-year period ending the preceding November 30 in the Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers published by the Bureau of Labor Statistics of the Department of Labor.
ADJUSTMENT TO CERTAIN PAYMENT OBLIGATIONS.
The capital repayment obligation of Central Valley Project water and power contractors pursuant to long-term contracts with the Bureau of Reclamation and the appropriate share of the Federal investment in the Central Valley Project to be recovered by the United States pursuant to Public Law 99-546 (100 United States Statutes at Large 3050) shall be reduced by the amount paid into the Trinity River Restoration Fund pursuant to section 3(1) and section 3(2).
Except as specifically provided herein, nothing in this Act shall modify or affect in any way, the following: (1) The Act of August 12, 1955 (Public Law 84-386; 69 United States Statutes at Large 719).
The Act of September 4, 1980 (Public Law 96-335; 94 United States Statutes at Large 1062).
The Act of October 24, 1984 (Public Law 98-541; 98 United States Statutes at Large 2721), as amended by the Act of May 15, 1996 (Public Law 104-143; 110 United States Statutes at Large 1338).
The Act of October 27, 1986 (Public Law 99-546; 100 United States Statutes at Large 3050).
The Central Valley Project Improvement Act (Public Law 102-575; 106 United States Statutes at Large 4706).