This Act may be cited as the ``Conventional Arms Threat Reduction Act of 2004''.
FINDINGS; SENSE OF CONGRESS.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The global proliferation of man-portable air defense systems (MANPADS), other small arms and light weapons, and tactical missile systems poses a direct threat to the national security of the United States.
The use of MANPADS and other small arms and light weapons by terrorists and insurgent groups continues to hamper United States efforts to achieve peace and security in Iraq and Afghanistan.
The proliferation of tactical missile systems provides many regimes with a means of income and threatens international peace and security.
The Government Accountability Office has estimated that there are between 500,000 and 750,000 MANPADS in the world.
Many countries that possess stocks of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems no longer require such weapons for their own security or self defense, but do not possess the means for the elimination or safeguarding of such systems.
There is currently no single United States program designed to promote efforts in other countries related to conventional arms threat reduction and the elimination of tactical missiles.
The Department of State has not used the Nonproliferation and Disarmament Fund for any activity to eliminate any tactical missile systems since 2002.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) where appropriate, the United States Government should provide assistance to countries seeking to secure, remove, or eliminate stocks of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems that pose a proliferation threat; and (2) given the clear links between global networks of terrorism and networks of the illicit trade in small arms and light weapons, the United States Government should place consistent, broad, and continued emphasis on combating the proliferation of MANPADS, other small arms and light weapons, and tactical missile systems within the broader nonproliferation strategy of the United States.
It is the policy of the United States to assist the governments of other countries in safeguarding or eliminating stocks of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems that pose a proliferation threat.
GLOBAL PROGRAM FOR THE SAFEGUARDING AND ELIMINATION OF CONVENTIONAL ARMS.
In General.--The Secretary of State is authorized to carry out an accelerated global program to secure, remove, or eliminate stocks of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems, as well as related equipment and facilities, that are determined by the Secretary to pose a proliferation threat.
Program Elements.--The program authorized under subsection (a) may include the following activities: (1) Humanitarian demining activities.
Small arms and light weapons destruction activities.
Programs for the elimination or securing of tactical missile systems.
Programs for the elimination or securing of MANPADS.
Programs to assist countries in the safe handling and proper storage of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems.
Cooperative programs with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and other international organizations to assist countries in the safe handling and proper storage or elimination of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems.
The utilization of funds for the elimination or safeguarding of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems.
The management of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems at locations where United States funds have been used to provide for the security of such weapons.
Actions to ensure that equipment and funds, including security upgrades at locations for the storage or disposition of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, tactical missile systems, and related equipment that are determined by the Secretary of State to pose a proliferation threat, continue to be used for authorized purposes.
OFFICE OF CONVENTIONAL ARMS THREAT REDUCTION.
There is established within the Department of State an Office of Conventional Arms Threat Reduction.
The principal duties of the head of such office are to formulate policy on conventional arms threat reduction and to plan and administer programs for carrying out activities under section 4.
REPORT ON CONVENTIONAL ARMS THREAT REDUCTION.
In General.--Not later than 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of State shall submit to the appropriate congressional committees a report on conventional arms threat reduction.
Content.--The report required under subsection (a) shall include the following information: (1) A description of prior efforts of the Department of State regarding conventional arms threat reduction.
A description of the progress made in initiating the operations of the Office of Conventional Arms Threat Reduction established under section 5.
A description, on a country-by-country basis, of the implementation of a global strategy for the elimination or safeguarding of MANPADS, other conventional weapons, and tactical missile systems, including, to the extent possible, a prioritization of such elimination and safeguarding efforts with respect to the proliferation sensitivity of such weapons in each country.
An evaluation of the extent to which activities under this Act and other United States Government programs are integrated to ensure that the conventional arms threat reduction efforts of the United States are consistent with United States policy and goals in countries receiving assistance through such activities.
A description of the scope and nature of United States programs related to the elimination of tactical missile systems.
Form.--The report required under subsection (a) shall be in unclassified form, but may contain a classified annex.
In General.--In addition to sums already authorized to be appropriated, there is authorized to be appropriated to the President $50,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 for carrying out activities under this Act.
Limitation.--Of the funds authorized to be appropriated under subsection (a), not more than $10,000,000 may be obligated until the Secretary of State submits to the appropriate congressional committees the report required under section 6.
In this Act: (1) The term ``appropriate congressional committees'' means the Committee on Foreign Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives.
The term ``Nonproliferation and Disarmament Fund'' means the Nonproliferation and Disarmament Fund established under section 504 of the FREEDOM Support Act (22 United States Code 5854).
The term ``small arms and light weapons'' means revolvers and self-loading pistols, rifles and carbines, submachine guns, assault rifles, light machine guns, heavy machine guns, hand-held under barrel and mounted grenade launchers, portable antiaircraft guns, portable antitank guns, recoilless rifles, portable antitank and antiaircraft missiles and rocket systems (including launch tubes, gripstocks, and thermal batteries), mortars of calibers of less than 100 millimeters, ammunition and explosives, cartridges and rounds for small arms and light weapons, antipersonnel and antitank hand grenades, landmines, and explosives.