This Act may be cited the ``Battle of Midway National Memorial Study Act''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) September 2, 1997, marked the 52nd anniversary of the United States victory over Japan in World War II.
The Battle of Midway proved to be the turning point in the war in the Pacific, as United States Navy forces inflicted such severe losses on the Imperial Japanese Navy during the battle that the Imperial Japanese Navy never again took the offensive against the United States or the allied forces.
During the Battle of Midway on June 4, 1942, an outnumbered force of the United States Navy, consisting of 29 ships and other units of the Armed Forces under the command of Admiral Nimitz and Admiral Spruance, out-maneuvered and out- fought 350 ships of the Imperial Japanese Navy.
It is in the public interest to study whether Midway Atoll should be established as a national memorial to the Battle of Midway to express the enduring gratitude of the American people for victory in the battle and to inspire future generations of Americans with the heroism and sacrifice of the members of the Armed Forces who achieved that victory.
The historic structures and facilities on Midway Atoll should be protected and maintained.
The purpose of this Act is to require a study of the feasibility and suitability of designating the Midway Atoll as a National Memorial to the Battle of Midway within the boundaries of the Midway Atoll National Wildlife Refuge.
The study of the Midway Atoll and its environs shall include, but not be limited to, identification of interpretative opportunities for the educational and inspirational benefit of present and future generations, and of the unique and significant circumstances involving the defense of the island by the United States in World War II and the Battle of Midway.
STUDY OF THE ESTABLISHMENT OF MIDWAY ATOLL AS A NATIONAL MEMORIAL TO THE BATTLE OF MIDWAY.
In General.--Not later than six months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall, acting through the Director of the National Park Service and in consultation with the Director of the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the International Midway Memorial Foundation, Inc. (hereafter referred to as the ``Foundation''), and Midway Phoenix Corporation, carry out a study of the suitability and feasibility of establishing Midway Atoll as a national memorial to the Battle of Midway.
Considerations.--In studying the establishment of Midway Atoll as a national memorial to the Battle of Midway under subsection (a), the Secretary shall address the following: (1) The appropriate federal agency to manage such a memorial, and whether and under what conditions, to lease or otherwise allow the Foundation or another appropriate entity to administer, maintain, and fully utilize the lands (including any equipment, facilities, infrastructure, and other improvements) and waters of Midway Atoll if designated as a national memorial.
Whether designation as a national memorial would conflict with current management of Midway Atoll as a wildlife refuge and whether, and under what circumstances, the needs and requirements of the wildlife refuge should take precedence over the needs and requirements of a national memorial on Midway Atoll.
Whether, and under what conditions, to permit the use of the facilities on Sand Island for purposes other than a wildlife refuge or a national memorial.
Whether to impose conditions on public access to Midway Atoll as a national memorial.
Report.--Upon completion of the study required under subsection (a), the Secretary shall submit, to the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives, a report on the study, which shall include any recommendations for further legislative action.
The report shall also include an inventory of all known past and present facilities and structures of historical significance on Midway Atoll and its environs.
The report shall include a description of each historic facility and structure and a discussion of how each will contribute to the designation and interpretation of the proposed national memorial.
Nothing in this Act shall be construed to delay or prohibit discussions between the Foundation and the United States Fish and Wildlife Service or any other government entity regarding the future role of the Foundation on Midway Atoll.
Passed the Senate November 4, 1997.
Attest: GARY SISCO, Secretary.