This Act may be cited as the ``Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) United States airline traffic is increasing.
The number of domestic passengers carried by United States air carriers has nearly tripled since 1978, to over 660 million annually.
The number is expected to grow to more than 1 billion by 2010.
The number of domestic flights has been steadily increasing as well.
The Inspector General of the Department of Transporation has found that with this growth in traffic have come increases in delays, cancellations, and customer dissatisfaction with air carrier service.
The Federal Aviation Administration has reported that, between 1995 and 2000, delays increased 90 percent and cancellations increased 104 percent.
In 2000, over 1 in 4 flights were delayed, canceled, or diverted, affecting approximately 163 million passengers.
At the 30 largest United States airports, the number of flights with taxi-out times of 1 hour or more increased 165 percent between 1995 and 2000.
The number of flights with taxi-out times of 4 hours or more increased 341 percent during the same period.
Certain flights, particularly those scheduled during peak periods at the nation's busiest airports, are subject to chronic delays.
In December, 2000, 626 regularly-scheduled flights arrived late 70 percent of the time or more, as reported by the Department of Transportation.
Consumer complaints filed with the Department of Transportation about airline travel have nearly quadrupled since 1995.
The Department of Transportation Inspector General has estimated that air carriers receive between 100 and 400 complaints for every complaint filed with the Department of Transportation.
At the same time as the number of complaints about airline travel has increased, the resources devoted to Department of Transportation handling of such complaints have declined sharply.
The Department of Transportation Inspector General has reported that the staffing of the Department of Transportation office responsible for handling airline customer service complaints declined from 40 in 1985 to just 17 in 2000.
In June, 1999, the Air Transport Association and its member airlines agreed to an Airline Customer Service Commitment designed to address mounting consumer dissatisfaction and improve customer service in the industry.
The Department of Transportation Inspector General has reviewed the airlines' implementation of the Airline Customer Service Commitment.
The Inspector General found that: (A) The Airline Customer Service Commitment has prompted air carriers to address consumer concerns in many areas, resulting in positive changes in how air travelers are treated.
Despite this progress, there continue to be significant shortfalls in reliable and timely communication with passengers about flight delays and cancellations.
Reports to passengers about flight status are frequently untimely, incomplete, or unreliable.
Air carriers need to do more, in the areas under their control, to reduce over-scheduling, the number of chronically-late or canceled flights, and the amount of checked baggage that does not show up with the passenger upon arrival.
A number of further steps could be taken to improve the effectiveness and enforceability of the Airline Customer Service Commitment and to improve the consumer protections available to commercial air passengers.
FAIR TREATMENT OF AIRLINE PASSENGERS.
In General.--Subchapter I of chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Airline passengers' right to know ``(a) Disclosure of On-Time Performance.--Whenever any person contacts an air carrier to make a reservation or to purchase a ticket on a consistently-delayed or canceled flight, the air carrier shall disclose (without being requested), at the time the reservation or purchase is requested, the on-time performance and cancellation rate for that flight for the most recent month for which data is available.
For purposes of this paragraph, the term `consistently-delayed or canceled flight' means a regularly-scheduled flight-- ``(1) that has failed to arrive on-time (as defined in section 234.2 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations) at least 40 percent of the time during the most recent 3-month period for which data are available; or ``(2) at least 20 percent of the departures of which have been canceled during the most recent 3-month period for which data are available.
On-Time Performance Posted on Website.--An air carrier that has a website on the Internet shall include in the information posted about each flight operated by that air carrier the flight's on-time performance (as defined in section 234.2 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations) for the most recent month for which data is available.
Passenger Information Concerning Delays, Cancellations, and Diversions.-- ``(1) In general--Whenever a flight is delayed, canceled, or diverted, the air carrier operating that flight shall provide to customers at the airport and on board the aircraft, in a timely, reasonable, and truthful manner, the best available information regarding such delay, cancellation, or diversion, including-- ``(A) the cause of the delay, cancellation, or diversion; and ``(B) in the case of a delayed flight, the carrier's best estimate of the departure time.
Public information.--An air carrier that provides a telephone number or website for the public to obtain flight status information shall ensure that the information provided via such telephone number or website will reflect the best and most current information available concerning delays, cancellations, and diversions.
Pre-Departure Notification System.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act, each air carrier that is a reporting carrier (as defined in section 234.2 of title 14, Code of Federal Regulations) shall establish a reasonable system (taking into account the size, financial condition, and cost structure of the air carrier) for notifying passengers before their arrival at the airport when the air carrier knows sufficiently in advance of the check-in time for their flight that the flight will be canceled or delayed by an hour or more.
Coordination of Monitors; Current Information.--At any airport at which the status of flights to or from that airport is displayed to the public on flight status monitors operated by the airport, each air carrier the flights of which are displayed on the monitors shall work closely with the airport to ensure that flight information shown on the monitors reflects the best and most current information available.
Frequent Flyer Program Information.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act, each air carrier that maintains a frequent flyer program shall increase the comprehensiveness and accessibility to the public of its reporting of frequent flyer award redemption information.
The information reported shall include-- ``(1) the percentage of successful redemptions of requested frequent flyer awards for free tickets or class-of-service upgrades for the air carrier; ``(2) the percentage of successful redemptions of requested frequent flyer awards for free tickets or class-of-service upgrades for each flight in the air carrier's top 100 origination and destination markets; and ``(3) the percentage of seats available for frequent flyer awards on each flight in its top 100 origination and destination markets.
Overbooking.-- ``(1) Oversold flight disclosure.--An air carrier shall inform a ticketed passenger, upon request, whether the flight on which the passenger is ticketed is oversold.
Bumping compensation information.--An air carrier shall inform passengers on a flight what the air carrier will pay passengers involuntarily denied boarding before making offers to passengers to induce them voluntarily to relinquish seats.
Disclosure of bumping policy.--An air carrier shall disclose, both on its Internet website, if any, and on its ticket jackets, its criteria for determining which passengers will be involuntarily denied boarding on an oversold flight and its procedures for offering compensation to passengers voluntarily or involuntarily denied boarding on an oversold flight.
Mishandled Baggage Reporting.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act, each air carrier shall revise its reporting for mishandled baggage to show-- ``(1) the percentage of checked baggage that is mishandled during a reporting period; ``(2) the number of mishandled bags during a reporting period; and ``(3) the average length of time between the receipt of a passenger's claim for missing baggage and the delivery of the bag to the passenger.
Small Air Carrier Exception.--This section does not apply to an air carrier that operates no civil aircraft designed to have a maximum passenger seating capacity of more than 30 passengers.
Enforcement and enhancement of airline passenger service commitments ``(a) Adoption of Customer Service Plan.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act, an air carrier certificated under section 41102 that has not already done so shall-- ``(1) develop and adopt a customer service plan designed to implement the provisions of the Airline Customer Service Commitment executed by the Air Transport Association and 14 of its member airlines on June 17, 1999; ``(2) incorporate its customer service plan in its contract of carriage; ``(3) incorporate the provisions of that Commitment if, and to the extent that those provisions are more specific than, or relate to issues not covered by, its customer service plan; ``(4) submit a copy of its customer service plan to the Secretary of Transportation; ``(5) post a copy of its contract of carriage on its Internet website, if any; and ``(6) notify all ticketed customers, either at the time a ticket is purchased or on a printed itinerary provided to the customer, that the contract of carriage is available upon request or on the air carrier's website.
Modifications.--Any modification in any air carrier's customer service plan shall be promptly incorporated in its contract of carriage, submitted to the Secretary, and posted on its website.
Quality Assurance and Performance Measurement System.-- ``(1) Air carriers.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act, an air carrier certificated under section 41102, after consultation with the Inspector General of the Department of Transportation, shall-- ``(A) establish a quality assurance and performance measurement system for customer service; and ``(B) establish an internal audit process to measure compliance with its customer service plan.
DOT approval required.--Each air carrier shall submit the measurement system established under paragraph (1)(A) and the audit process established under paragraph (1)(B) to the Secretary of Transportation for review and approval.
Customer Service Plan Enhancements.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of the Fair Treatment of Airline Passengers Act, an air carrier certificated under section 41102 shall-- ``(1) amend its customer service plan to specify that it will offer to a customer purchasing a ticket at any of the air carrier's ticket offices or airport ticket service counters the lowest fare available for which that customer is eligible; and ``(2) establish performance goals designed to minimize incidents of mishandled baggage.
Small Air Carrier Exception.--This section does not apply to an air carrier that operates no civil aircraft designed to have a maximum passenger seating capacity of more than 30 passengers.''.
Civil Penalty.--Section 46301(a)(7) is amended by striking ``40127 or 41712'' and inserting ``40127, 41712, 41722, or 41723''.
Conforming Amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 417 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 41721 the following: ``41722.
Airline passengers' right to know.
Enforcement and enhancement of airline passenger service commitments.''.
REQUIRED ACTION BY SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION.
Uniform Minimum Check-In Time; Baggage Statistics; Bumping Compensation.--Within 6 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall-- (1) establish a uniform check-in deadline and require air carriers to disclose, both in their contracts of carriage and on ticket jackets, their policies on how those deadlines apply to passengers making connections; (2) revise the Department of Transportation's method for calculating and reporting the rate of mishandled baggage for air carriers to reflect the reporting requirements of section 41722(h) of title 49, United States Code; and (3) revise the Department of Transportation's Regulation (14 Code of Federal Regulations 250.5) governing the amount of denied boarding compensation for passengers denied boarding involuntarily to increase the maximum amount thereof.
Review of Regulations.-- (1) In general.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete a thorough review of the Department of Transportation's regulations that relate to air carriers' treatment of customers, and make such modifications as may be necessary or appropriate to ensure the enforceability of those regulations and the provisions of this Act and of title 49, United States Code, that relate to such treatment, or otherwise to promote the purposes of this Act.
Specific areas of review.--As part of such review and modification, the Secretary shall, to the extent necessary or appropriate-- (A) modify existing regulations to reflect this Act and sections 41722 and 41723 of title 49, United States Code; (B) modify existing regulations to the extent necessary to ensure that they are sufficiently clear and specific to be enforceable; (C) establish minimum standards, compliance with which can be measured quantitatively, of air carrier performance with respect to customer service issues addressed by the Department of Transportation regulations or the Airline Customer Service Commitment executed by the Air Transport Association and 14 of its member airlines on June 17, 1999; (D) address the manner in which the Department of Transportation regulations should treat customer service commitments that relate to actions occurring prior to the purchase of a ticket, such as the commitment to offer the lowest available fare, and whether such the inclusion of such commitments in the contract of carriage creates an enforceable obligation prior to the purchase of a ticket; (E) restrict the ability of air carriers to include provisions in the contract of carriage restricting a passenger's choice of forum in the event of a legal dispute; and (F) require each air carrier to report information to Department of Transportation on complaints submitted to the air carrier, and modify the reporting of complaints in the Department of Transportation's monthly customer service reports, so those reports will reflect complaints submitted to air carriers as well as complaints submitted to the Department.
Expedited procedure.--Within 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall complete all actions necessary to establish regulations to implement the requirements of this subsection.
IMPROVED ENFORCEMENT OF AIR PASSENGER RIGHTS.
Use of Authorized Funds.--In utilizing the funds authorized by section 223 of the Wendell H. Ford Aviation Investment and Reform Act for the 21st Century for the purpose of enforcing the rights of air travelers, the Secretary of Transportation shall give priority to the areas identified by the Inspector General of the Department of Transportation as needing improvement in Report No.
AV-2001-020, submitted to the Congress on February 12, 2001.
Secretary Required To Consult the Secretary's Inspector General.--The Secretary of Transportation, in carrying out this Act and the provisions of section 41722 and 41723 of title 49, United States Code, shall consult with the Inspector General of the Department of Transportation.