The Congress finds the following: (1) The President has proposed a multibillion dollar reconstruction project for Iraq.
The President's plan includes resources to rebuild potable water and wastewater treatment facilities; schools and health facilities; ports and airports; the electric power system, roads, and bridges; railroad infrastructure; solid waste management services; irrigation systems; and selected local government buildings.
State and local governments in the United States have their own unmet infrastructure and social services needs.
State and local governments represent a significant segment of the national economy whose economic health is essential to national economic prosperity.
Present national economic problems have imposed considerable hardships on State and local government budgets.
Those governments, because of their own fiscal difficulties, are being forced to take budget-related actions which tend to undermine Federal Government efforts to stimulate the economy.
Efforts to stimulate the economy through reductions in Federal Government tax obligations or increased spending on Federal programs are weakened when State and local governments are forced to increase taxes or cut spending.
Efforts by the Federal Government to stimulate the economic recovery will be substantially enhanced by a program of emergency Federal Government assistance to State and local governments to help prevent those governments from taking budget-related actions which undermine the Federal Government efforts to stimulate economic recovery.
State and local governments deserve, at a minimum, the same level of Federal investment to address infrastructure and social services shortfalls as the amount of relief and reconstruction funds provided to Iraq.
Payments to State and Local Governments.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall, in accordance with the provisions of this Act, make payments to States and local governments to coordinate budget-related actions by such governments with Federal Government efforts to stimulate economic recovery.
Authorization of Appropriation.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of the Treasury for fiscal year 2003 for payments under this Act an amount equal to at least the total amount appropriated for fiscal year 2003 under the heading ``Iraq Relief and Reconstruction Fund'' in the Emergency Wartime Supplemental Appropriations Act, 2003, and any amounts appropriated for such Fund in any subsequent appropriation Act.
Such amounts shall be in addition to, and not in lieu of, other amounts appropriated for payments to States and local governments.
Availability to Local Governments.--Not less than one-third of the amount appropriated pursuant to the authorization in subsection (b) shall be made available to local governments under the applicable laws of a given State.
The Secretary of the Treasury shall establish a formula, within 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, for determining the allocation of payments under this Act.
The formula shall give priority weight to the following factors: (1) The unemployment rate in relation to the national average unemployment rate.
The duration of the unemployment rate above such average.
USE OF FUNDS BY STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENTS.
In General.--Funds received under this Act may be used only for priority expenditures.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``priority expenditures'' means only-- (1) ordinary and necessary maintenance and operating expenses for-- (A) primary, secondary, or higher education, including school building renovation; (B) public safety; (C) public health, including hospitals and public health laboratories; (D) social services for the disadvantaged or aged; (E) roads, transportation, and water infrastructure; and (F) housing; and (2) ordinary and necessary capital expenditures authorized by law.
Certifications by State and Local Governments.--The Secretary of the Treasury may accept a certification by the chief executive officer of a State or local government that the State or local government has used the funds received by it under this Act only for priority expenditures, unless the Secretary determines that such certification is not sufficiently reliable to enable the Secretary to carry out this Act.
The Secretary shall prescribe by rule the time and manner in which the certification must be filed.