TITLE I--CONGRESSIONAL COMPLIANCE WITH CERTAIN GENERALLY APPLICABLE LAWS SECTION 101.
This title may be cited as the ``Equity for Congress Act''.
COVERAGE OF CONGRESS IN MATTERS INVOLVING EMPLOYMENT.
Application.-- (1) In general.--The rights and protections provided pursuant to this title and the provisions of law specified in paragraph (2) shall apply with respect to employment by the Congress.
Provisions.--The provisions of law that shall apply with respect to employment by Congress are-- (A) title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 United States Code 2000e et sequentes), (B) the Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (29 United States Code 621 et sequentes), (C) the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 151 et sequentes), (D) section 1977 of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 United States Code 1881), (E) section 1977A of the Revised Statutes of the United States (42 United States Code 1881a), (F) the Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938 (29 United States Code 201 et sequentes), (G) the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes), and (H) the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993 (29 United States Code 2601 et sequentes).
Enforcement by Administrative Action.-- (1) In general.--A congressional employee, including a class or organization acting on behalf of a congressional employee, may bring an administrative action in accordance with paragraph (2) before an administrative agency to enforce the application of a law set out in subsection (a)(2) by the Congress or the congressional employer of such employee to such employee if a similarly situated complaining party may bring such an action before such agency.
Requirements.--An administrative action described in paragraph (1) shall be commenced in accordance with the statutory and procedural requirements of the law which is sought to be enforced.
Administrative action.--An administrative agency before which is brought an action described in paragraph (1) may take such action against the Congress or congressional employer sited in the action as the agency could take in an action brought by a similarly situated complaining party.
Enforcement by Civil Action.-- (1) In general.--A congressional employee, including a class or organization acting on behalf of a congressional employee, may bring a civil action to enforce a provision of law set out in subsection (a)(2) in a court authorized by paragraph (3) against the Congress or the congressional employer of such employee if a similarly situated complaining party could bring such a civil action.
Requirements.--A civil action described in paragraph (1) shall be commenced in accordance with the statutory and procedural requirements of the law which is sought to be enforced.
Venue.--An action may be brought under paragraph (1) to enforce a provision of law set out in subsection (a)(2) in any court of competent jurisdiction in which a similarly situated complaining party may otherwise bring a civil action to enforce such provision.
Relief.--In any civil action brought under paragraph (1) to enforce a provision of law set out in subsection (a)(2), the court-- (A) may grant as relief against the Congress or congressional employer any equitable relief otherwise available to a similarly situated complaining party bringing a civil action to enforce such provision, (B) may grant as relief against the Congress any damages that would otherwise be available to such a complaining party, and (C) allow such fees and costs as would be allowed in such an action by such a party.
MATTERS OTHER THAN EMPLOYMENT.
Rights and Protections.--In accordance with paragraph (6) of section 509(a) of the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12209), the rights and protections provided under such Act shall apply with respect to the conduct of the Congress regarding matters other than employment.
Enforcement.--To enforce paragraph (1), any person may bring-- (1) an administrative action described in section 102(b), or (2) a civil action described in section 102(c).
Application.--The rights and protections provided under section 552a of title 5, United States Code, shall apply with respect to information in the possession of the Congress.
Enforcement.--To enforce subsection (a), any person may bring-- (1) an administrative action described in section 102(b), or (2) a civil action described in section 102(c), against the Congress or a congressional employer in possession of information.
Application.--The rights and protections provided pursuant to chapter 40 of title 28, United States Code, shall apply with respect to investigations of congressional improprieties.
Enforcement.--To enforce subsection (a), any person may bring-- (1) an administrative action described in section 102(b), or (2) a civil action described in section 102(c), against any party with a duty under such chapter 40.
AMENDMENT TO THE STANDING RULES OF THE SENATE.
Rule XIV of the Standing Rules of the Senate is amended by adding at the appropriate place the following: ``No bill, resolution, or amendment which creates a requirement of general applicability but which exempts the Congress of the United States from its provisions may be considered except by a vote of three-fifths of Senators duly chosen and sworn.''.
AMENDMENT TO THE RULES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Rule XXIV of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following: ``9 No bill, resolution, or amendment which creates a requirement of general applicability but which exempts the Congress of the United States from its provisions may be considered except by a vote of three- fifths of the Members duly chosen and sworn.''.
For purposes of this title: (1) The term ``congressional employer'' means-- (A) a supervisor as described in paragraph 12 of Rule XXXVII of the Standing Rules of the Senate, (B)(i) a Member of the House of Representatives with respect to the administrative, clerical, and other assistants of a Member, (ii) a Member who is the chairman of a committee with respect to the professional, clerical, and other assistants to the committee, (iii) the ranking minority Member of a committee with respect to the minority staff members of the committee, (iv) a Member who is the chairman of a subcommittee which has its own staff and financial authorization with respect to the professional, clerical, and other assistants to the subcommittee, (v) the ranking minority Member of a subcommittee with respect to the minority staff members of the subcommittee, (vi) the majority and minority leaders of the House of Representatives and the majority and minority whips with respect to the research, clerical, and other assistants to their respective offices, and (vii) the other officers of the House of Representatives with respect to the employees of such officers, (C) the Architect of the Capitol with respect to the employees of the Architect of the Capitol, (D) the Director of the Congressional Budget Office with respect to the employees of such office, (E) the Comptroller General with respect to the employees of the General Accounting Office, (F) the Public Printer with respect to the employees of the Government Printing Office, (G) the Librarian of Congress with respect to employees of the Library of Congress, (H) the Director of the Office of Technology Assessment with respect to employees of such office, and (I) the Director of the United States Botanic Gardens with respect to the employees of such gardens.
The term ``congressional employee'' means an employee who is employed by, or an applicant for employment with, a congressional employer.
The term ``similarly situated complaining party'' means-- (A) in the case of a party seeking to enforce a provision with a separate enforcement mechanism for governmental complaining parties, a governmental complaining party, or (B) in the case of a party seeking to enforce a provision with no such separate mechanism, a complaining party.
This title shall take effect 120 days after the date of its enactment.
TITLE II--OTHER CONGRESSIONAL REFORMS SEC.
APPLICATION OF THE FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT.
In General.--The provisions of section 552 of title 5, United States Code, commonly known as the Freedom of Information Act, shall apply to the Congress.
Office.--The Congress shall establish an office, to be known as the ``Freedom of Information Access Office'', in order to assure that Members of Congress comply with the provisions of law referred to in subsection (a).
HEALTH CARE REFORMS TO BE APPLICABLE TO THE CONGRESS.
It is the sense of the Congress that any law enacted pertaining to the reform of our Nation's health care system should apply to Members of Congress.
LIMIT ON CONGRESSIONAL APPROPRIATIONS.
The total of amounts appropriated for the legislative branch of the Government for fiscal year 1995 may not exceed the total of amounts appropriated for the legislative branch of the Government for fiscal year 1994.
PROHIBITION OF FREE PARKING FOR THE CONGRESS.
Each Member of Congress and each employee of the Congress shall pay for parking on the Capitol grounds and parking at any other location provided by the Government, in the same amount as officers and employees of the executive branch of the Government pay for similar parking.
Official travel performed by Members and employees of the Congress shall be subject to the same guidelines, as to mode and cost of travel, as are applicable to the executive branch of the Government.
BARBER SHOPS AND BEAUTY SHOPS TO BE OPERATED UNDER CONTRACT.
Any barber shop or beauty shop on the Capitol grounds shall be operated by contract with a private sector entity.
PROHIBITION OF EMPLOYMENT OF ELEVATOR OPERATORS.
No elevator operator may be employed for any elevator in the Capitol, any House of Representatives office building, or any Senate office building.
OFFICE MOVES TO BE PAID FROM OFFICIAL ALLOWANCES.
The cost of each office move for a Member of Congress shall be paid from an official allowance made available to the Member.
PROHIBITION OF PREFERENTIAL AIRPORT PARKING.
No Member of Congress or employee of the Congress may use preferential parking at any airport.
GIFT AND TICKET PROHIBITION.
No Member of Congress or employee of the Congress may accept any gift or ticket from a person who is required to register under the Federal Regulation of Lobbying Act (2 United States Code 261, et sequentes).
TREATMENT AND REVIEW OF CONGRESSIONAL EXPENSE ACCOUNTS.
The expense accounts of Members and employees of the Congress shall be subject to the same treatment and review as are applicable to the executive branch of the Government.
The annuities and other retirement benefits of Members and employees of the Congress shall be the same as the annuities and other retirement benefits that are available with respect to the executive branch of the Government.
NO LIMOUSINE SERVICE FOR THE CONGRESS.
No Member of Congress or employee of the Congress may use any limousine service that is paid for from official funds.
PROHIBITION OF PROXY VOTING IN COMMITTEES OF THE HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES.
Clause 2(f) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended to read as follows: ``(f) No vote by any member of any committee or subcommittee with respect to any measure may be cast by proxy.''.
HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE AND SUBCOMMITTEE ATTENDANCE AND VOTING RECORDS TO BE AVAILABLE TO THE PUBLIC.
Clause 2(e)(2) of rule XI of the Rules of the House of Representatives is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``All committee and subcommittee attendance and voting records shall be made available to the public.''.
PROHIBITION OF PURCHASE OF CALENDARS FOR THE CONGRESS.
Appropriated funds may not be used to purchase United States Capitol Historical Society calendars for the Congress.
PROHIBITION OF SPECIAL SERVICES FOR MEMBERS AND EMPLOYEES OF THE CONGRESS.
No Federal, State, or local department or agency may provide any service or assistance for a Member or employee of the Congress that is not provided for all citizens.
The preceding sentence does not apply in the case of assistance in support of the constituent or legislative responsibilities of a Member or employee of the Congress.