This Act may be cited as the ``21st Century Mentor Teacher Act''.
Title II of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6601 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating part E as part F; and (2) by inserting after part D the following new part: ``PART E--MENTOR TEACHER PROGRAM ``SEC.
``The purposes of this part are to give local educational agencies the resources to establish mentor teacher programs to enable experienced teachers to train novice or beginner teachers.
``In this part: ``(1) Board certified.--The term `board certified' means successful completion of all requirements to be certified by the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.
Mentor teacher.--The term `mentor teacher' means a teacher who-- ``(A) is permanently certified or licensed; ``(B) has demonstrated mastery of pedagogical and subject matter skills (such as by becoming board certified); ``(C) has provided evidence of superior teaching abilities and interpersonal relationship qualities; and ``(D) provides mentor services for not more than 2 academic years out of 5 academic years.
Novice teacher.--The term `novice teacher' means a teacher who has been teaching not more than 3 years at a public elementary school or secondary school.
Authority.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants on a competitive basis to local educational agencies to develop and implement mentor teacher programs as described in subsection (d).
Geographic distribution.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Secretary shall award grants under paragraph (1) so that such grants are distributed among the school districts with the highest concentration of novice teachers.
Duration.--A grant under subsection (a) shall be awarded for a period of 5 years.
Amount.--The amount of a grant awarded under subsection (a), shall be determined based on-- ``(1) the total amount appropriated for a fiscal year under section 2358 and made available to carry out this part; and ``(2) the extent of the concentration of novice teachers in the school district involved.
Authorized Activities.--The mentor teacher programs described in subsection (a) shall provide training to novice teachers on effective teaching techniques through observation, instruction, coaching, and mentoring by experienced educators.
In General.--A local educational agency desiring a grant under section 2353 shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents.--Each application submitted pursuant to subsection (a) shall include-- ``(1) a statement describing the program activities for which amounts received under the grant will be used; ``(2) a statement describing the goals and objectives for the program activities described in paragraph (1), including goals of-- ``(A) enhancing overall student achievement; ``(B) increasing the number of permanently certified and licensed teachers; ``(C) increasing the number of provisionally certified and licensed teachers seeking board certification; and ``(D) maximizing the retention in the profession of teaching of certified and licensed teachers; and ``(3) a statement describing the manner in which the goals and objectives described in paragraph (2) will be measured.
Approval of Application.--The Secretary shall make a determination regarding an application submitted under subsection (a) based on a recommendation of a peer review panel described in subsection (d), and any other criteria that the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
Peer Review Panel.-- ``(1) Establishment.--The Secretary shall establish a peer review panel to review and make recommendations as to whether applications submitted pursuant to subsection (a) should be approved.
Recommendations.--In making a recommendation described in paragraph (1), the panel shall give consideration to the same factors that the Secretary is required to consider under section 2353(a)(2).
In General.--Grant payments shall be made under this part on an annual basis.
Administrative Costs.--Each local educational agency that receives a grant under section 2353 shall use not more than 2 percent of the amount awarded under the grant for administrative costs.
Denial of Grant.--If the Secretary determines that a local educational agency has failed to make substantial progress in attaining the performance objectives and goals described in section 2354(b)(2), such an agency shall not be eligible for a grant payment under this part in the next succeeding year.
Report by the Secretary.--Not later than 6 months after receipt of reports described in subsection (b), the Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions of the Senate and the Committee on Education and the Workforce of the House of Representatives a report of program activities funded under this part.
Report by Applicant.--Not later than March 31, 2004, each local educational agency receiving a grant under this part shall submit a report to the Secretary describing whether the program established under section 2353 was effective in meeting the goals described in subparagraphs (A) through (D) of section 2354(b)(2).
``The Secretary may not award a grant to a local educational agency under section 2353 unless the local educational agency agrees that, with respect to costs to be incurred by the agency in carrying out activities for which the grant was awarded, the agency shall provide (directly or through donations from public or private entities) in non- Federal contributions an amount equal to 25 percent of the amount of the grant awarded to the agency.
``There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 2000 through 2004.