MARJORY STONEMAN DOUGLAS WILDERNESS AND ERNEST Federal Reporter COE VISITOR CENTER, EVERGLADES NATIONAL PARK.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Marjory Stoneman Douglas, through her book, ``The Everglades: River of Grass'' (1947), defined the Everglades for the American people and for the world.
Her book was the first to stimulate widespread understanding of the Everglades ecosystem and ultimately served to awaken the desire to restore its health.
In her 107th year, Mrs. Douglas is the sole surviving member of the original group of people who devoted decades of selfless effort to establish Everglades National Park.
When the water supply and ecology of the Everglades, both within and outside the park, became threatened by drainage and development, Mrs. Douglas dedicated the balance of her life to the defense of the Everglades through extraordinary personal effort and by inspiring countless other people to take action.
For these and many other accomplishments, the President awarded Mrs. Douglas the Medal of Freedom on Earth Day, 1994.
Ernest Federal Reporter Coe (1886-1951) was a leader in the creation of Everglades National Park.
He organized the Tropic Everglades National Park Association in 1928 and was widely regarded as the ``Father of Everglades National Park''.
As a landscape architect, Mr. Coe's vision for the park recognized the need to protect south Florida's diverse wildlife and their habitats for future generations.
His original park proposal included lands and waters subsequently protected within Everglades National Park, the Big Cypress National Preserve, and the Florida Keys National Marine Sanctuary.
Mr. Coe's leadership, selfless devotion, and commitment to achieving this vision culminated in the authorization of Everglades National Park by Congress in 1934.
Afterwards, Mr. Coe fought tirelessly and lobbied strenuously for establishment of the park, finally realizing his dream in 1947.
He accomplished much of this work at his own expense, which dramatically demonstrated his commitment to establishment of the park.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to commemorate the vision, leadership, and enduring contributions of Marjory Stoneman Douglas and Ernest Federal Reporter Coe in the protection of the Everglades and the establishment of Everglades National Park.
Marjory Stoneman Douglas Wilderness.-- (1) Redesignation.--Section 401(3) of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-625; 92 United States Statutes at Large 3490; 16 United States Code 1132 note) is amended by striking out ``to be known as the Everglades Wilderness'' and inserting ``to be known as the Marjory Stoneman Douglas Wilderness to commemorate the vision and leadership shown by Mrs. Douglas in the protection of the Everglades and the establishment of Everglades National Park''.
Notice of redesignation.--As part of the redesignation of the ``Everglades Wilderness'' as the ``Marjory Stoneman Douglas Wilderness'' under paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Interior shall provide such notification of the redesignation by signs, materials, maps, markers, interpretive programs, and other means (including changes in existing signs, materials, maps, and markers) as will adequately inform the public of the redesignation of the wilderness area and the reasons therefor.
References.--Any reference in any law, regulation, document, record, map, or other paper of the United States to the ``Everglades Wilderness'' shall be considered to be a reference to ``Marjory Stoneman Douglas Wilderness''.
Ernest Federal Reporter Coe Visitor Center.-- (1) Designation.--Section 103 of the Everglades National Park Protection and Expansion Act of 1989 (16 United States Code 410r-7) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(f) Ernest Federal Reporter Coe Visitor Center.--Upon completion of construction of the main visitor center facility at the headquarters of Everglades National Park, the Secretary of the Interior shall designate the visitor center facility as `The Ernest Federal Reporter Coe Visitor Center' to commemorate the vision and leadership shown by Mr. Coe in the establishment and protection of Everglades National Park.''.
Conforming amendment.--Subsection (e) of such section is amended by striking ``Visitor Center'' and inserting ``Marjory Stoneman Douglas Visitor Center''.
Technical correction.--Subsection (c)(2) of such section is amended by striking ``personnally-owned'' and inserting ``personally-owned''.