This Act may be cited as the ``Nursing Education and Quality of Health Care Act of 2006''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The current nursing workforce is the largest group of healthcare providers in the United States.
There will be a need for 1,200,000 new and replacement nurses by 2014.
Over 37,000 qualified applicants were turned away from entry-level nursing programs leading to a baccalaureate degree in 2005.
This number increases to 147,000 when all schools of nursing are taken into account.
Insufficient numbers of faculty is the primary reason given by schools of nursing for not accepting qualified applicants.
The average age of doctorally-prepared nurse faculty is almost 56 years old.
Nurses are the healthcare providers most likely to intercept medication errors before the errors reach patients and result in adverse events.
Employing a greater proportion of more highly educated nurses may reduce the rates of patient mortality.
RURAL NURSES TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.
Part D of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296p) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
RURAL NURSES TRAINING GRANT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to, or enter into contracts with, eligible entities for the purpose of educating nurses to serve in rural areas.
Use of Funds.--An eligible entity that receives a grant under this section shall use grant funds to develop distance learning education by-- ``(1) providing technology infrastructure to enhance or increase-- ``(A) broadband connectivity; and ``(B) education rooms wired for the Internet; ``(2) providing technology infrastructure for a video conferencing network; ``(3) recruiting, training, and supporting community-based faculty for classroom and clinical training; or ``(4) recruiting and supporting community-based sites for clinical training.
Analyses.--Not later than 1 year after the Secretary awards grants under subsection (a), and annually thereafter, the Secretary, working with the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration and appropriate nursing agencies, shall collect and perform analyses on the number of nurses in the United States to track rural nursing trends.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall generate an annual report about the status of the nursing workforce in the United States and shall disseminate the report as the Secretary determines appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2011.''.
Nurse Faculty Development Program.--Part D of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296p et sequentes) is amended by inserting after section 832 (as added by section 3) the following: ``SEC.
NURSE FACULTY DEVELOPMENT PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary, acting through the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration, shall award grants to eligible entities for the establishment and operation of demonstration projects that will expand the numbers of nurse faculty within schools of nursing, including-- ``(1) developing recruitment programs for nurses with academic credentials for faculty status who are not teaching at the time; ``(2) offering scholarships that facilitate the return of registered nurses to a school of nursing on a part-time basis for graduate education that leads to a career in nursing education; ``(3) providing additional education to enable nurses with graduate degrees to serve as faculty by obtaining teaching certificates; ``(4) developing accelerated doctoral programs that will facilitate entry in a nursing faculty position; ``(5) developing online continuing education courses and practice teaching opportunities for nurse faculty; and ``(6) developing research internships and fellowships for nursing students at academic medical centers to foster interest in academic research.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Nursing Education and Quality of Health Care Act of 2006, the Comptroller General of the United States shall prepare and submit a report to Congress that-- ``(1) addresses the causes of the nurse faculty shortage; and ``(2) makes recommendations to increase the numbers and the retention of nurse faculty members.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2011.''.
Doctoral Programs.--Section 811(f)(2) of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296j(f)(2)) is amended by striking the period at the end and inserting ``, except that in the case of a nurse faculty shortage, the Secretary may, in the Secretary's discretion, obligate more than 10 percent of such traineeships for individuals in doctoral degree programs.''.
DEVELOPING THE RURAL NURSING WORKFORCE.
Part C of title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296m) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
DEVELOPING THE RURAL NURSING WORKFORCE.
In General.--The Secretary shall award grants to, and enter into contracts with, eligible entities to increase the nursing opportunities for individuals who reside in rural communities.
The activities funded under this section shall include-- ``(1) increasing and expanding pipeline programs, including-- ``(A) mathematics and science programs; ``(B) Nurse Medical Academy of Science and Health (MASH) Camp and other health career pipeline programs for middle school and secondary school students tied to higher education curricula; ``(C) nurse mentor programs that provide experience for secondary school students in clinical settings to learn about the nursing profession; ``(D) training for middle school and secondary school guidance counselors; and ``(E) programs that attract nontraditional nursing students, including minorities and men; ``(2) supporting a web-based healthcare workforce development system that will be a database-driven website to connect employers, educators, rural communities, and students with the nursing pipeline and recruitment programs described in this section; and ``(3) increasing the program capacity of accelerated registered nurse programs that recruit individuals with baccalaureate degrees in other fields into baccalaureate or graduate degree nursing programs that serve rural communities, by-- ``(A) increasing the number of faculty; ``(B) increasing clinical training sites; and ``(C) providing financial incentives, including loan forgiveness and tuition assistance for nurses who practice in rural areas.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2011.''.
NURSING AND THE QUALITY OF HEALTHCARE.
Title VIII of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 296 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``PART J--NURSING AND IMPROVING HEALTHCARE ``SEC.
LINKING NURSING EDUCATION AND QUALITY OUTCOMES PROGRAM.
In General.--The Secretary, in collaboration with the Administrator of the Health Resources and Services Administration and the Director of the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, shall award grants to entities that meet the requirements of subsection (b) to enable the entities to carry out demonstration projects that advance the education, delivery, or measurement of quality and patient safety in nursing practice.
Eligibility.--To be eligible to receive a demonstration project grant under this section, an entity shall-- ``(1) be a school of nursing, a nursing center, an academic health center, a State or local government, or any other public or private nonprofit entity determined appropriate by the Secretary; ``(2) submit to the Secretary an application in accordance with section 802; ``(3) form a partnership with 1 or more eligible entities; and ``(4) submit a plan to the Secretary that assures grant funds received under this section will be used to support the implementation and evaluation of healthcare quality improvement activities that include-- ``(A) with respect to healthcare systems, activities relating to improving patient safety, timeliness of care, effectiveness of care, equity and efficiency of care, and patient-centeredness; or ``(B) with respect to patients, activities, including activities relating to staying healthy, getting well, living with illness or disability, and coping with end of life issues.
Priority.--In awarding grants under subsection (a), the Secretary shall give priority to entities that will carry out 1 or more of the following: ``(1) Implementation.--Implementing initiatives in professional nursing education to enhance patient safety efforts through evidence-based practice and quality improvement strategies by-- ``(A) developing partnerships between accredited schools of nursing and health care facilities, as defined in section 801, to educate registered nurses in clinical leadership, interdisciplinary team management, systems administration, outcomes and risk management, and education, for implementation in multiple healthcare settings; and ``(B) providing scholarships for registered professional nurses to pursue advanced nursing education in accordance with subsection (a).
Education.--Integrating quality and safety competencies into nursing education programs by-- ``(A) disseminating patient safety education content to a nurse faculty administrator to integrate quality competencies into each school of nursing that are consistent with technical standards that are developed or adopted by voluntary consensus standards bodies under section 12(d) of the National Technology Transfer and Advancement Act of 1995 (15 United States Code 272 note); and ``(B) developing ongoing web-based modules for continued nurse faculty education to bring research evidence into practice not later than 2 years after receiving a grant under this section; and ``(3) provide continuing education for practicing nurses, including-- ``(A) developing web-based modules related to patient safety, including topics of evidenced-based practice, professional communication, patient or family-centered care, systems thinking, informatics, collaborative practice, medication, and practice error; and ``(B) developing systems for the dissemination of continuing education through facility-based staff development and orientation.
Evaluation.--The Secretary shall award grants to entities described in subsection (b) to collect data and study the potential benefits of basic and advanced nursing education levels or certification status in the efforts to promote quality improvement strategies and enhance patient outcomes and cost saving measures, by-- ``(1) compiling and analyzing quality indicator data from existing databases and other sources to evaluate relationships between basic and advanced nursing education levels or certification status on nursing sensitive indicators and quality outcomes; ``(2) working in consultation with State departments of health or other nonprofit patient safety organizations; or ``(3) demonstrating the cost savings and sustainability of the demonstration projects.
Report.--Not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of the Nursing Education and Quality of Health Care Act of 2006, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress on the results of the program under this section.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2007 through 2011.