SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Extension of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002.
Entitlement to additional weeks of temporary extended unemployment compensation.
Application of revised rate of insured unemployment.
Additional TEUC extended benefit period trigger.
Additional weeks of benefits for workers in high unemployment States.
EXTENSION OF THE TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION ACT OF 2002.
Six-Month Extension of Program.--Section 208 of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 30) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
In General.--Subject to subsection (b), an agreement entered into under this title shall apply to weeks of unemployment-- ``(1) beginning after the date on which such agreement is entered into; and ``(2) ending before July 1, 2003.
Transition.--In the case of an individual who is receiving temporary emergency unemployment compensation for the week which immediately precedes July 1, 2003, temporary emergency unemployment compensation shall continue to be payable to such individual for any week thereafter from the account from which such individual received compensation for the week which includes such termination date.
No compensation shall be payable by reason of the preceding sentence for any week beginning after October 14, 2003.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 21).
ENTITLEMENT TO ADDITIONAL WEEKS OF TEMPORARY EXTENDED UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION.
Paragraph (1) of section 203(b) of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 21) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) In general.--The amount established in an account under subsection (a) shall be equal to 26 times the individual's weekly benefit amount for the benefit year.''.
APPLICATION OF REVISED RATE OF INSURED UNEMPLOYMENT.
Section 207 of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 21) is amended-- (1) by striking ``In this title, the terms'' and inserting the following: ``In this title: ``(1) General definitions.--The terms''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(2) Adjusted insured unemployment rate.--For weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment of the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002, the term `rate of insured unemployment' has the meaning given that term in section 203(e)(1) of the Federal-State Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 1970 (26 United States Code 3304 note), except that individuals exhausting their right to regular compensation during the most recent 3 calendar months for which data are available before the close of the period for which such rate is being determined shall be taken into account as if they were individuals filing claims for regular compensation for each week during the period for which such rate is being determined.''.
ADDITIONAL TEUC EXTENDED BENEFIT PERIOD TRIGGER.
In General.--Section 203(c) of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 21) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) Additional extended benefit period trigger.-- ``(A) In general.--Effective with respect to compensation for weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment of the Emergency Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002, an agreement under this title shall provide that, in addition to any other extended benefit period trigger, for purposes of beginning or ending any extended benefit period under this section-- ``(i) there is a State `on' indicator for a week if-- ``(I) the average rate of total unemployment in such State (seasonally adjusted) for the period consisting of the most recent 3 months for which data for all States are published before the close of such week equals or exceeds 6 percent; and ``(II) the average rate of total unemployment in such State (seasonally adjusted) for the 3-month period referred to in clause (i) equals or exceeds 110 percent of such average rate for either (or both) of the corresponding 3-month periods ending in the 2 preceding calendar years; and ``(ii) there is a State `off' indicator for a week if either the requirements of subclause (I) or (II) of clause (i) are not satisfied.
No effect on other determinations.-- Notwithstanding the provisions of any agreement described in subparagraph (A), any week for which there would otherwise be a State `on' indicator shall continue to be such a week and shall not be determined to be a week for which there is a State `off' indicator.
Determinations made by the secretary.--For purposes of this subsection, determinations of the rate of total unemployment in any State for any period (and of any seasonal adjustment) shall be made by the Secretary.''.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 203(c)(1) of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 21) is amended by inserting ``or (3)'' after ``paragraph (2)''.
ADDITIONAL WEEKS OF BENEFITS FOR WORKERS IN HIGH UNEMPLOYMENT STATES.
Section 203(c)(1) of the Temporary Extended Unemployment Compensation Act of 2002 (Public Law 107-147; 116 United States Statutes at Large 30) is amended by striking ``an amount equal to the amount originally established in such account (as determined under subsection (b)(1))'' and inserting ``7 times the individual's weekly benefit amount for the benefit year''.
Except as otherwise provided in this Act, the amendments made by this Act shall apply with respect to weeks of unemployment beginning on or after the date of enactment this Act.