This Act may be cited as the ``Rail Transportation Security Act''.
RAIL TRANSPORTATION SECURITY RISK ASSESSMENT.
In General.-- (1) Assessment.--The Secretary of Homeland Security, in consultation with the Secretary of Transportation, shall assess the security risks associated with freight and intercity passenger rail transportation and develop prioritized recommendations for-- (A) improving the security of rail infrastructure and facilities, terminals, tunnels, rail bridges, rail switching areas, and other areas identified by the Secretary as posing significant rail-related risks to public safety and the movement of interstate commerce, taking into account the impact that any proposed security measure might have on the provision of rail service; (B) deploying chemical and biological weapon detection equipment; (C) training employees in terrorism response activities; and (D) identifying the immediate and long-term economic impact of measures that may be required to address those risks.
Existing private and public sector efforts.--The assessment shall include a review of any actions already taken or prospective actions necessary to address identified security issues by both public and private entities.
Consultation; Use of Existing Resources.--In carrying out the assessment required by subsection (a), the Secretary shall consult with rail management, rail labor, facility owners and operators, and public safety officials (including officials responsible for responding to emergencies).
Report.-- (1) Contents.--Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation and the House of Representatives Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure a report, without compromising national security, containing the assessment and prioritized recommendations required by subsection (a).
Format.--The Secretary may submit the report in both classified and redacted formats if the Secretary determines that such action is appropriate or necessary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $515,000,000 for fiscal year 2005 to carry out this section, implement the measures contained in the Secretary's prioritized recommendations, and award grants for purposes identified in the assessment in subsection (a), such sums to remain available until expended.
Rail Police Officers.--Section 28101 is amended by striking ``the rail carrier'' each place it appears and inserting ``any rail carrier''.
Review of Rail Regulations.--Within 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Department of Homeland Security, shall review existing rail regulations of the Department of Transportation for the purpose of identifying areas in which those regulations need to be revised to improve rail safety and security.
STUDY OF FOREIGN RAIL TRANSPORT SECURITY PROGRAMS.
Requirement for Study.--Not later than December 1, 2004, the Comptroller General shall carry out a study of the rail passenger transportation security programs that are carried out for rail transportation systems in Japan, member nations of the European Union, and other foreign countries.
Purpose.--The purpose of the study shall be to identify effective rail transportation security measures that are in use in foreign rail transportation systems, including innovative measures and screening procedures determined effective.
Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit a report on the results of the study to Congress.
The report shall include the Comptroller General's assessment regarding whether it is feasible to implement within the United States any of the same or similar security measures that are determined effective under the study.
PASSENGER, BAGGAGE, AND CARGO SCREENING.
Requirement for Study and Report.--The Secretary of Homeland Security shall-- (1) study the cost and feasibility of requiring security screening for all passengers, baggage, and mail, express, and other cargo on Amtrak trains; and (2) report the results of the study, together with any recommendations that the Secretary may have for implementing a rail security screening program to the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate and the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives one year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Pilot Program.--As part of the study under subsection (a), the Secretary shall conduct a pilot program of random security screening of passengers and baggage at 5 of the 10 busiest passenger rail stations served by Amtrak (measured by the average number of boardings of Amtrak passenger trains) and at up to five additional rail stations served by Amtrak that are selected by the Secretary.
In selecting the additional train stations the Secretary shall attempt to achieve a distribution of participating stations in terms of geographic location and size.
CERTAIN PERSONNEL LIMITATIONS NOT TO APPLY.
Any statutory limitation on the number of employees in the Transportation Security Administration of the Department of Transportation, before or after its transfer to the Department of Homeland Security, does not apply to the extent that any such employees are responsible for implementing the provisions of this title.
LIFE SAFETY AND INFRASTRUCTURE.
Life Safety Needs.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation for the use of Amtrak for fiscal year 2005: (1) $677,000,000 for the 6 New York tunnels built in 1910 to provide ventilation, electrical, and fire safety technology upgrades, emergency communication and lighting systems, and emergency access and egress for passengers.
$57,000,000 for the Baltimore & Potomac tunnel built in 1872 to provide adequate drainage, ventilation, communication, lighting, and passenger egress upgrades.
$40,000,000 for the Washington, D.C. Union Station tunnels built in 1904 under the Supreme Court and House and Senate Office Buildings to improve ventilation, communication, lighting, and passenger egress upgrades.
Infrastructure Upgrades.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary of Transportation for the use of Amtrak for fiscal year 2005, $3,000,000 for the preliminary design of options for a new tunnel on a different alignment to augment the capacity of the existing Baltimore tunnels, such funds to remain available until expended.