This Act may be cited as the ``Secret Evidence Against Lawful Aliens Repeal Act of 2001''.
The Congress makes the following findings: (1) No person physically present in the United States who is a lawful permanent resident alien or other alien with an unexpired visa should be deprived of liberty based on evidence kept secret from that person, including information classified for national security reasons.
Use of secret evidence in immigration proceedings against lawful aliens deprives such aliens of due process rights guaranteed under the United States Constitution and undermines our adversarial system, which relies on cross- examination as an engine of truth-seeking.
APPLICATION OF PROCEDURES USED UNDER CLASSIFIED INFORMATION PROCEDURES ACT (CIPA) TO IMMIGRATION PROCEEDINGS.
Application of Procedures Used Under Classified Information Procedures Act (CIPA) to Immigration Proceedings.--Chapter 9 of title II of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1351 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``application of procedures used under classified information procedures act to certain immigration proceedings ``Sec.
Notice of Intended Use of Classified Information.-- ``(1) In general.--In any immigration proceeding respecting an alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise present in the United States with an unexpired visa in which the Attorney General seeks to use classified information, the Attorney General shall inform the alien and the presiding officer in advance.
To the maximum extent practicable, if the Attorney General is initiating such proceeding, the Attorney General shall provide such notice within 15 days after initiating the proceeding.
Limitation.--The Attorney General may seek to use classified information only in an immigration proceeding described in paragraph (1) in which the alien is alleged to be deportable under section 237(a)(4)(B) or to oppose an application for admission or an application for discretionary relief from removal and only after issuing the following certification: ``(A) Substantially the same information could not reasonably be developed from open sources.
The Attorney General has informed the classifying agency of its intent to use the classified information in connection with immigration proceedings and has requested such agency to declassify such information as is permitted to be declassified under the President's Executive Order on classification.
Referral of Classified Matters to District Court.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of an immigration proceeding described in subsection (a)(1) in which the Attorney General or the alien moves for a referral under this section to consider matters relating to classified information that may arise in connection with the proceeding, the presiding officer shall forward the petition for review to a Federal district court for the district in which the alien resides or the place where the immigration proceedings are pending, of the use of such information in such proceeding under subsection (c).
Any evidence which is the subject of a petition shall not be considered in the immigration proceeding and shall not be examined by the presiding officer, except as provided in paragraph (3).
Suspension of immigration proceeding.--In the case of an order or review provided for under paragraph (1), the immigration proceeding may be suspended by the presiding officer pending the disposition of such matter by the district court involved (and any appeals related to such matter).
Submission of summary.--In the case of a referral under paragraph (1)(A), after the application of subsection (c), the district court shall issue an order to the presiding officer at the proceeding indicating any unclassified summary of classified information, and admissions in lieu of disclosure of classified information, that may be used and the conditions of its use at the proceeding.
The presiding officer shall determine whether any information approved by the order may be offered at the immigration proceeding.
Application of CIPA.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to the succeeding provisions of this section, in the cases described in subsection (b)(1) involving review by a Federal district court of the use of classified information in an immigration proceeding, the provisions of the Classified Information Procedures Act (18 United States Code Appendix III) (in this section referred to as `CIPA') shall apply to an alien who is a subject of the immigration proceeding in the same manner as it applies to a defendant in a criminal proceeding subject to CIPA.
General rules of application.--In applying subsection (a), the following general rules apply: ``(A) Any reference in CIPA to-- ``(i) a criminal defendant or a trial (or pre-trial) proceeding is deemed to be a reference to the alien who is the subject of the immigration proceeding and to the immigration proceeding; ``(ii) an indictment or information at issue is deemed to be a reference to a notice to appear; ``(iii) a dismissal of an indictment or information is deemed a reference to termination of the immigration proceeding against an alien; and ``(iv) a trial court is deemed a reference (in the case of an administrative immigration proceeding) to the presiding officer in such proceeding.
The provisions of section 2 of CIPA (other than the last sentence) shall not be applied.
The Attorney General shall prescribe rules establishing procedures for the protection against unauthorized disclosure of classified information in the custody of the Federal non-judicial officials in immigration proceedings.
Such rules shall apply instead of the rules described in section 9 of CIPA.
Section 12 of CIPA shall not be applied to immigration proceedings.
In lieu of the reports described in section 13 of CIPA, the Attorney General shall report annually and in writing to the chairmen and ranking minority members of the Committees on the Judiciary of the Senate and the House of Representatives on the implementation of this section.
Such reports shall include the following information about each case brought under this section: ``(i) The alien's country of citizenship or, if the alien was stateless, the country in which the alien last habitually resided outside of the United States.
The alien's immigration status.
Whether the Federal district court approved the summary of classified information and the deletions or admissions proffered by the Attorney General.
Whether the alien was ultimately ordered removed under section 237(a)(4)(B) or was granted or denied admission.
Disclosure of Exculpatory Evidence.--In any immigration proceeding under this section, the Attorney General shall disclose to the alien information that it would be required to disclose to a defendant in an analogous criminal proceeding under CIPA.
Appointment of Counsel.--In any immigration proceeding described in subsection (a)(1), any alien financially unable to obtain counsel shall be entitled to have counsel assigned to represent such alien.
Counsel may be appointed as described in section 3006A of title 18, United States Code.
Construction Concerning Declassification of Information.-- Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing an alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise present in the United States with an unexpired visa in an immigration proceeding from seeking access to classified information under section 552 of title 5, United States Code, or, in the case of information which is not disclosed based on section 552(b)(1) of such title, from initiating an action to seek to declassify some or all of the information involved.
Expedited Proceedings.--To the extent practicable and in the interests of justice, proceedings under this section shall be conducted on an expedited basis.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Immigration proceeding.--The term `immigration proceeding' means any administrative proceeding under this Act.
Presiding officer.--The term `presiding officer' means, with respect to an immigration proceeding, the administrative or judicial official who is presiding over the immigration proceeding.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Alien terrorist removal.--Title V of the Immigration and Nationality Act is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
LIMITATION ON APPLICATION OF TITLE.
``This title shall not apply to any alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence or who is otherwise present in the United States with an unexpired visa.''.
Aliens' rights in proceedings.--Section 240(b)(4)(B) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1229a(b)(4)(B)) is amended by inserting ``(subject to section 295)'' after ``but''.
Burden on alien.--The last sentence of section 240(c)(2) of such Act (8 United States Code 1229a(c)(2)) is amended by inserting ``and for which disclosure is not provided under section 295'' after ``not considered by the Attorney General to be confidential'' (c) Clerical Amendments.--The table of contents for the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1101 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by inserting after the item relating to section 294 the following new item: ``Sec.
Application of procedures used under Classified Information Procedures Act to certain immigration proceedings.
''; and (2) by adding after the item relating to section 507 the following new item: ``Sec.
Limitation on application of title.''.
REPEAL OF USE OF SECRET EVIDENCE IN BOND PROCEEDINGS AND JUDICIAL REVIEW OF BOND DETERMINATIONS.
Aliens' Rights in Bond Proceedings.--Section 236 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1226) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Aliens' Rights in Bond Proceedings.--Subject to section 295, in proceedings under this section in the case of an alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise present in the United States with an unexpired visa-- ``(1) the alien shall have the privilege of being represented, at no expense to the Government, by counsel of the alien's choosing who is authorized to practice in such proceedings; ``(2) the alien shall have a reasonable opportunity to examine the evidence against the alien, to present evidence on the alien's own behalf, and to cross-examine all witnesses presented by the Government; and ``(3) a complete record shall be kept of all testimony and evidence produced at the proceeding.''.
Judicial Review.--Section 236(e) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1226(e)) is amended-- (1) in the first sentence, by inserting ``to an alien who is not a lawful permanent resident or who otherwise has an unexpired visa'' after ``application of this section''; (2) in the second sentence, by inserting ``who is not a lawful permanent resident or who otherwise has an unexpired visa'' after ``of any alien''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``Notwithstanding any other provision of law, any alien who is a lawful permanent resident or who otherwise has an unexpired visa and against whom an order concerning detention, release on bond or parole pending or subsequent to an order of deportability, excludability, or removability shall be entitled to judicial review thereof in habeas corpus proceedings to determine whether the Attorney General is acting in violation of the laws or Constitution of the United States, or is not proceeding with such reasonable dispatch as may be warranted by the particular facts and circumstances of the case.''.
REPEAL OF USE OF SECRET EVIDENCE AGAINST LAWFUL ALIENS.
Section 235(c)(1) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1225(c)(1)) is amended to read as follows: ``(1) Removal without further hearing.-- ``(A) In general.--Except in the case of an alien described in subparagraph (B), if an immigration officer or an immigration judge suspects that an arriving alien may be inadmissible under subparagraph (A) (other than clause (ii)), (B), or (C) of section 212(a)(3), the officer or judge shall-- ``(i) order the alien removed, subject to review under paragraph (2); ``(ii) report the order of removal to the Attorney General; and ``(iii) not conduct any further inquiry or hearing until ordered by the Attorney General.
Excepted aliens described.--An alien described in this subparagraph is an alien who-- ``(i) is a lawful permanent resident; or ``(ii) has an unexpired visa.''.
Application to Detainees.--Not more than 30 days after the effective date of this Act, the Attorney General shall, with respect to any alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise present in the United States with an unexpired visa then detained or whose liberty is otherwise restricted by the Attorney General, on the basis in whole or in part of information submitted by the Government ex parte and in camera to an immigration judge, to the Board of Immigration Appeals or to any court-- (1) provide such alien a copy or transcript of such information, and provide the alien with a redetermination of bond (or a reconsideration of the terms of custody, as the case may be) based on evidence disclosed to the alien and the alien's response to such evidence; (2) withdraw from the record of any proceedings involving such alien any and all evidence, testimony, or other information submitted by the Government ex parte and in camera to the immigration judge, the Board of Immigration Appeals, or to any court, as the case may be, and-- (A) release such alien if such alien is detained; and (B) cease all restrictions on the liberty of such alien if such restrictions exist, unless detention is warranted solely on the basis of evidence disclosed to the alien; (3) initiate proceedings under section 295, if applicable; or (4) release such alien.
Termination of Proceedings.--In the case of an alien who is lawfully admitted for permanent residence or otherwise in the United States with an unexpired visa and who is in immigration proceedings as of the effective date of this Act conducted under title V of the Immigration and Nationality Act-- (1) such proceedings are terminated as of the effective date of this Act without prejudice to the Attorney General or the alien; and (2) the Attorney General may, in his or her discretion, commence de novo removal proceedings within 10 days thereafter under section 240 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1229a) and proceedings under section 295, if applicable.
The Attorney General shall promulgate regulations, including regulations governing applications for withholding of deportation or removal and relief from deportation, exclusion, or removal to implement this Act not more than 90 days after the effective date of this Act.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act and shall apply to all aliens who are lawful permanent residents or who otherwise have an unexpired visa without regard to the date of arrival, admission, or entry into the United States.