ENHANCEMENT OF ADMINISTRATION OF THE UNITED STATES AIR FORCE INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY.
Enhancement of Administration.-- (1) In general.--Chapter 901 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 9314a the following new section: ``Sec.
United States Air Force Institute of Technology: administration ``(a) Commandant.-- ``(1) Selection.--The Commandant of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology shall be selected by the Secretary of the Air Force.
Eligibility.--The Commandant shall be one of the following: ``(A) Active-duty officers.--An active-duty officer of the Air Force in a grade not below the grade of colonel, who is assigned or detailed to such position.
Civilians.--A civilian individual, including an individual who was retired from the Air Force in a grade not below brigadier general, who has the qualifications appropriate to the position of Commandant and is selected by the Secretary as the best qualified from among candidates for the position in accordance with-- ``(i) the criteria specified in paragraph (5); ``(ii) a process determined by the Secretary; and ``(iii) other factors the Secretary considers relevant.
Consultation of relevant individuals.--Before making an assignment, detail, or selection of an individual for the position of Commandant, the Secretary shall-- ``(A) consult with the Air Force Institute of Technology Subcommittee of the Air University Board of Visitors; ``(B) consider any recommendation of the leadership and faculty of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology regarding the assignment or selection to that position; and ``(C) consider the recommendations of the Chief of Staff of the Air Force.
Five year term for civilian commandant.--An individual selected for the position of Commandant under paragraph (1)(B) shall serve in that position for a term of not more than five years and may be continued in that position for an additional term of up to five years.
Relevant qualifications.--The qualifications appropriate for selection of an individual for detail or assignment to the position of Commandant include the following: ``(A) An academic degree that is either-- ``(i) a doctorate degree in a field of study relevant to the mission and function of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology; or ``(ii) a master's degree in a field of study relevant to the mission and function of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology, but only if-- ``(I) the individual is an active- duty or retired officer of the Air Force in a grade not below the grade of brigadier general; and ``(II) at the time of the selection of that individual as Commandant, the individual permanently appointed to the position of Provost and Academic Dean has a doctorate degree in a field of study relevant to the mission and function of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology.
A comprehensive understanding of the Department of the Air Force, the Department of Defense, and joint and combined operations.
Leadership experience at the senior level in a large and diverse organization.
Demonstrated ability to foster and encourage a program of research in order to sustain academic excellence.
Other qualifications, as determined by the Secretary.
Support.--The Secretary shall detail officers of the Air Force of appropriate grades and qualifications to assist the Commandant in-- ``(A) the advanced instruction and professional and technical education of students and the provision of research opportunities for students; and ``(B) the administration of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology.
Provost and Academic Dean.-- ``(1) In general.--There is established at the United States Air Force Institute of Technology the civilian position of Provost and Academic Dean.
Appointment.-- ``(A) Appointment by secretary.--The Provost and Academic Dean shall be appointed by the Secretary for a term of five years.
Consultation.--Before making an appointment to the position of Provost and Academic Dean, the Secretary shall consult with the Air Force Institute of Technology Subcommittee of the Air University Board of Visitors and shall consider any recommendation of the leadership and faculty of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology regarding an appointment to that position.
Compensation.--The Provost and Academic Dean is entitled to such compensation as the Secretary prescribes, but not more than the rate of compensation authorized for level IV of the Executive Schedule.''.
Clerical amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 901 of such title is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 9314a the following new item: ``9314b.
United States Air Force Institute of Technology: administration.''.
Treatment of Current Commandant.--The officer who is serving as Commandant of the United States Air Force Institute of Technology at the time of the enactment of this Act may serve as acting Commandant until the appointment of a Commandant in accordance with section 9314b(a) of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a).