This Act may be cited as the ``Law Enforcement Family Support Act of 1993''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF OFFICE OF FAMILY SUPPORT.
There is established an Office of Family Support within the Department of Justice under the authority of the Attorney General.
APPOINTMENT AND DUTIES OF DIRECTOR.
Appointment.--The Office of Family Support shall be headed by a Director appointed by the President, by and with the consent of the Senate.
The Director shall report to the Attorney General.
Authority.--The Director shall have final authority for all grants awarded by the Office.
Restriction.--The Director shall not engage in any employment other than that as serving as Director; nor shall the Director hold any office in, or act in any capacity for, any organization, agency, or institution with which the Office makes any grant or other arrangement under this Act.
Duties.--The Director shall-- (1) establish guidelines and oversee the implementation of family-friendly policies within law enforcement-related offices and divisions in the Department of Justice; (2) study the effects of stress on law enforcement personnel and family well-being and disseminate the findings of such studies to Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, related organizations, and other interested parties; (3) identify and evaluate model programs that provide support services to law enforcement personnel and families; (4) provide technical assistance and training programs to develop stress reduction and family support to State and local law enforcement agencies; (5) collect and disseminate information regarding family support, stress reduction, and psychological services to Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, law enforcement-related organizations, and other interested entities; and (6) determine issues to be researched by the Office and by grant recipients.
The Director is authorized to make grants to States and local law enforcement agencies and to organizations representing state and local law enforcement personnel to provide family support services to law enforcement personnel.
In General.--A State or local law enforcement agency or organization that receives a grant under this Act shall use amounts provided under the grant to establish or improve training and support programs for law enforcement personnel.
Required Activities.--A law enforcement agency or organization that receives funds under this Act shall provide at least one of the following services: (1) Counseling for law enforcement family members.
Child care on a 24-hour basis.
Marital and adolescent support groups.
Stress education for law enforcement recruits and families.
Provide technical assistance and training programs to support any or all of the services listed in (1) through (5).
Optional Activities.--A law enforcement agency that receives funds under this Act may provide the following services: (1) Post-shooting debriefing for officers and their spouses.
Critical incident response on a 24-hour basis.
Law enforcement family crisis telephone services on a 24-hour basis.
Counseling for law enforcement personnel exposed to the human immunodeficiency virus.
Counseling for families of personnel killed in the line of duty.
Seminars regarding alcohol, drug use, gambling, and overeating.
Technical assistance and training to support any or all of the services in (1) through (9).
A law enforcement agency or organization desiring to receive a grant under this Act shall submit to the Director an application at such time, in such manner, and containing or accompanied by such information as the Director may reasonably require.
Such application shall-- (1) certify that the law enforcement agency shall match all Federal funds with an equal amount of cash or in-kind goods or services from other non-Federal sources; (2) include a statement from the highest ranking law enforcement official from the State or locality or from the highest ranking official from the organization applying for the grant that attests to the need and intended use of services to be provided with grant funds; and (3) assure that the Director or the Comptroller General of the United States shall have access to all records related to the receipt and use of grant funds received under this Act.
AWARD OF GRANTS; LIMITATION.
Grant Distribution.--In approving grants under this Act, the Director shall assure an equitable distribution of assistance among the States, among urban and rural areas of the United States, and among urban and rural areas of a State.
Duration.--The Director may award a grant each fiscal year, not to exceed $100,000 to a State or local law enforcement agency or $250,000 to a law enforcement organization for a period not to exceed 5 years.
In any application from a State or local law enforcement agency or organization for a grant to continue a program for the second, third, fourth, or fifth fiscal year following the first fiscal year in which a grant was awarded to such agency, the Director shall review the progress made toward meeting the objectives of the program.
The Director may refuse to award a grant if the Director finds sufficient progress has not been made toward meeting such objectives, but only after affording the applicant notice and an opportunity for reconsideration.
Limitation.--Not more than 10 percent of grant funds received by a State or a local law enforcement agency may be used for administrative purposes.
The Director may reserve 10 percent of funds to award research grants to a State or local law enforcement agency or organization to study issues of importance in the law enforcement field as determined by the Director.
Report From Grant Recipients.--A State or local law enforcement agency or organization that receives a grant under this Act shall submit to the Director an annual report that includes-- (1) program descriptions; (2) the number of staff employed to administer programs; (3) the number of individuals who participated in programs; and (4) an evaluation of the effectiveness of grant programs.
Report From Director.--(1) The Director shall submit to the President, the Speaker of the House of Representatives, and the President pro tempore of the Senate a report not later than March 31 of each fiscal year.
Such report shall contain-- (A) a description of the types of projects developed or improved through funds received under this Act; (B) a description of exemplary projects and activities developed; (C) a designation of the family relationship to the law enforcement personnel of individuals served; and (D) the number of individuals served in each location and throughout the country.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the Office of Family Support within the Department of Justice; (2) the term ``family-friendly policy'' means a policy to promote or improve the morale and well being of law enforcement personnel; (3) the term ``law enforcement personnel'' means individuals employed by Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies; and (4) the term ``Office'' means the Office of Family Support within the Department of Justice.
AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS; LIMITATION.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated $5,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997, and 1998.
Limitation.--Not more than 20 percent of the amounts available under this Act may be used to accomplish the duties of the Director under section 2(d) and to operate the Office, including administrative costs, research, and training programs.