This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Civilian and Uniformed Services Long-Term Care Insurance Act of 1999''.
Subpart G of part III of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Chapter 90--Long-Term Care Insurance ``Sec.
Eligibility to obtain coverage.
Definitions ``For purposes of this chapter: ``(1) Employee.--The term `employee' means-- ``(A) an employee as defined by section 8901(1)(A)- (H); and ``(B) an individual described in section 2105(e).
Annuitant.--The term `annuitant' has the meaning such term would have under paragraph (3) of section 8901 if, for purposes of such paragraph, the term `employee' were considered to have the meaning given to it under paragraph (1) of this subsection.
Qualified relative.--The term `qualified relative', as used with respect to a sponsoring individual, means-- ``(A) the spouse of such sponsoring individual; ``(B) a parent or parent-in-law of such sponsoring individual; and ``(C) any other person bearing a relationship to such sponsoring individual specified by the Office in regulations.
Sponsoring individual.--The term `sponsoring individual' refers to an individual described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of section 9002(b).
Carrier.--The term `carrier' means a voluntary association, corporation, partnership, or other nongovernmental organization which is lawfully engaged in providing, paying for, or reimbursing the cost of, qualified long-term care services under group insurance policies or contracts, or similar group arrangements, in consideration of premiums or other periodic charges payable to the carrier.
Qualified long-term care services.--The term `qualified long-term care services' has the meaning given such term by section 7702B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Office.--The term `Office' means the Office of Personnel Management.
Appropriate secretary.--The term `appropriate Secretary' means-- ``(A) except as otherwise provided in this paragraph, the Secretary of Defense; ``(B) with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service of the Navy, the Secretary of Transportation; ``(C) with respect to the commissioned corps of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Secretary of Commerce; and ``(D) with respect to the commissioned corps of the Public Health Service, the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Eligibility to obtain coverage ``(a) In General.--Any eligible individual may obtain long-term care insurance coverage under this chapter for himself or herself, in accordance with applicable provisions of this chapter.
Eligible Individual Defined.--For purposes of this section, the term `eligible individual' means each of the following: ``(1) Employee.--An employee who has completed 6 months of continuous service as an employee under other than a temporary appointment limited to 6 months or less.
Member of the uniformed services.--A member of the uniformed services on active duty for a period of more than 30 days or full-time National Guard duty (as defined in section 101(d)(5) of title 10) who satisfies such eligibility requirements as the Office prescribes under section 9006(c).
Retired member of the uniformed services.--A member of the uniformed services entitled to retired or retainer pay (other than under chapter 1223 of title 10) who satisfies such eligibility requirements as the Office prescribes under section 9006(c).
Qualified relative.--A qualified relative of a sponsoring individual.
Certification Requirement.--As a condition for obtaining long-term care insurance coverage under this chapter based on one's status as a qualified relative, certification from the applicant's sponsoring individual shall be required as to-- ``(1) such sponsoring individual's status, as described in paragraph (1), (2), (3), or (4) of subsection (b) (as applicable), as of the time of the qualified relative's application for coverage; and ``(2) the existence of the claimed relationship as of that time.
Any such certification shall be submitted at such time and in such form and manner as the Office shall by regulation prescribe.
Disqualifying Condition.--Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to require that long-term care insurance coverage be made available in the case of any individual who would be immediately benefit eligible.
Contracting authority ``(a) In General.--The Office may, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes or other statute requiring competitive bidding, contract with qualified carriers to provide group long-term care insurance under this chapter, except that the Office may not have contracts in effect under this section with more than 3 qualified carriers as of any given time.
Qualified Carriers.--To be considered a qualified carrier under this chapter, a company must be licensed to issue group long-term care insurance in all the States and the District of Columbia.
Terms and Conditions.-- ``(1) In general.--Each contract under this section shall contain a detailed statement of the benefits offered (including any maximums, limitations, exclusions, and other definitions of benefits), the rates charged (including any limitations or other conditions on their subsequent adjustment), and such other terms and conditions as may be mutually agreed to by the Office and the carrier involved, consistent with the requirements of this chapter.
Rates.--The rates charged under any contract under this section shall reasonably reflect the cost of the benefits provided under such contract.
Noncancelability.--The benefits and coverage made available to individuals under any contract under this section shall be guaranteed to be renewable and may not be canceled by the carrier except for nonpayment of charges.
Payment of Required Benefits; Dispute Resolution.--Each contract under this section shall require the carrier to agree-- ``(1) to pay or provide benefits in an individual case if the Office (or a duly designated third-party administrator) finds that the individual involved is entitled thereto under the terms of the contract; and ``(2) to participate in administrative procedures designed to bring about the expeditious resolution of disputes arising under such contract, including, in appropriate circumstances, one or more alternative means of dispute resolution.
Duration.-- ``(1) In general.--Each contract under this section shall be for a term of 5 years, but may be made automatically renewable from term to term in the absence of notice of termination by either party.
However, the rights and responsibilities of the enrolled individual, the insurer, and the Office (or duly designated third-party administrator) under any such contract shall continue until the termination of coverage of the enrolled individual.
Termination of individual coverage.--Group long-term care insurance coverage obtained by an individual under this chapter shall terminate only upon the occurrence of any of the following: ``(A) Death.--The death of the insured.
Exhaustion of benefits.--Exhaustion of benefits, as determined under the contract.
Insolvency.--Insolvency of the insurer, as determined under the contract.
Cancellation.--Any event justifying a cancellation under subsection (d).
Preservation of rights and responsibilities.--Each contract under this section shall include such provisions as may be necessary so as, except as provided in paragraph (2)-- ``(A) to effectively preserve all parties' rights and responsibilities under such contract notwithstanding the termination of such contract (whether due to its nonrenewal under the first sentence of paragraph (1) or otherwise); and ``(B) to ensure that, once an individual becomes duly enrolled, long-term care insurance coverage obtained by such individual pursuant to that enrollment shall not be terminated due to any change in status (as described in section 9002(b)), such as separation from Government service or the uniformed services, or ceasing to meet the requirements for being considered a qualified relative (whether due to divorce or otherwise).
Long-term care benefits ``(a) In General.--Benefits under this chapter shall be provided under qualified long-term care insurance contracts, within the meaning of section 7702B of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
Specific Matters To Be Included in All Contracts.--Each contract under section 9003 shall, in addition to any matter otherwise required under this chapter, provide for the following: ``(1) Adequate consumer protections (including through establishment of sufficient reserves or reinsurance).
Adequate protections in the event of carrier bankruptcy (or other similar event).
Availability of benefits upon appropriate certification as to an individual's-- ``(A) inability (without substantial assistance from another individual) to perform at least 2 activities of daily living for a period of at least 90 days due to a loss of functional capacity; ``(B) having a level of disability similar (as determined under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Treasury in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services) to the level of disability described in subparagraph (A); or ``(C) requiring substantial supervision to protect such individual from threats to health and safety due to severe cognitive impairment.
Choice of cash or service benefits (such as the expense-incurred method or the indemnity method).
Inflation protection (whether through simple or compounded adjustment of benefits).
Portability of benefits (consistent with subsections (d) and (f) of section 9003).
Additional Specific Matters To Be Included in at Least One Contract.--To the maximum extent practicable, as of any given time, at least 1 of the policies being offered under this chapter shall, in addition to any matter otherwise required under this chapter, provide for the following: ``(1) Length-of-benefit options.
Options relating to the provision of coverage in a variety of settings, including nursing homes, assisted living facilities, and home and community care.
Options relating to elimination periods.
Options relating to nonforfeiture benefits.
Availability of benefits upon appropriate certification of medical necessity (as defined by the Office in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services) not satisfying the requirements of subsection (b)(3).
Governmentwide Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--The Office shall take all practicable measures to ensure that, of the long-term care benefits plans available under this chapter as of any given time, at least one of them shall be a Governmentwide long-term care benefits plan.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `long-term care benefits plan' means a group insurance policy or contract, or similar group arrangement, provided by a carrier for the purpose of providing, paying for, or reimbursing expenses for qualified long-term care services.
Clarification.--Neither subsection (c)(5) nor the exception set forth in the parenthetical matter under subsection (e) shall apply with respect to any Governmentwide plan under this subsection.
Coordination With Internal Revenue Code of 1986.--Nothing in this chapter shall be considered to permit or require the inclusion, in any contract, of provisions inconsistent with section 7702B or any other provision of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (except to the extent necessary to carry out subsection (c)(5)).
Coordination With State Requirements.--If a State (or the District of Columbia) imposes any requirement which is more stringent than the analogous requirement imposed by subsection (b)(1), the requirement imposed by subsection (b)(1) shall be treated as met if the more stringent requirement of the State (or the District of Columbia) is met.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Activities of daily living.--Each of the following is an activity of daily living: ``(A) Eating.
Nursing home.--The term `nursing home' has the meaning given such term by section 1908 of the Social Security Act.
Assisted living facility.--The term `assisted living facility' has the meaning given such term by section 232 of the National Housing Act.
Home and community care.--The term `home and community care' has the meaning given such term by section 1929 of the Social Security Act.
9005. Financing ``(a) No Government Contribution.--Except as provided in subsection (b)(2), each individual having long-term care insurance coverage under this chapter shall be responsible for 100 percent of the charges for such coverage.
Withholdings.-- ``(1) In general.--The amount necessary to pay the charges for enrollment shall-- ``(A) in the case of an employee, be withheld from the pay of such employee; ``(B) in the case of an annuitant, be withheld from the annuity of such annuitant; ``(C) in the case of a member of the uniformed services described in section 9002(b)(3), be withheld from the basic pay of such member; and ``(D) in the case of a member of the uniformed services described in section 9002(b)(4), be withheld from the retired pay or retainer pay payable to such member.
Voluntary withholdings for qualified relatives.-- Withholdings to pay the charges for enrollment of a qualified relative may, upon election of the sponsoring individual involved, be withheld under paragraph (1) in the same manner as if enrollment were for such sponsoring individual.
Direct payments.--All amounts withheld under paragraph (1) or (2) shall be paid directly to the carrier.
Other Forms of Payment.--Any enrollee whose pay, annuity, or retired or retainer pay (as referred to in subsection (b)(1)) is insufficient to cover the withholding required for enrollment (or who is not receiving any regular amounts from the Government, as referred to in subsection (b)(1), from which any such withholdings may be made) shall pay an amount equal to the shortfall (or, in the case of an enrollee not receiving any regular amounts, the full amount of those charges) directly to the carrier.
Separate Fund Requirement.--Each carrier participating under this chapter shall maintain all amounts received under this chapter separate and apart from all other funds.
Reimbursements.--Contracts under this chapter shall include appropriate provisions under which each carrier shall reimburse the Office or other administering entity for the administrative costs incurred by such entity under this chapter (such as for dispute resolution) which are allocable to such carrier.
Regulations ``(a) In General.--The Office shall prescribe regulations necessary to carry out this chapter.
Enrollment.--The regulations of the Office shall prescribe the time at which and the manner and conditions under which an individual may obtain long-term care insurance under this chapter, except that, under the regulations, an open enrollment period shall be afforded at least once each year (similar to that afforded under section 8905(f)).
Consultation.--Any regulations necessary to effect the application and operation of this chapter with respect to an eligible individual described in paragraph (3) or (4) of section 9002(b), or a qualified relative thereof, shall be prescribed by the Office in consultation with the appropriate Secretary.''.
The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act, except that no coverage may become effective before the first calendar year beginning after the expiration of the 18-month period beginning on the date of enactment of this Act.