URANIUM ENRICHMENT DECONTAMINATION AND DECOMMISSIONING FUND.
Expenditures Beginning October 1, 1999.--Notwithstanding any other law, beginning on October 1, 1999, the Secretary of Energy may expend amounts collected under subsections (c) and (d) of section 1802 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code section 2297g-1 (c), (d)) for the purposes set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of section 1803 of such Act (42 United States Code 2297g-2 (b), (c)) without further appropriation and without fiscal year limitation.
Expenditures Beginning October 1, 2008.--Notwithstanding any other law, beginning October 1, 2008, the Secretary of Energy may expend amounts in the fund established by section 1801 of the Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 United States Code 2297g) for the purposes set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of section 1803 of such Act (42 United States Code section 2297g-1 (c), (d)) without further appropriation and without fiscal year limitation but subject to limitations that may be included in appropriations Acts.
In General.--The funds referred to in section 1 shall be allocated to each decontamination and decommissioning program of the 3 gaseous diffusion plants in, Portsmouth, Ohio, Paducah, Kentucky, and Oak Ridge, Tennessee, proportional to the total number of Separative Work Units processed at each such site.
Such units shall be calculated as of the date of enactment of this Act.
The Secretary of Energy shall report the allocation to Congress within 60 days of such date of enactment.
Advance Notification of Termination of Lease.--Upon receiving advance notification that the United States Enrichment Corporation, or its affiliates, is terminating all or part of its lease with the Department of Energy at the gaseous diffusion plant at Portsmouth, Ohio, or Paducah, Kentucky, the Department of Energy shall notify local and State officials, the congressional delegation, employee representatives, and community reuse organizations (if any).
Decontamination and Decommissioning Program.--If such a lease is terminated, in whole or in part, the Department of Energy shall, within 60 days, make a determination whether it will lease the facility involved in the lease to a successor entity, operate the facility as a government enterprise, operate the facility on standby, or close all or part of the operations of the facility.
In the event that the Department of Energy determines that it will no longer operate or lease all or part of a gaseous diffusion plant, the Department of Energy shall immediately initiate a decontamination and decommissioning program.
Within 30 days of such decision, the Department of Energy shall immediately commence all required environmental reviews, including compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969.
Report.--The Secretary of Energy shall transmit to Congress a decontamination and decommissioning program for the Portsmouth, Ohio and Paducah, Kentucky, gaseous diffusion plants no later than 180 days after the date a decision has been made to close all or part of one of the gaseous diffusion plants.
PORTSMOUTH AND PADUCAH OPERATIONS OFFICE.
In General.--The Department of Energy shall establish, not later than March 30, 2000, a Portsmouth and Paducah Operations Office.
The office shall manage the environmental restoration, nuclear energy, and uranium enrichment program activities at such 2 sites.
The office shall be provided with budget authority and contracting authority over existing contracts and authority to award new contracts.
The office shall manage and direct, among other projects, the depleted uranium hexafluoride conversion program and decontamination and decommissioning program.
The office shall also have its own capacity to perform environmental, safety, health, and financal oversight.
Plan.--The Department shall submit, not later than 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act, a plan for establishing the Portsmouth and Paducah Operations Office.
The plan shall describe actions required to transfer functions from the Oak Ridge Operations Office to the Portsmouth and Paducah Operations Office.
The plan shall outline the personnel transfers, full-time equivalent requirements, budget requirements, physical space requirements, and identify the source of funds to accomplish the transfer of personnel, documents, and support systems.
The plan shall include the provision for legal counsel and chief financial officer and describe the reporting relationships to the Headquarters Program Office.
The plan shall detail which Operations Office functions shall be located at the Portsmouth Plant Area Office versus the Paducah Plant Area Office.
President's Budget.--The President's Budget request for fiscal year 2001 and for each fiscal year thereafter shall include funding for the Portsmouth and Paducah Operations Office as a separate line item from the Oak Ridge Operations Office budget.
CLOSURE OF GASEOUS DIFFUSION PLANT.
The Department of Energy shall minimize the social and economic impacts of any decisions related to the closure of all or part of a gaseous diffusion plant at Portsmouth, Ohio, or Paducah, Kentucky.
As part of this effort, all contracts and subcontracts for safe shutdown, deactivation, decontamination, and decommissioning work at such Department of Energy's gaseous diffusion plants shall include requirements that-- (1) consistent with site seniority practices, contractors and subcontractors of all tiers directly provide a continuing right of first refusal for available work to gaseous diffusion plant employees and Department of Energy contractor employees who were employed on the date of enactment of this Act and are displaced or facing displacement and are qualified or can qualify with a reasonable amount of training; (2) contractors and subcontractors provide requisite training and retraining for incumbent employees not to exceed $10,000 per worker, excluding wages and time spent in training; (3) pay wages and benefits not less than wages and fringes provided under the Service Contract Act of 1965, and provide pension and retiree health care benefit continuity using the Multiple Employer Pension Plan now in place at the Portsmouth, Ohio, Paducah, Kentucky, and Oak Ridge, Tennessee sites or an equivalent instrument; (4) comply with the workforce restructuring plan promulgated by the Department of Energy pursuant to section 3161 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1993 (42 United States Code 7274h); and (5) suits alleging violations of this section may be brought in any district court of the United States having jurisdiction over the parties, without regard to the amount in controversy or citizenship of the parties.