This Act may be cited as the ``Juvenile Crime Avoidance and Prevention Act of 1996''.
TITLE I--FEDERAL JUVENILE PROCEEDINGS SEC.
In General.--Chapter 403 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 5032 the following: ``Sec.
Initial intake screening and referrals to youth development specialists ``(a) Intake Screening.--Before any decision is made to proceed against a juvenile as a juvenile, to prosecute that juvenile as an adult, or to refer the juvenile to State authorities, an appropriate Federal authority, designated by the Attorney General, shall perform an initial intake screening of each juvenile taken into custody who is alleged to have committed an offense against the United States or an act of juvenile delinquency, to determine whether that juvenile is an at risk juvenile, as described in subsection (b).
If the juvenile is determined to be an at risk juvenile at the initial intake screening and the juvenile is proceeded against under this chapter as a juvenile, that juvenile shall promptly be referred to a youth development specialist under subsection (c).
If the juvenile is referred to State authorities for further proceedings or transferred for prosecution as an adult, the results of the intake screening shall promptly be made available to those authorities or the entity to which the juvenile is so transferred.
At Risk Determination.-- ``(1) Generally.--The screening body shall determine that a juvenile is at risk if it determines that the juvenile is likely to exhibit recidivist or increasingly violent crimes, based on the following factors in the juvenile's development: ``(A) School behavior or performance, including truancy, recent suspensions or expulsion, functioning significantly below grade level, and failing to achieve passing grades.
Family problems, including traumatic family situations such as death or incarceration of one or both parents, financial difficulties, family divorce or ongoing conflicts, child abuse or neglect, and abuse of controlled substances or other criminal activities in the home.
Substance abuse problems, including a pattern of alcohol or controlled substance abuse.
Runaway tendencies, previous delinquent activities, participation in a gang, or other similar activities.
Such other factors as the National Institute of Justice approves, based on an on-going evaluation aimed at isolating those factors that can predict patterns of juvenile recidivism in 90 percent of cases.
Limitation on use.--The at risk determination shall only be used in the administration of this section or a similar State operation, and shall not be made part of a juvenile's school, medical, or other official record.
Youth Development Specialist.-- ``(1) A youth development specialist (hereinafter in this subsection referred to as a `specialist') is a person designated by a court to carry out the duties described in paragraph (2).
The specialist shall-- ``(A) be the employee or contractee of the court or of the Government agency responsible for the referral; and ``(B) have appropriate experience in the assessment and counseling of juveniles and an understanding of the juvenile criminal system.
A specialist to whom a juvenile is referred shall-- ``(A) determine a course of action for the juvenile that will avoid continued criminal activity and help the juvenile successfully reintegrate into his community and school; ``(B) promptly convene a group meeting of any or all of the juvenile's community group, to determine an appropriate course of action for the juvenile pending and after completion of any court action; ``(C) after completing the meeting of the juvenile's community group-- ``(i) present a written report to be included in any court proceedings against the juvenile, which shall include recommendations for community actions that would help prevent instances of recidivism by the juvenile; ``(ii) meet with the juvenile's parents or guardian, and, at the specialist's discretion, any other interested parties from the juvenile's community group to discuss the findings of the report; and ``(iii) provide assistance and guidance to the juvenile's parents and community group to implement the recommendations outlined in the report.
work with the juvenile, in conjunction with the juvenile's parents or guardians and community group, to implement the actions recommended in the report.
monitor the juvenile's progress through the court system; ``(E) act as a liaison to the juvenile's family and community group and work with the juvenile's attorney; ``(F) maintain contact with the juvenile during custody, any court proceedings, any incarceration, and after release until-- ``(i) the juvenile is no longer subject to juvenile jurisdiction; or ``(ii) such time as the court, in consultation with the juvenile, the specialist, and the juvenile's parents or guardian, determines that further contact is no longer necessary with the juvenile to prevent future delinquency.
As part of the specialist's duties under subsection (a), the specialist, in consultation with the juvenile and the juvenile's community, may pay for any expenses, of which the portion paid from appropriated funds shall not to exceed $10,000 annually, of implementing the recommendations of the specialist, including-- (A) tutors, counselors, test preparation, additional education, and mentoring programs; (B) nutrition, or alcohol or controlled substance abuse treatment programs; (C) incentive programs for academic achievement, including but not limited to books and other educational material; (D) arrangements for community based activities to occupy the juvenile in wholesome uses of his time; (E) parenting instruction for the juvenile's parents or guardians; and (F) such other expenditures designed to stabilize the juvenile's life and direct the juvenile toward a peaceful and productive future instead of crime, as are approved by the juvenile court.
Of the amount paid under paragraph (3), not more than 20 percent may be used for the salaries and administration of the youth development specialist operation.
For the purposes of this subsection a juvenile's community group includes the juvenile's parents or guardians, extended family, teachers, clergy, athletic and other coaches, family friends, personal friends, and other interested parties.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of chapter 403 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``5032A.
Initial intake screening and referrals to youth development specialists.''.
Collection of Data.--The Attorney General shall collect data on the effects of screening and youth specialist activities under the amendments made by this section and similar State and local activities, including their costs compared to incarceration, and their effects on recidivism rates and rehabilitation of at risk juveniles and make that data available to the States, localities, and the public.
TITLE II--GRANT PROGRAM FOR AT RISK JUVENILES SEC.
In General.--The Attorney General shall award grants to an entity that has implemented at risk juvenile screening programs and youth development specialist referral services modeled after the program and services described in subsections (b) and (c) of section 5032 of title 18, United States Code.
Grants.--The Attorney General shall award an entity that meets the requirements of this title not more than $10,000 each year for each juvenile that receives services pursuant to this title.
To be eligible to receive funds under this title, an entity shall submit an application to the Attorney General that includes an assurance that such entity will use funds received under this title in accordance with section 203.
An entity may use funds received under this title-- (1) to pay not more than 20 percent of the total amount received to pay for salaries and administration of youth development specialist operations; and (2) upon the recommendation of the youth development specialist, in consultation with the juvenile and a representative of the juvenile justice system, to pay for programs recommended by the specialist, including-- (A) tutors, counselors, test preparation and other educational and mentoring programs; (B) nutrition, alcohol, or controlled substance abuse programs; (C) incentive programs for academic achievement, including books and other educational material; (D) arrangements for community-based activities to occupy the juvenile in constructive uses of time; (E) parenting instruction for the juvenile's parents or guardians; and (F) such other expenditures, if approved by the court, that are designed to stabilize the juvenile's life and direct the juvenile towards a peaceful and productive future.
For purposes of this title, the term ``entity'' means one of the 50 States or a unit of local government that has jurisdiction over the juvenile justice system for the county or city of such unit, as the case may be.
Grant Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated beginning in 1997, such sums as may be necessary to carry out this title.
Source of Appropriations.--Funds authorized by this section to be appropriated may be appropriated from the Violent Crime Reduction Trust Fund.