This Act may be cited as the ``Community Food Security Act of 1995''.
ASSISTANCE FOR COMMUNITY FOOD SECURITY PROJECTS.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Community food security project.--The term ``community food security project'' means a community-based project that-- (A) is designed to-- (i) meet the food needs of low-income people; (ii) increase the self-reliance of communities in providing for their own food needs; and (iii) promote comprehensive, inclusive, and future-oriented solutions to local food, farm, and nutrition problems; and (B) requires a one-time infusion of Federal assistance to become self-sustaining.
Eligible entity.--The term ``eligible entity'' means an entity that has experience in the area of-- (A) community food work, including the development of new markets in low-income communities for agricultural producers, particularly small- and medium- sized farms; or (B) job training and business development activities for food-related businesses in low-income communities.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Agriculture.
Authorization.--The Secretary may make grants to assist eligible entities in establishing and carrying out community food security projects.
Applications.--An eligible entity may submit to the Secretary an application, in such form and containing such information as the Secretary may require, that-- (1) demonstrates competency in implementing a community food security project; (2) demonstrates fiscal accountability; (3) contains an agreement that the entity will collect data and prepare reports and other documentation, as required by the Secretary; and (4) demonstrates that the entity is willing to participate in a continuing assessment of regional food security and to share information with researchers, practitioners, and other interested parties.
Preference for Certain Projects.--In selecting community food security projects to be supported by grants under subsection (b), the Secretary shall give preference to projects designed-- (1) to develop linkages between 2 or more sectors of the food system; (2) to support the development of entrepreneurial solutions to local food problems; (3) to develop innovative linkages between the for-profit and nonprofit food sectors; or (4) to encourage long-term planning activities and multisystem, interagency approaches.
Matching Funds.-- (1) Requirements.--The Federal share of the cost of establishing or carrying out a community food security project that receives assistance under subsection (b) may not exceed 50 percent of the cost during the term of the grant.
Calculation.--The non-Federal share of the cost of carrying out a community food security project may be provided through a payment in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including facilities, equipment, or services from private, State, or local sources.
Single Grant.--A community food security project may be supported by only a single grant under subsection (b), for a term of not to exceed 3 years.
Technical Assistance and Related Information.--The Secretary shall-- (1) provide technical assistance regarding community food security projects, processes, and development to entities seeking such assistance; (2) provide for the sharing of information about community food security projects and issues among and between government agencies, private for-profit and nonprofit groups, and the public through publications, conferences, and other appropriate form; and (3) participate in assessments of regional food security and share information with researchers, practitioners, and other interested parties.
Evaluation and Report.--The Secretary shall-- (1) provide for the evaluation of community food security projects supported using funds under this section; and (2) not later than January 30, 2000, submit to Congress a report on the results of the evaluation.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1996, 1997, 1998, 1999, and 2000.