This Act may be cited as the ``STEM Network Act''.
In General.--From amounts made available to carry out this Act, the Secretary of Education shall make grants to eligible networks to expand STEM education.
Eligible Network Defined.--In this Act, the term ``eligible network'' means a State-based STEM network or similar organization, which-- (1) may include the participation of State officials, educators, administrators, parents, industry leaders, philanthropists, and representatives from the STEM communities; and (2) aims to increase student achievement in the STEM disciplines at the elementary schools and secondary schools in its State, particularly at schools with a high concentration of low-income students and at rural schools (within the meaning of part B of title VI of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6201 et sequentes)).
In General.--An eligible network seeking a grant under section 2 shall submit an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
Matching Requirement.--In order to receive a grant under section 2, an eligible network shall agree to provide, either directly or through private contributions, non-Federal matching funds equal to not less than 30 percent of the amount of the grant.
Each eligible network receiving a grant under section 2 shall use the funds to carry out one or more of the following: (1) Testing, validating, sharing, and scaling up STEM education research, promising practices, and exemplary programs among members of the network and with other eligible networks receiving grants under section 3.
Identifying points of weakness and strength among State STEM education efforts, prioritizing strategies for addressing problem areas, and communicating State needs to the Secretary.
Assisting in the implementation of rigorous common content standards in STEM education for grades prekindergarten through grade 12 that reflect common elements between such disciplines and take into consideration-- (A) the Next Generation Science Standards and the Common Core State Standards Initiative; (B) established international standards and 21st century skills; (C) the needs of English language learners and special education students; and (D) the need to increase scientific literacy of prekindergarten through grade 12 students.
Assisting and supporting the development and implementation of innovative STEM assessments based on common content standards in mathematics and science.
Promoting and developing rigorous undergraduate pre- service teacher programs in institutions of higher education that emphasize STEM content in the part of the program that focuses on elementary school education.
Promoting and developing curriculum tools and professional development for in-service STEM teachers that foster innovation and inventiveness.
Developing STEM career pathways that reflect the projected STEM workforce needs of the 21st century that may include mentoring programs and STEM professional outreach.
Developing STEM-related workforce education and training programs in secondary schools and institutions of higher education to enhance the skills of workers to meet the needs of business and industry.
Developing systems for the implementation of extended learning times on school sites to enhance STEM education inside and outside of the classroom.
Not later than 2 years after receiving a grant under section 2, each eligible network receiving such a grant shall-- (1) conduct periodic independent evaluations, by grant or by contract, of the eligible network's effectiveness at accomplishing the activities described in section 4, which shall include an assessment of the impact of such activities on STEM teaching and learning; and (2) prepare and submit a report on the results of each evaluation described in paragraph (1) to the Secretary.
In implementing this Act, the Secretary may not-- (1) endorse, approve, or sanction any STEM curriculum designed for use in any elementary school, secondary school, or institution of higher education; or (2) engage in oversight, technical assistance, or activities that will require the adoption of a specific STEM program or instructional materials by a State, local educational agency, or school.
TOTAL AMOUNT OF GRANTS.
The total amount of grants made under this Act in any fiscal year may not exceed $20,000,000.
In this Act: (1) The terms ``elementary school'', ``local educational agency'', and ``secondary school'' have the meanings given such terms in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801).
The term ``high concentration of low-income students'' has the meaning given such term in section 1707 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6537).
The term ``institution of higher education'' has the meaning given such term in section 101 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001).
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``State'' means each of the several States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, Guam, the Commonwealth of Northern Mariana Islands, American Samoa, and the United States Virgin Islands.
The term ``STEM'' means science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.