This Act may be cited as ``The Genomes to Life Research and Development Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Department of Energy's Genomes to Life initiative involves the emerging fields of systems biology and proteomics, which address the ability to understand the composition and function of the biochemical networks and pathways that carry out the essential processes of living organisms.
The Genomes to Life initiative builds on the Department of Energy's integral role in the Human Genome Project, which has led to the mapping, sequencing and identification of genetic material.
Genomes to Life will go beyond mapping to develop an understanding of how genetic components interact to perform cellular activities vital to life.
The ability of the United States to respond to the national security, energy and environmental challenges of the 21st century will be driven by science and technology.
An integrated and predictive understanding of biological systems will enable the United States to develop new technologies related to the detection of biological and chemical agents, energy production, carbon sequestration, bioremediation and other Department of Energy statutory missions.
These advances will also enhance the strength of United States Reports science, technology, and medicine generally.
The fundamental intellectual challenges inherent in the Genomes to Life initiative are considerable, and require public support for basic and applied research and development.
Significant advances in areas such as the characterization of multiprotein complexes and gene regulatory networks will be required before biologically-based solutions and technologies will be useful in national security applications, as well as to the energy, medical and agricultural industries.
The development of new scientific instruments will also be required to advance Genomes to Life research.
Such instruments are likely to be large and costly.
Specialized facilities are also likely to be required in order to advance the field and to realize its promise.
Such facilities will be sufficiently expensive that they will have to be located and constructed on a centralized basis, similar to a number of unique facilities already managed by the Department of Energy.
Contributions from individual researchers as well as multidisciplinary research teams will be required to advance systems biology and proteomics.
The Department of Energy's Office of Science is well suited to manage systems biology and proteomics research for the Department.
Through its support of research and development pursuant to the Department's statutory authorities, the Office of Science is the principal federal supporter of the research and development in the physical and computational sciences.
The Office is also a significant source of federal support for research in genomics and the life sciences.
The Office supports research and development by individual investigators and multidisciplinary teams, and manages special user facilities that serve investigators in both university and industry.
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY PROGRAM.
Establishment.--The Secretary shall carry out a program of research, development, demonstration, and commercial application, to be known as the Genomes to Life Program, in systems biology and proteomics consistent with the Department's statutory authorities.
Planning.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall prepare a program plan describing how knowledge and capabilities would be developed by the program and applied to Department missions relating to energy, environmental cleanup, and mitigation of global climate change.
Consultation.--The program plan will be developed in consultation with other relevant Department technology programs.
Long-term goals.--The program plan shall focus science and technology on long-term goals including-- (A) contributing to United States Reports independence from foreign energy sources, (B) stabilizing atmospheric levels of carbon dioxide to counter global warming, (C) advancing environmental cleanup, and (D) providing the science and technology basis for new industries in biotechnology.
Specific goals.--The program plan shall identify appropriate research, development, demonstration, and commercial application activities to address the following issues within the next decade-- (A) identifying new biological sources of fuels and electricity, with particular emphasis on creating biological technologies for the production and utilization of hydrogen; (B) understanding the Earth's natural carbon cycle and create strategies to stabilize atmospheric carbon dioxide; (C) developing a knowledge and capability base for exploring more cost effective cleanup strategies for Department sites; and (D) capturing key biological processes in engineered systems not requiring living cells.
Program Execution.--In carrying out the program under this Act, the Secretary shall-- (1) support individual investigators and multidisciplinary teams of investigators; (2) subject to subsection (d), develop, plan, construct, acquire, or operate special equipment or facilities for the use of investigators conducting research, development, demonstration, or commercial application in systems biology and proteomics; (3) support technology transfer activities to benefit industry and other users of systems biology and proteomics; (4) coordinate activities by the Department with industry and other federal agencies; and (5) award funds authorized under this Act only after an impartial review of the scientific and technical merit of the proposals for such awards has been carried out by or for the Department.
Genomes to Life User Facilities and Ancillary Equipment.-- (1) Authorization.--Within the funds authorized to be appropriated pursuant to this Act, the amounts specified under section 4(b) shall, subject to appropriations, be available for projects to develop, plan, construct, acquire, or operate special equipment, instrumentation, or facilities for investigators conducting research, development, demonstration, and commercial application in systems biology and proteomics and associated biological disciplines.
Projects.--Projects under paragraph (1) may include-- (A) the identification and characterization of multiprotein complexes; (B) characterization of gene regulatory networks; characterization of the functional repertoire of complex microbial communities in their natural environments at the molecular level; and (C) development of computational methods and capabilities to advance understanding of complex biological systems and predict their behavior.
Facilities.--Facilities under paragraph (1) may include facilities for-- (A) the production and characterization of proteins; (B) whole proteome analysis; (C) characterization and imaging of molecular machines; and (D) analysis and modeling of cellular systems.
Collaboration.--The Secretary shall encourage collaborations among universities, laboratories and industry at facilities under this subsection.
All facilities under this subsection shall have a specific mission of technology transfer to other institutions.
Total Authorization.--The following sums are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary, to remain available until expended, for the purposes of carrying out this Act: (1) $100,000,000 for fiscal year 2004.
$170,000,000 for fiscal year 2005.
$325,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.
$415,000,000 for fiscal year 2007.
$455,000,000 for fiscal year 2008.
User Facilities and Ancillary Equipment.--Of the funds under subsection (a), the following sums are authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 3(d): (1) $16,000,000 for fiscal year 2004.
$70,000,000 for fiscal year 2005.
$175,000,000 for fiscal year 2006.
$215,000,000 for fiscal year 2007.
$205,000,000 for fiscal year 2008.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Department.--The term ``Department'' means the Department of Energy.
Proteomics.--The term ``proteomics'' means the determination of the structure, function, and expression of the proteins encoded in any genome, including new protein sequences encoded in a genome for which the structural or functional correlates are not currently known.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Energy, acting through the Biological and Environmental Research Program of the Office of Science of the Department.