This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Flight Deck Officer Improvement Act of 2004''.
FEDERAL FLIGHT DECK OFFICER TRAINING AND REQUALIFICATION TRAINING.
Training, Supervision, and Equipment.--Section 44921(c) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Location of training.-- ``(A) Study.--The Secretary shall conduct a study of the feasibility of conducting Federal flight deck officer initial training at facilities located throughout the United States, including an analysis of any associated programmatic impacts to the Federal flight deck officer program.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall transmit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the results of the study.
Dates of training.--The Secretary shall ensure that a pilot who is eligible to receive Federal flight deck officer training is offered a choice of training dates and is provided at least 30 days advance notice of the dates.
Travel to training facilities.--The Secretary shall establish a program to improve travel access to Federal flight deck officer training facilities through the use of charter flights or improved scheduled air carrier service.
Requalification and recurrent training.-- ``(A) Standards.--The Secretary shall establish qualification standards for facilities where Federal flight deck officers can receive requalification and recurrent training.
Locations.--The Secretary shall provide for requalification and recurrent training at geographically diverse facilities, including military facilities, Federal, State, and local law enforcement facilities, and private training facilities that meet the qualification standards established under subparagraph (A).
Costs of training.-- ``(A) In general.--The Secretary shall provide Federal flight deck officer training, requalification training, and recurrent training to eligible pilots at no cost to the pilots or the air carriers that employ the pilots.
Transportation and expenses.--The Secretary may provide travel expenses to a pilot receiving Federal flight deck officer training, requalification training, or recurrent training.
Communications equipment.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall establish a secure means for personnel of the Transportation Security Administration to communicate with Federal flight deck officers, and for Federal flight deck officers to communicate with each other, in support of the mission of such officers.
Such means of communication may include a secure Internet website.
Issuance of badges.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall issue badges to Federal flight deck officers.''.
FEDERAL FLIGHT DECK OFFICER FIREARM CARRIAGE PILOT PROGRAM.
Section 44921(f) of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(4) Pilot Program.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this paragraph, the Secretary shall implement a pilot program to allow pilots participating in the Federal flight deck officer program to transport their firearms on their persons.
The Secretary may prescribe any training, equipment, or procedures that the Secretary determines necessary to ensure safety and maximize weapon retention.
Review.--Not later than 1 year after the date of initiation of the pilot program, the Secretary shall conduct a review of the safety record of the pilot program and transmit a report on the results of the review to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
Option.--If the Secretary as part of the review under subparagraph (B) determines that the safety level obtained under the pilot program is comparable to the safety level determined under existing methods of pilots carrying firearms on aircraft, the Secretary shall allow all pilots participating in the Federal flight deck officer program the option of carrying their firearm on their person subject to such requirements as the Secretary determines appropriate.''.
FEDERAL FLIGHT DECK OFFICERS ON INTERNATIONAL FLIGHTS.
Agreements With Foreign Governments.--The President is encouraged to pursue aggressively agreements with foreign governments to allow maximum deployment of Federal flight deck officers on international flights.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the President (or the President's designee) shall submit to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate a report on the status of the President's efforts to allow maximum deployment of Federal flight deck officers on international flights.
COMPENSATION FOR PROGRAM-RELATED INJURIES.
Section 44921 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by redesignating subsection (k) as subsection (l); and (2) by inserting after subsection (j) the following: ``(k) Compensation for Program-Related Injury or Death.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall work with the relevant Federal agencies to obtain compensation under applicable Federal laws for the death or injury of a Federal flight deck officer sustained while in the performance of the officer's duties under the program.
Report.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report on the Secretary's efforts to obtain compensation for Federal flight deck officers under paragraph (1), together with recommendations, if any, for legislative actions required to provide such compensation.''.
It is the sense of Congress that air carriers should permit Federal flight deck officers to take a leave of absence from their employment as required to attend initial and requalification Federal flight deck officer training.
REFERENCES TO UNDER SECRETARY.
Section 44921 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (a) by striking ``Under Secretary of Transportation for Security'' and inserting ``Secretary of Homeland Security''; (2) by striking ``Under Secretary'' each place it appears and inserting ``Secretary''; and (3) by striking ``Under Secretary's'' each place it appears and inserting ``Secretary's''.