Designation.--In furtherance of the purposes of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), certain Federal lands in Box Elder County, Utah, which comprise approximately 23,021 acres, as generally depicted on a map entitled ``Pilot Range Wilderness'' and dated October 1, 2001, are hereby designated as wilderness and, therefore, as components of the National Wilderness Preservation System, and shall be known as the Pilot Range Wilderness.
Map and Description.--As soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior (in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall file a map and legal description of the Pilot Range Wilderness with the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate.
Such map and description shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in such map and legal description.
The map and legal description shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Director of the Bureau of Land Management and the office of the State Director of the Bureau of Land Management in the State of Utah, Department of the Interior.
ADMINISTRATION OF PILOT RANGE WILDERNESS.
In General.--Subject to valid existing rights and this Act, the Pilot Range Wilderness shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with the provisions of the Wilderness Act, except that any reference in such provisions to the effective date of the Wilderness Act (or any similar reference) shall be deemed to be a reference to the effective date of this Act.
Incorporation of Acquired Lands and Interests.--Any privately owned lands or interest in lands within or abutting the boundaries of the Pilot Range Wilderness that are acquired by the United States after the date of the enactment of this Act shall be added to and administered as part of the Pilot Range Wilderness.
State Fish and Wildlife.--As provided in section 4(d)(7) of the Wilderness Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed as affecting the jurisdiction or responsibilities of the State of Utah with respect to wildlife and fish on the public lands located in that State.
Acquisition of Lands and Interests.--The Secretary may offer to acquire from nongovernmental entities lands and interest in lands located within or abutting the Pilot Range Wilderness.
Such lands may be acquired at fair market value under this subsection by exchange, donation, or purchase from willing sellers.
Wildlife Management.--In furtherance of the purposes and principles of the Wilderness Act, management activities to maintain or restore fish and wildlife populations and the habitats to support such populations may be carried out within the Pilot Range Wilderness where consistent with relevant wilderness management plans, in accordance with appropriate policies and guidelines such as those set forth in appendix B of the Report of the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs to accompany H.R.
2570 of the One Hundred First Congress (H. Rept.
National Defense Lands.-- (1) Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (A) The testing and development of military weapons systems and the training of military forces are critical to ensuring the national security of the United States.
The Utah Test and Training Range and Dugway Proving Ground are unique and irreplaceable national assets at the core of the Department of Defense's test and training mission.
The Pilot Range Wilderness is located near lands withdrawn for military use and beneath special use airspace critical to the support of military test and training missions on the Utah Test and Training Range and Dugway Proving Ground.
Continued unrestricted access to the special use airspace and lands which comprise the Utah Test and Training Range and Dugway Proving Ground is a national security priority and is not incompatible with the protection and proper management of the natural, environmental, cultural, and other resources of the Federal lands designated as wilderness by this Act.
Overflights.-- (A) In general.--Nothing in this Act, the Wilderness Act, or other land management laws generally applicable to the Pilot Range Wilderness, shall restrict or preclude low-level overflights, low-level military overflights and operations of military aircraft, helicopters, unmanned aerial military overflights or military overflights and operations that can be seen or heard within those areas.
There shall be no restrictions or preclusions to altitude or airspeed, noise level, supersonic flight, route of flight, time of flight, seasonal usage, or numbers of flights of any military aircraft, helicopters, unmanned aerial vehicles, missiles, aerospace vehicles, and other military weapons systems over the Pilot Range Wilderness.
As used in this paragraph, the term ``low- level'' includes any flight down to and including 10 feet above ground level.
Modification in use.--Nothing in this Act, the Wilderness Act, or other land management laws generally applicable to the Pilot Range Wilderness, shall restrict or preclude the designation of new units of special use airspace, the expansion of existing units of special use airspace, or the use or establishment of military training routes over the Pilot Range Wilderness.
Memorandum of understanding.-- (A) In general.--Not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Air Force and the Secretary shall enter into a formal memorandum of understanding to establish the procedures and guidelines for the use of the Pilot Range Wilderness, including the following: (i) Procedures and guidelines to ensure immediate access which may be necessary to respond to emergency situations, including the search, rescue, and recovery of personnel and the recovery and investigation of military aircraft or other weapons systems.
Procedures and guidelines to determine the control, restriction, or prohibition of public access when necessary for purposes of national security or public safety.
Procedures and guidelines to provide for the installation of temporary communications, instrumentation, or other equipment necessary for effective testing and training to meet military requirements.
Interim operations.--Military operations in the Dugway Proving Ground and in the Utah Test and Training Range shall not be limited or restricted in any way pending the completion of the memorandum of understanding required by subparagraph (A).
Livestock.--Within the Pilot Range Wilderness, the grazing of livestock, where established prior to the date of the enactment of this Act, shall be permitted to continue subject to such reasonable regulations, policies, and practices as the Secretary deems necessary, as long as such regulations, policies, and practices fully conform with and implement the intent of Congress regarding grazing in such areas as such intent is expressed in the Wilderness Act, section 101(f) of Public Law 101-628, and House Report 101-405, Appendix A.
Water Rights.--Nothing in this Act, the Wilderness Act, or any action taken pursuant thereto shall constitute an express or implied reservation of surface or groundwater by any person, including the United States.
Nothing in this Act affects any valid existing water rights in existence before the date of the enactment of this Act, including any water rights held by the United States.
If the United States determines that additional water resources are needed for the purposes of this Act, the United States shall work with or through any agency that is eligible to hold in-stream flow water rights to acquire such rights in accordance with the water laws of the State of Utah.
Lands that are within the Pilot Range in Utah not designated as wilderness by this Act are no longer subject to the plan amendment process initiated by the Secretary and identified by the Federal Register Notice dated March 18, 1999, page 13499.
The Congress does not intend for the designation of the Pilot Range Wilderness to lead to the creation of protective perimeters or buffer zones around any such wilderness.
The fact that nonwilderness activities or uses can be seen or heard within the Pilot Range Wilderness shall not, of itself, preclude such activities or uses up to the boundary of that wilderness.
Subject to valid existing rights, the Federal lands within the Pilot Range Wilderness are hereby withdrawn from all forms of entry, appropriation, or disposal under the public land laws; and from location, entry, and patent under the United States mining laws; and from disposition under all laws pertaining to mineral and geothermal leasing, and mineral materials, and all amendments thereto.