This Act may be cited as the ``National Institute for the Environment Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) An appropriate scientific understanding of the diverse physical, biological, engineering, social, and economic issues that underlie the environmental problems facing the United States is essential to finding environmentally and economically sound solutions to the problems.
While more than a dozen Federal agencies support environmental research and gather environmental information, there is not a lead Federal agency for environmental research and information.
The current approach of the Federal Government to developing a scientific understanding of environmental problems, and of applying that understanding to the problems, lacks coherence and often fails to provide information vital to finding sound solutions to the problems.
The United States needs to improve the scientific basis for decisionmaking by Federal, State, and local governments, and private sector entities, on environmental issues.
Many environmental issues that will seriously affect the United States in the future are not adequately studied under existing Federal environmental research programs.
Existing Federal environmental research programs often do not provide adequate information in a timely manner to enable Federal, State, and local governments, and private sector entities, to engage in well-informed decisionmaking on environmental and related issues.
Existing Federal environmental research programs do not adequately address, link, and integrate research in different disciplinary, interdisciplinary, and multidisciplinary environmental sciences.
Ongoing study and communication of the existing knowledge about environmental issues, including the assessment of the significance of the knowledge, are needed to strengthen the weak link between scientific knowledge and decisionmaking on environmental issues.
Easy and effective access, including access by the scientific community, to the many rapidly growing sources of environmental information would improve the effectiveness of research on, and communication about, environmental issues.
To address the complex environmental problems facing the United States, there is a growing need for more education and training of individuals in disciplinary, interdisciplinary, and multidisciplinary sciences related to the environment.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to create an independent establishment to improve the scientific basis for making decisions on environmental issues through support for competitive, peer-reviewed, extramural research, ongoing knowledge assessments, data and information activities, and education and training on environmental issues.
ESTABLISHMENT OF NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
There is established as an independent establishment an institute to be known as the ``National Institute for the Environment'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Institute'').
The mission of the Institute shall be to improve the scientific basis for decisionmaking on environmental issues.
The Institute shall have the following duties: (1) To increase scientific understanding of environmental issues (including environmental resources, systems, and sustainability, and the human dimensions associated with environmental issues) by initiating and supporting credible, extramural, problem-focused, peer-reviewed basic and applied scientific environmental research and other disciplinary, multidisciplinary, and interdisciplinary environmental programs.
The support of research and programs under this paragraph may include the provision of financial assistance pursuant to section 8, including grants, contracts, and cooperative agreements.
To assist decisionmaking on environmental issues by providing ongoing, comprehensive assessments of knowledge of environmental issues.
The performance of assessments under this paragraph shall include the following: (A) Summarizing the state of the knowledge.
Assessing the implications of the knowledge.
Identifying additional research that will provide information needed for decisionmaking by Federal, State, and local governments, and private sector entities, on environmental issues.
Analyzing constraints that may affect the conduct of research described in subparagraph (C), including the existence of limited technological, human, and economic resources.
Communicating the results of assessments under this paragraph to relevant Federal, State, and local government decisionmakers and the public.
To serve as the foremost provider and facilitator in the United States of access to current and easy-to-use peer- reviewed scientific and technical information about the environment.
The provision and facilitation of access to information under this paragraph shall include the following: (A) Providing and facilitating access to credible environmental information (including scientific and technological results of environmental research) for relevant Federal, State, and local government decisionmakers, policy analysts, researchers, resource managers, educators, information professionals (including computer and telecommunications specialists), and the general public.
Establishing an electronic network that-- (i) uses existing telecommunications infrastructures to provide single-point access to environmental information; and (ii) includes existing collections of environmental information, such as libraries, specialized information centers, data and statistical centers, and government and private sector repositories of regional, event-driven, or ecosystem information.
Identifying and encouraging the effective application of state-of-the-art information technologies to promote the availability and use of, and access to, environmental knowledge.
Providing long-term stewardship of the environmental information resources of the United States, including efforts to ensure the continued usefulness of the resources, through the promotion and development of policies and standards for providing access to environmental information, and through the support of relevant research and development.
To sponsor higher education and training in environmental fields in order to contribute to a greater public understanding of the environment and to ensure that the United States has a core of scientifically educated and trained personnel who possess skills to meet the environmental needs of the United States.
The sponsorship of education and training under this paragraph shall include the following: (A) Awarding scholarships, traineeships, and graduate fellowships at appropriate nonprofit institutions of the United States for study and research in natural and social sciences and engineering related to the environment.
Supporting curriculum and program development in fields related to the environment.
Promoting the involvement of women, minorities, and other underrepresented groups.
To encourage and support the development and use of methods and technologies that increase scientific and general understanding of the environment and minimize adverse environmental impact.
To evaluate the status and needs of the various environmental sciences and fields.
To foster interchange of scientific information about the environment among scientists, Federal, State, and local government decisionmakers, and the public.
To identify and seek to address emerging environmental issues and all aspects of scientific, technological, and societal aspects of environmental problems.
To establish research priorities for the Institute for environmental issues of global, national, and regional significance.
Establishment.--There shall be a Governing Board for the Institute (referred to in this Act as the ``Board'') which shall establish the policies and priorities of the Institute.
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--The Board shall be composed of 18 members who shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Representation on the board.-- (A) In general.--The members of the Board shall include individuals-- (i) who, as scientists and users of scientific information, are representative of diverse groups and entities, including States, academic institutions, businesses, environmental groups, citizens groups, and other appropriate organizations; (ii) who have a distinguished record of service in their fields; and (iii) who, among the scientific members of the Board, represent the diversity of scientific fields that study the environment.
Selection of certain groups.--In making appointments under this subsection, the President shall seek to provide for representation on the Board of women, minority groups, and individuals recommended by the National Academy of Sciences, the National Academy of Engineering, and other groups.
Terms.-- (1) Initial terms.--Members initially appointed to the Board shall serve for the following terms: (A) 6 members shall serve for an initial term of 2 years.
6 members shall serve for an initial term of 4 years.
6 members shall serve for an initial term of 6 years.
Subsequent terms.--On completion of a term referred to in paragraph (1), each member of the Board subsequently appointed or reappointed shall serve for a term of 6 years, with a maximum of 2 consecutive terms for any member appointed under this section.
Administration.-- (1) Travel expenses.--Each member of the Board who is not an officer or employee of the United States may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in the same manner as travel expenses are allowed under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code, for persons serving intermittently in the Government service.
Prohibition of compensation of federal employees.-- Members of the Board who are full-time officers or employees of the United States or Members of Congress may not receive additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Board.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Board shall be designated by the President at the time of the appointment.
The term of office of the Chairperson shall be 6 years.
Meetings.--The Board shall meet as needed at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of the members of the Board, but not less than 4 times a year.
Reports.--The Board shall periodically submit to the President reports on such specific environmental policy matters as the Board, the President, or Congress determines to be necessary.
After receipt of any such report, the President shall transmit the report to Congress in a timely fashion, together with any comments that the President considers to be appropriate.
Advisory Committees.--The Board may establish such advisory committees as the Board considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Director.-- (1) Appointment.--The Director of the Institute shall be appointed by the President by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
Authority.--The Director shall exercise all of the authority granted to the Institute by this Act, including any powers and functions delegated to the Director by the Board.
All actions taken by the Director pursuant to this Act, or pursuant to the delegation from the Board, shall be final and binding on the Institute.
The Director shall formulate programs consistent with the policies of the Institute and in consultation with the Board and any appropriate advisory committee established pursuant to this Act.
Pay; term of office.--The Director shall receive basic pay at the rate provided for level II of the Executive Schedule under section 5313 of title 5, United States Code, and shall serve for a term of 6 years.
NSTC membership.--Section 401(b) of the National Science and Technology Policy, Organization, and Priorities Act of 1976 (42 United States Code 6651(b)) is amended by inserting ``, the Director of the National Institute for the Environment,'' after ``the Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy''.
Assistant Directors.--The President may, on the recommendation of the Director, appoint such assistant Directors as the President considers necessary to carry out this Act.
Establishment.--There is established an Interagency Advisory Committee to ensure that the environmental efforts of the Institute and other Federal agencies are complementary.
Duties.--It shall be the duty of the Interagency Advisory Committee established under subsection (a) to provide recommendations and advice to the Board to help to ensure that-- (1) the research priorities and agenda of the Institute support, rather than duplicate or compete with, the research agendas of existing Federal agencies; (2) the knowledge assessment activities of the Institute incorporate knowledge obtained and possessed by other Federal agencies, and are useful to the agencies; (3) information within the databases of other Federal agencies is available for incorporation into the information network of the Institute; and (4) the educational programs of the Institute serve the needs of the United States.
Composition.-- (1) In general.--The Interagency Advisory Committee established under subsection (a) shall include directors of research (or individuals who hold a comparable position) from Federal agencies that conduct or use substantial quantities of environmental research, including-- (A) the Environmental Protection Agency; (B) the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; (C) the National Science Foundation; (D) the Department of Energy; (E) the Department of the Interior; and (F) the Department of Agriculture.
Ex officio members.--The Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy (or a designee of the Director) and the Director of the Office of Environmental Quality (or a designee of the Director) shall serve as ex officio members of the Interagency Advisory Committee.
Duration.--Section 14(a)(2) of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
shall not apply to the Interagency Advisory Committee established under subsection (a).
Authority to Provide Financial Assistance.--The Institute may enter into contracts and cooperative agreements and provide financial assistance, including grants, to carry out the duties of the Institute under this Act.
Persons Eligible to Receive Funding.--Scientists, engineers, and other researchers are eligible to receive funding from the Institute under subsection (a), except that-- (1) scientists from Federal agencies shall not be given a preference for funding based on their employment with the Federal Government; and (2) the receipt of funding from the Institute shall be subject to any criteria and other requirements that are prescribed by the Institute.
Receipt of Funds from Other Persons.--The Institute may, subject to the approval of the Board, receive funds from other Federal agencies and private sector persons to carry out particular projects and activities under this Act.
Funds received under this subsection shall be deposited in the Treasury and shall be made available to the Institute to the extent provided in appropriations Acts.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out this Act.
S 2242 IS----2 S 2242 IS----3