This Act may be cited as the ``Academic Emergency Act''.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to provide funds to States that have 1 or more schools designated under section 3 as academic emergency schools to provide parents whose children attend such schools with education alternatives.
Grants to States.--Grants awarded to a State under this Act shall be awarded for a period of not more than 5 years.
Designation.--The Governor of each State may designate 1 or more schools in the State that meet the eligibility requirements set forth in subsection (b) as academic emergency schools.
Eligibility.--To be designated as an academic emergency school, the school shall be a public elementary school-- (1) with a consistent record of poor performance by failing to meet minimum academic standards as determined by the State; and (2) in which more than 50 percent of the children attending are eligible for free or reduced price lunches under the National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes).
List to Secretary.--To receive a grant under this Act, the Governor shall submit a list of academic emergency schools to the State educational agency and the Secretary.
APPLICATION AND STATE SELECTION.
Application.--Each State in which the Governor has designated 1 or more schools as academic emergency schools shall submit an application to the Secretary that includes the following: (1) Assurances.--Assurances that the State shall-- (A) use the funds provided under this Act to supplement, not supplant, State and local funds that would otherwise be available for the purposes of this Act; (B) provide written notification to the parents of every child eligible to receive academic emergency relief funds under this Act, informing the parents of the voluntary nature of the program established under this Act, and the availability of qualified schools within their geographic area; (C) provide parents and the education community with easily accessible information regarding available education alternatives; and (D) not reserve more than 4 percent of the amount made available under this Act to pay administrative expenses.
Information.--Information regarding each academic emergency school, for the school year in which the application is submitted, regarding the number of children attending such school, including the number of children who are eligible for free or reduced-price lunch under the National School Lunch Act (42 United States Code 1751 et sequentes) and the level of student performance.
State Awards.-- (1) State selection.--From the amount appropriated pursuant to the authority of section 14 in any fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to States in accordance with this section.
Priority.--To the extent practicable, the Secretary shall ensure that each State that completes an application in accordance with subsection (a) shall receive a grant of sufficient size to provide education alternatives to not less than 1 academic school.
Award criteria.--In determining the amount of a grant award to a State under this Act, the Secretary shall take into consideration the number of schools designated as academic emergencies in the State and the number of eligible students in such schools.
State plan.--Each State that applies for funds under this Act shall establish a plan-- (A) to distribute funds to academic emergency schools selected under section 5(a)(1); (B) to ensure that-- (i) the greatest number of eligible students who attend academic emergency schools have an opportunity to receive an academic emergency relief funds; and (ii) each academic emergency school continues to receive, in accordance with section 5(c), payments for each eligible student who leaves the school to attend a qualified school; (C) to develop a simple procedure to allow parents of participating eligible students and selected academic emergency schools to redeem academic emergency relief funds.
AWARDS TO ACADEMIC EMERGENCY SCHOOLS.
Subgrant Awards.-- (1) In general.--From amounts made available under this Act to a State and not reserved for administrative expenses under section 4(a)(1)(D), the State shall select academic emergency schools to receive a subgrant based on-- (A) the number of eligible students attending academic emergency school; (B) the availability of qualified schools near such schools; and (C) the academic performance of students in such schools.
Class size reduction.--The funds made available to an academic emergency school pursuant to subsection (c)(1)(B) shall be used exclusively to reduce class size.
Insufficient Funds.--If the amount of funds made available to a State under this Act is insufficient to provide every eligible student in a selected academic emergency school with academic emergency relief funds, the State shall devise a random selection process to provide eligible students in such school whose family income does not exceed 185 percent of the poverty line the opportunity to participate in education alternatives established pursuant to this Act.
Payments.-- (1) In general.--From the funds made available to a State under this Act, a State shall-- (A) pay not more than $3,500 in academic emergency relief funds to the parents of each participating eligible student; and (B) pay $3,500 to an academic emergency school selected for participation under this Act for each participating eligible student who chooses to attend a qualified school.
Period of awards.--The academic emergency relief funds awarded to parents of participating eligible students and the amounts distributed to academic emergency schools under paragraph (1) shall be awarded for each school year during the grant period which shall terminate-- (A) when a participating eligible student is no longer a student in the State; or (B) at the end of 5 years, whichever occurs first.
Duration.--A State shall continue to receive funds under this Act for distribution to parents of participating eligible students and selected academic emergency schools in accordance with subsection (a).
Qualifications.--A State that submits an application to the Secretary under section 4 shall publish the qualifications necessary for a school to participate as a qualified school under this Act.
At a minimum, each such school shall-- (1) provide assurances to the State that it will comply with section 10; (2) certify to the State that the amount charged to a parent using academic relief funds for tuition and fees does not exceed the amount for such tuition and fees charged to a parent not using such relief funds whose child attends the qualified school (excluding scholarship students attending such school); and (3) report to the State, not later than July 30 of each year in a manner prescribed by the State, information regarding student performance.
Confidentiality.--No personal identifiers may be used in such report, except that the State may request such personal identifiers solely for the purpose of verification.
ACADEMIC EMERGENCY RELIEF FUNDS.
Use of Academic Emergency Relief Funds.--A parent who receives academic emergency relief funds from a State under this Act may use such funds to pay the costs of tuition and mandatory fees for a program of instruction at a qualified school.
Not School Aid.--Academic emergency relief funds under this Act shall be considered assistance to the student and shall not be considered assistance to a qualified school.
Annual Evaluation.-- (1) Contract.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall enter into a contract, with an evaluating agency that has demonstrated experience in conducting evaluations, for the conduct of an ongoing rigorous evaluation of the education alternative program established under this Act.
Annual evaluation requirement.--The contract described in paragraph (1) shall require the evaluating agency entering into such contract to annually evaluate the education alternative program established under this Act in accordance with the evaluation criteria described in subsection (b).
Transmission.--The contract described in paragraph (1) shall require the evaluating agency entering into such contract to transmit to the Comptroller General of the United States the findings of each annual evaluation under paragraph (2).
Evaluation Criteria.--The Comptroller General of the United States, in consultation with the Secretary, shall establish minimum criteria for evaluating the education alternative program established under this Act.
Such criteria shall provide for-- (1) a description of the effects of the programs on the level of student participation and parental satisfaction with the education alternatives provided pursuant to this Act compared to the educational achievement of students who choose to remain at academic emergency schools selected for participation under this Act; and (2) a description of the effects of the programs on the educational performance of eligible students who receive academic emergency relief funds compared to the educational performance of students who choose to remain at academic emergency schools selected for participation under this Act.
REPORTS BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Interim Reports.--Three years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Comptroller General of the United States shall submit an interim report to Congress on the findings of the annual evaluations under section 8(a)(2) for the education alternative program established under this Act.
The report shall contain a copy of the annual evaluation under section 8(a)(2) of education alternative program established under this Act.
Final Report.--The Comptroller General shall submit a final report to Congress, not later than 7 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, that summarizes the findings of the annual evaluations under section 8(a)(2).
In General.--A qualified school under this Act shall not discriminate on the basis of race, color, national origin, or sex in carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Applicability and Construction With Respect to Discrimination on the Basis of Sex.-- (1) Applicability.--With respect to discrimination on the basis of sex, subsection (a) shall not apply to a qualified school that is controlled by a religious organization if the application of subsection (a) is inconsistent with the religious tenets of the qualified school.
Single-sex schools, classes, or activities.--With respect to discrimination on the basis of sex, nothing in subsection (a) shall be construed to prevent a parent from choosing, or a qualified school from offering, a single-sex school, class, or activity.
In General.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prevent a qualified school that is operated by, supervised by, controlled by, or connected to a religious organization from employing, admitting, or giving preference to persons of the same religion to the extent determined by such school to promote the religious purpose for which the qualified school is established or maintained.
Sectarian Purposes.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to prohibit the use of funds made available under this Act for sectarian educational purposes, or to require a qualified school to remove religious art, icons, scripture, or other symbols.
Nothing in this Act shall affect the rights of students, or the obligations of public schools of a State, under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (20 United States Code 1400 et sequentes).
As used in this Act: (1) The terms ``local educational agency'' and ``State educational agency'' have the same meanings given such terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
The term ``eligible student'' means a student enrolled in an academic emergency school during the school year in which the Governor designates the school as an academic emergency school in a grade between K and 4th.
The term ``Governor'' means the chief executive officer of the State.
The term ``parent'' includes a legal guardian or other person standing in loco parentis.
The term ``poverty line'' means the income official poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)) applicable to a family of the size involved.
The term ``qualified school'' means a public, private, or independent elementary school that meets the requirements of section 6 and any other qualifications established by the State to accept academic emergency relief funds from the parents of participating eligible students.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``State'' means each of the 50 States and the District of Columbia.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $200,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 2001 through 2004, except that the amount authorized to be appropriated may not exceed $200,000,000 for any fiscal year.