This Act may be cited as the ``Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness Expansion, Protection, and Access Act of 1997''.
Section 4 of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1650) is amended by striking subsection (g) and inserting the following: ``(g) Motorized Portages.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), nothing in this Act shall prevent the operation of a motorized vehicle and associated equipment that is necessary to assist in the transport of a boat across Prairie Portage from the Moose Lake chain to Basswood Lake, and from Lake Vermilion to Trout Lake across the Trout Lake Portage.
Clean and efficient vehicles.--A vehicle operated as permitted under paragraph (1)-- ``(A) may not exceed the dimensions of a \3/4\ ton pickup truck; and ``(B) shall be a clean-emission and energy- efficient vehicle, as determined by the Secretary.
New technology.--The Secretary may require the use of vehicles under paragraph (1) that utilize appropriate cost- effective new technology allowing for a cleaner and quieter motorized vehicle as soon as practicable, as determined by the Secretary.
Removal of tow boats.--Not later than 30 days after the date on which the operation of motorized vehicles begins under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall terminate any special use permit for a tow boat in Basswood Lake or South Farm Lake.
Increase in motorboat permits.--The Secretary shall allow an appropriate increase in the number of motorboat permits for September on Basswood Lake to take into account the removal of commercial tow boats on Basswood Lake.
No additional facilities.--Nothing in this subsection permits the building of an overnight facility, building, road, or amenity at a portage site.
No subsidy.--The costs of operating a motorized vehicle under this subsection shall be borne by a concessionaire without subsidy from any government.
Continued operation.--If there is no operation of a motorized vehicle under this subsection by a concessionaire for a significant portion of the ice-free season for 3 consecutive years, this subsection shall cease to have effect.''.
LAND ADDITIONS TO THE WILDERNESS.
Section 3 of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1649) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' after ``Sec.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``(b) Additional Land.-- ``(1) In general.--The wilderness shall include the land designated on the map entitled `Boundary Waters Canoe Area-- Expansion Proposal', dated July 29, 1997, comprising approximately 21,700 acres.
On file.--The map referred to in paragraph (1) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Chief of the Forest Service and the Supervisor of the Superior National Forest.
Detailed legal description and map.-- ``(A) In general.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a detailed legal description and map showing the new boundaries of the wilderness.
Filing with congress.--The Secretary shall file the legal description and map described in subparagraph (A) with the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate and the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives.
Force of law.--The legal description and map described in subparagraph (A) shall have the same force and effect as if included in this Act.
Clerical and typographical errors.--The Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors in the legal description and map described in subparagraph (A) at any time.
Timber access roads.--Any timber access road in the land described in paragraph (1) that is in existence on the date of enactment of this subsection that is needed for operations under a timber sale contract in existence on that date shall remain open only until such time as the operations are completed and the timber sale contract expires.
Land exchanges.--Not later that 2 years after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Secretary shall identify and convey to the State or a county, in exchange for land owned by the State or county in the wilderness area described in paragraph (1), Federal land of approximately comparable value, taking into consideration factors such as the timber species, the volume of timber, and the accessibility of timber on the land.''.
MOTORBOATS ON CANOE LAKE.
Section 4(c)(2) of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1650) is amended by striking ``; Canoe, Cook County''.
USE OF PISTON BULLY.
Section 4(i) of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1652) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``The Secretary shall allow the use of a piston bully or similar device to groom the portion of the maintained ski trail on the east end of Flour Lake.''.
Section 4 of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1652) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(j) Permit Reservation System.--It is the sense of Congress that the Secretary should take steps, if feasible, to move the permit reservation system for the wilderness to northeastern Minnesota.
In taking such steps, the Secretary should give preference to a contractor located in a county in which part of the wilderness lies.''.
Section 16 of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1658) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Annual Grants.--Of the amounts made available under section 21, the Secretary shall make a portion available each year to the State of Minnesota to be used by the Department of Natural Resources to be used to pay the costs of providing employees and equipment in the wilderness (in addition to the employees and equipment being provided before the date of enactment of this subsection) for activities such as-- ``(1) campsite restoration; ``(2) trail and campsite maintenance; ``(3) law enforcement; ``(4) monitoring of the management plan described in section 20; ``(5) user education; and ``(6) other appropriate activities, as determined by the Secretary.''.
The provisions of Executive Order No.
7637) shall be applicable to the areas depicted as wilderness on the map referred to in the amendments made by section 3.
Section 21 of Public Law 95-495 (16 United States Code 1132 note; 92 United States Statutes at Large 1659) is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
``In addition to any other funds authorized to be appropriated for the wilderness, there are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act-- ``(1) $3,500,000 for fiscal year 1998; and ``(2) such sums as are necessary for each fiscal year thereafter.''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act take effect on January 1, 1998.