This Act may be cited as the ``Y2K State and Local GAP (Government Assistance Programs) Act of 1999''.
In this Act: (1) Welfare programs.--The welfare programs are as follows: (A) TANF.--The State program funded under part A of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 601 et seq.).
Medicaid.--The program of medical assistance under title XIX of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1396 et sequentes).
Food stamps.--The food stamp program, as defined in section 3(h) of the Food Stamp Act of 1977 (7 United States Code 2012(h)).
WIC.--The program of assistance under the special supplemental nutrition program for women, infants and children (WIC) under section 17 of the Child Nutrition Act of 1966 (42 United States Code 1786).
Child support enforcement.--The child support and paternity establishment program established under part D of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 651 et sequentes).
Child welfare.--A child welfare program or a program designed to promote safe and stable families established under subpart 1 or 2 of part B of title IV of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 620 et sequentes).
Child care.--The Child Care and Development Block Grant Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 9858 et sequentes) (including funding provided under section 418 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 618)).
Y2K.--The term ``Y2K compliant'' means, with respect to information technology, that the information technology accurately processes (including calculating, comparing, and sequencing) date and time data from, into, and between the 20th and 21st centuries and the years 1999 and 2000, and leap year calculations, to the extent that other information technology properly exchanges date and time data with it.
GRANTS TO STATES TO MAKE STATE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT PROGRAMS Y2K COMPLIANT.
Authority To Award Grants.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), the Secretary of Commerce shall award grants in accordance with this section to States for purposes of making grants to assist the States and local governments in making programs administered by the States and local governments Y2K compliant.
The Secretary of Commerce shall give priority to grant requests that relate to making Federal welfare programs Y2K compliant.
Limitations.-- (A) Number of grants.--No more than 75 grants may be awarded under this section.
Per state limitation.--Not more than 2 grants authorized under this section may be awarded per State.
Application deadline.--45 days after enactment.
Application.-- (1) In general.--A State, through the State Governor's Office, may submit an application for a grant authorized under this section at such time within the constraints of paragraph Sec.
3(a)(2)(C) and in such manner as the Secretary of Commerce may determine.
Information required.--An application for a grant authorized under this section shall contain the following: (A) A description of a proposed plan for the development and implementation of a Y2K compliance program for the State's programs or for a local government program, including a proposed budget for the plan and a request for a specific funding amount.
A description or identification of a proposed funding source for completion of the plan (if applicable) and maintenance of the system after the conclusion of the period for which the grant is to be awarded.
Conditions for Approval of Applications.-- (1) Matching requirement.-- (A) In general.--A State awarded a grant under this section shall expend $1 for every $2 awarded under the grant to carry out the development and implementation of a Y2K compliance program for the State's programs under the proposed plan.
Waiver for hardship.--The Secretary of Commerce may waive or modify the matching requirement described in subparagraph (A) in the case of any State that the Secretary of Commerce determines would suffer undue hardship as a result of being subject to the requirement.
Non-federal expenditures.-- (i) Cash or in kind.--State expenditures required under subparagraph (A) may be in cash or in kind, fairly evaluated, including equipment, or services.
No credit for pre-award expenditures.--Only State expenditures made after a grant has been awarded under this section may be counted for purposes of determining whether the State has satisfied the matching expenditure requirement under subparagraph (A).
Considerations.--In evaluating an application for a grant under this section the Secretary of Commerce shall consider the extent to which the proposed system is feasible and likely to achieve the purposes described in subsection (a)(1).
Length of Awards.--No grant may be awarded under this section for a period of more than 2 years.
Availability of Funds.--Funds provided to a State under a grant awarded under this section shall remain available until expended without fiscal year limitation.
Reports.-- (1) Annual report from grantees.--Each State that is awarded a grant under this section shall submit an annual report to the Secretary of Commerce that contains a description of the ongoing results of the independent evaluation of the plan for, and implementation of, the compliance program funded under the grant.
Final report.--Not later than 90 days after the termination of all grants awarded under this section, the Secretary of Commerce shall submit to Congress a final report evaluating the programs funded under such grants.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section, $40,000,000 for fiscal years 1999 to 2001 funded from the Y2K Emergency Supplemental Funds appropriated in the FY99 Omnibus Act, PL 105-277.