This Act may be cited as the ``Regulatory Right-to-Know Act of 1997''.
The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) promote the public right-to-know about the costs and benefits of Federal regulatory programs and rules; (2) promote Government accountability for the growth of Federal regulatory programs and rules; and (3) encourage open communication among Federal agencies, the public, the President, and Congress regarding regulatory priorities.
For purposes of this Act: (1) Agency.--The term ``agency'' means any executive department, military department, Government corporation, Government controlled corporation, or other establishment in the executive branch of the Government (including the Executive Office of the President), or any independent regulatory agency, but shall not include-- (A) the General Accounting Office; (B) the Federal Election Commission; (C) the governments of the District of Columbia and of the territories and possessions of the United States, and their various subdivisions; or (D) Government-owned contractor-operated facilities, including laboratories engaged in national defense research and production activities.
Benefit.--The term ``benefit'' means the reasonably identifiable significant favorable effects, including social, environmental, and economic benefits, that are expected to result directly or indirectly from implementation of a rule.
Cost.--The term ``cost'' means the reasonably identifiable significant adverse effects, including social, environmental, and economic costs that are expected to result directly or indirectly from implementation of, or compliance with, a rule.
Program element.--The term ``program element'' means a rule or related set of rules.
Rule.--The term ``rule'' has the same meaning given such term in section 551(4) of title 5, United States Code, except that such term shall not include-- (A) administrative actions governed by sections 556 and 557 of title 5, United States Code; (B) rules issued with respect to a military or foreign affairs function of the United States; or (C) rules related to agency organization, management, or personnel.
In General.-- (1) Administration.--The President, acting through the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall be responsible for implementing and administering the requirements of this Act.
Accounting statement.--No later than January 2000, and each January every 2 years thereafter, the President shall prepare and submit to Congress an accounting statement that estimates the costs and corresponding benefits of Federal regulatory programs and program elements in accordance with this section.
Years Covered by Accounting Statement.--Each accounting statement (other than the initial accounting statement) submitted under this Act shall cover, at a minimum, the costs and corresponding benefits for the 5 fiscal years preceding October 1 of the year in which the report is submitted.
The statement shall also contain a projection of the costs and corresponding benefits for the next 10 fiscal years, based on rules in effect or projected to take effect.
The statement may cover any fiscal year preceding such fiscal years for the purpose of revising previous estimates.
Timing and Procedures.-- (1) Notice and comment.--The President shall provide notice and opportunity for comment for each accounting statement.
The President may delegate to an agency the requirement to provide notice and opportunity to comment for the portion of the accounting statement relating to that agency.
Timing.--The President shall propose the first accounting statement under this section no later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act.
Such statement shall cover, at a minimum, each of the preceding fiscal years beginning with fiscal year 1997.
Contents of Accounting Statement.-- (1) Estimates of costs.--(A) An accounting statement shall estimate the costs of Federal regulatory programs and program elements by setting forth, for each year covered by the statement-- (i) the annual expenditure of national economic resources for each regulatory program and program elements; and (ii) such other quantitative and qualitative measures of costs as the President considers appropriate.
For purposes of the estimate of costs in the accounting statement, national economic resources shall include, and shall be listed under, at least the following categories: (i) Private sector costs.
Federal sector administrative costs.
Federal sector compliance costs.
State and local government administrative costs.
State and local government compliance costs.
Estimates of benefits.--An accounting statement shall estimate the corresponding benefits of Federal regulatory programs and program elements by setting forth, for each year covered by the statement, such quantitative and qualitative measures of benefits as the President considers appropriate.
Any estimates of benefits concerning reduction in health, safety, or environmental risks shall be based on sound and objective scientific practices and shall present the most plausible level of risk practical, along with a statement of the reasonable degree of scientific certainty.
ASSOCIATED REPORT TO CONGRESS.
In General.--In each year following the year in which the President submits an accounting statement under section 4, the President, acting through the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, shall, after notice and opportunity for comment, submit to Congress a report associated with the accounting statement (hereinafter referred to as an ``associated report'').
The associated report shall contain, in accordance with this section-- (1) analyses of impacts; (2) identification and analysis of jurisdictional overlaps, duplications, and potential inconsistencies among Federal regulatory programs; and (3) recommendations for reform.
Analyses of Impacts.--The President shall include in the associated report the following: (1) Analyses.--Analyses prepared by the president of the cumulative impact of Federal regulatory programs covered in the accounting statement.
Factors to be considered in such report shall include impacts on the following: (A) The ability of State and local governments to provide essential services, including police, fire protection, and education.
Consumer prices for goods and services.
Such other factors considered appropriate by the President.
Summary.--A summary of any independent analyses of impacts prepared by persons commenting during the comment period on the accounting statement.
Recommendations for Reform.--The President shall include in the associated report the following: (1) Presidential recommendations.--A summary of recommendations of the President for reform or elimination of any Federal regulatory program or program element that does not represent sound use of national economic resources or otherwise is inefficient.
Recommendations from commenters.--A summary of any recommendations for such reform or elimination of Federal regulatory programs or program elements prepared by persons commenting during the comment period on the accounting statement.
GUIDANCE FROM OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET.
The Director of the Office of Management and Budget shall, in consultation with the Council of Economic Advisers, and after independent and external peer review, provide guidance to agencies-- (1) to standardize measures of costs and benefits in accounting statements prepared pursuant to this Act, including guidance on estimating the costs and corresponding benefits of regulatory programs and program elements; and (2) to standardize the format of the accounting statements.
The Director shall review submissions from agencies to assure consistency with the guidance under this section.
RECOMMENDATIONS FROM CONGRESSIONAL BUDGET OFFICE.
After each accounting statement and associated report submitted to Congress, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office shall make recommendations to the President-- (1) for improving accounting statements prepared pursuant to this Act, including recommendations on level of detail and accuracy; and (2) for improving associated reports prepared pursuant to this Act, including recommendations on the quality of analysis.