This Act may be cited as the ``Superior National Forest Resort Special Use Permit Land Exchange Act of 1995''.
Findings.--The Congress finds that to provide for the increased ownership, continued protection, enhancement, and preservation of the natural values of the lakes, waterways, and associated forested areas within the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, and to enable Cook County, Lake County, and St. Louis County, Minnesota, to more effectively manage certain commercially developed lands in the Superior National Forest (and thus relieve the United States from the cost and responsibility for such management), an exchange of lands between the United States and such counties is in the public interest.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to provide for the transfer of-- (1) certain Federal lands within the Cook County portion of the Superior National Forest (approximately 36.28 acres) to Cook County in exchange for the transfer to Federal ownership of lands of equal value owned by Cook County in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness; (2) certain Federal lands within the Lake County portion of the Superior National Forest (approximately 20 acres) to Lake County in exchange for the transfer to Federal ownership of lands of equal value owned by Lake County in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness; and (3) certain Federal lands within the St. Louis County portion of the Superior National Forest (approximately 30.81 acres) to St. Louis County in exchange for the transfer to Federal ownership of lands of equal value owned by St. Louis County in the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness.
LAND EXCHANGE, BOUNDARY WATERS CANOE AREA WILDERNESS AND SUPERIOR NATIONAL FOREST, MINNESOTA.
Acceptance of County Lands.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall accept on behalf of the United States, fee title to certain selected Cook County, Lake County, and St. Louis County, Minnesota, lands and interests, respectively for each county, within the Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness, consisting of all rights, excluding mineral interests reserved in the State of Minnesota or by prior reservation in private parties, such lands to be selected by the Secretary from parcels described on the map entitled ``Boundary Waters Canoe Area Wilderness--Additions'', dated January 1992, having a market value equal to or greater than the National Forest System lands in each respective county as described in subsections (b), (c), and (d), in exchange for such National Forest System lands.
Title may be conveyed by quit claim deed but must otherwise comply with the Department of Justice title standards as set forth in the ``Standards for the Preparation of Title Evidence In Land Acquisitions by the United States''.
Conveyance of Forest System Lands to Cook County.--(1) Upon acceptance by the Secretary of the Cook County lands and interests therein referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall convey to Cook County the four federally owned parcels of land within the boundaries of the Superior National Forest in Minnesota described in paragraph (2).
The conveyance shall be subject to valid existing rights and any deed restrictions and reservations as the Secretary may prescribe pursuant to section 4(c), as follows: (A) For lands which had been previously patented from the United States, the Secretary shall convey such lands to Cook County by quit claim deed.
For lands which have never been previously patented, the Secretary of the Interior shall convey such lands by patent at the request of the Secretary.
The federally owned lands to be conveyed to Cook County pursuant to paragraph (1) are generally described as follows: (A) T64N-R1W, Section 11, Parts of Lots 15 and 17; Section 12, Parts of Lot 3, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Bearskin Lodge--David Tuttle, including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shores of East Bearskin Lake.
T64N-R1W, section 4, Part of Lots 10 and 11, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Gateway Hungry Jack Lodge--Hungry Jack, Inc., Gerald Parson, President, including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shores of Hungry Jack Lake.
T64N-R1W, Section 1, Part of Lot 19, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Golden Eagle Lodge--Golden Eagle Lodge, Inc., including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shores of Flour Lake.
T62N-R4W, Section 7, Part of E\1/2\ SW\1/4\, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Sawbil Canoe Outfitters-- Frank & Mary Alice Hansen.
Conveyance of Forest System Lands to Lake County.--(1) Upon acceptance by the Secretary of the Lake County lands and interests therein referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall convey to Lake County the two federally owned parcels of land within the boundaries of the Superior National Forest in Minnesota described in paragraph (2).
The conveyance shall be subject to valid existing rights and any deed restrictions and reservations as the Secretary may prescribe pursuant to section 4(c), as follows: (A) For lands which had been previously patented from the United States, the Secretary of Agriculture shall convey such lands to Lake County by quit claim deed.
For lands which have never been previously patented, the Secretary of the Interior shall convey such lands by patent at the request of the Secretary of Agriculture.
The federally owned lands to be conveyed to Lake County pursuant to paragraph (1) are generally described as follows: (A) T61N-R11W, Section 30, Part of Lot 8, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Victor H. Gunderson, Sharon G. Gunderson and Gregory Gunderson, partners d/b/a Roaring Stony Resort, including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shores of Birch Lake.
T61N-R11W, Section 6, Part of Lot 10, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Steven L. Koschak and Mary Jane Koschak, d/b/a River Point Resort, including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shore of Birch Lake.
Conveyance of Forest System Lands to St. Louis County.--(1) Upon acceptance by the Secretary of the St. Louis County lands and interests therein referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary shall convey to St. Louis Country the two federally owned parcels of land within the boundaries of the Superior National Forest in Minnesota described in paragraph (2).
The conveyance shall be subject to valid existing rights and any deed restrictions and reservations as the Secretary may prescribe pursuant to section 4(c), as follows: (A) For lands which had been previously patented from the United States, the Secretary shall convey such lands to St. Louis County by quit claim deed.
For lands which have never been previously patented, the Secretary of the Interior shall convey such lands by patent at the request of the Secretary.
The federally owned lands to be conveyed to St. Louis County pursuant to paragraph (1) are generally described as follows: (A) T61N-R12W, Section 31, Part of Lot 7, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to John D. Rykken and Mayleann T. Rykken, d/b/a Timber Bay Lodge and Houseboats, including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shores of Birch Lake.
T65N-R13W, Section 28, Part of Lot 3, 4th P.M., as described in Special Use Permit to Garrett G. Alberts and Karen J. Alberts, d/b/a/ Big Lake Wilderness Lodge, including all lands lying between the described parcel and the shores of Big Lake.
Other Elements of Exchange.--The conveyances required by subsections (b), (c), and (d) shall include such easements as may be necessary for ingress, egress, and utilities between the conveyed property and the nearest State or county road.
The property to be conveyed by the Secretary under such subsections shall be surveyed, monumented, and given legally acceptable descriptions by the Secretary prior to conveyance.
Parcel descriptions shall include land sufficient to provide minimum 100 foot sideyard and 500 foot backyard setbacks from any buildings or septic systems currently located on the premises.
Additional land may be added by the Secretary in the Secretary's sole discretion to help facilitate the exchange, create more usable boundaries, or to create a more usable parcel for the currently permitted business operation on the parcel.
Expenses.--The United States and Cook County, Lake County, and St. Louis County, respectively, shall each bear the normal expenses associated with the conveyance of their respective properties in executing the land exchange under section 3.
Valuation.--The values of the national forest and county lands selected to be exchanged pursuant to this Act shall be determined by an independent fee appraisal to be approximately equal.
The independent fee appraiser for land in each county shall be selected by agreement of the respective county and the Secretary, who shall share the cost of such respective appraisal equally.
Deed Restrictions and Reservations.--The Secretary shall have full discretion to impose restrictions and reservations, including conservation easements, reasonably necessary in the deeds to the counties to accomplish the following: (1) Protect the natural resource values of the National Forest System lands adjacent to the lands described in subsections (b), (c), and (d) of section 3 by the imposition of restrictions no greater than the following: (A) New buildings constructed on the premises shall have setbacks as follows: (i) 100 feet from any lake or river.
50 feet from any side or back lot line or any road centerline.
Requiring a minimum lot size equal to the lesser of 5 acres or the size of the parcel conveyed.
Improvements on the premises shall be maintained in a good state of repair and the premises shall be kept clean and orderly.
No accumulation or dumping of trash or unsightly materials shall be permitted on the land.
Any trash or refuse shall be disposed of as required by State or local laws and regulations.
Owners of the land and operators of any business thereon shall comply with all Federal, State, and local laws and regulations applicable to the land or any use thereof.
Any new or remodeled buildings, or additions thereto, shall be constructed and maintained on the premises in harmony with the color, design, and type of construction of buildings presently located on the lands.
No material shall be disposed of on the land by burning in open fires during any closed season established by law or regulation without a written permit as required by law or regulation.
No waste or by-product shall be discarded into any surface water or onto any land surface in violation of Federal, State, or local regulation.
The land shall not be used for any purpose other than single family residences, resorts, lodges, outfitters, and normal accessory uses.
Preserve any rights-of-way or easements reasonably necessary for public and administrative access to, and management of, adjacent National Forest System lands.
Preserve any archaeological sites or valid existing private property rights on the land.
Map.--The map described in section 3 along with legal descriptions of all lands to be conveyed, shall be on file and available for public inspection in the office of the Chief of the Forest Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
The maps and legal descriptions shall have the same force and effect as if included in the Act, except that the Secretary may correct clerical and typographical errors.