This Act may be cited as the ``Renewable and Distributed Energy Net Metering Act''.
The Congress finds that it is in the public interest to: (1) Enable small businesses, residences, schools, churches, farms, and other retail electric customers who generate electric energy to reduce their electric bills.
Encourage private investment in renewable and unconventional energy resources.
Enhance the diversity of the Nation's electric supply by increasing reliance on a wide range of renewable and other environmentally sound distributed generation technologies.
Reduce price volatility and enhance reliability by reducing peak load on centrally generated power supplies.
Protect the environment by promoting clean energy sources.
Part II of the Federal Power Act is amended by adding the following new section at the end thereof: ``SEC.
STATE NET METERING PROGRAMS.
Definitions.--As used in this section-- ``(1) The term `customer generator' means the owner or operator of an electric generation unit qualified for net metering under this section.
The term `net metering' means measuring the difference between the electricity supplied to a customer- generator and the electricity generated by a customer-generator that is delivered to a local distribution system at the same point of interconnection during an applicable billing period and providing a credit to the customer-generator for the net amount, if any, by which the electricity generated by the customer-generator exceeds the electricity supplied to the customer generator during that billing period.
The terms `electric generation unit qualified for net metering' and `qualified generation unit' mean an electric energy generation unit that meets the requirements of subsection (b)(1) of this section.
The term `retail electric supplier' means any person that sells electric energy to the ultimate consumer thereof.
The term `local distribution system' means any system for the distribution of electric energy to the ultimate consumer thereof, whether or not the owner or operator of such system is also a retail electric supplier.
Net Metering Requirement.--Each State, electric utility not regulated by a State, and Federal power marketing agency shall consider establishing a net metering program, or modifying an existing program, to meet the minimum Federal standards set forth in subsection (c) of this section.
If the Commission determines that a State, electric utility not regulated by a State, or Federal power marketing agency has not established a net metering program that meets such minimum standards within 2 years after the enactment of this Act, the Commission shall establish a program (in such State or in the service territory of such electric utility or Federal power marketing agency) consistent with such standards.
Minimum Federal Standards for State and Other Net Metering Programs.-- ``(1) Qualified generation unit.--A generation unit that meets the following requirements qualifies for net metering under this section: ``(A) The unit is a fuel cell or uses as its energy source either solar, wind, or biomass.
The unit has a generating capacity of up to 200 kilowatts.
The unit is located on premises that are owned, operated, leased, or otherwise controlled by the customer-generator.
The unit operates in parallel with the retail electric supplier.
The unit is used primarily to offset part or all of the customer-generator's requirements for electric energy.
The unit is not intended to offset or provide credits for electric consumption at another location of the customer or for any other customer.
Metering and costs.--The retail electric supplier shall make available upon request net metering service to any customer-generator that the supplier serves if the retail customer-generator pays any incremental costs, including those incurred by suppliers and local distribution systems for equipment or services for safety or performance that are necessary to meet the standards referred to in this section.
If a State, nonregulated utility, or Federal power marketing agency determines that the use of a real-time net meter or interval net meter will advance the purposes of this section for such units, a customer-generator in that State (or, in the case of a nonregulated utility or Federal power marketing agency, the relevant service territory) may be required to use the appropriate meter and pay the reasonable incremental costs for such meter and its installation.
Rates.--Rates and charges for retail electric service to customer-generators, including the amount of a net metering credit, shall be established by the appropriate State regulatory authority and nonpublic utilities.
To the extent that a State regulatory authority, nonregulated utility, or Federal power marketing agency does not establish such rates and charges, such rates and charges shall be established by the Commission.
The rates and charges established pursuant to this section shall be just and reasonable.
Safety and performance standards.--A qualified generation unit and net metering system used by a customer- generator shall meet all applicable safety and performance and reliability standards established by the national electrical code, the Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers, Underwriters Laboratories, or the American National Standards Institute, except that a State may adopt additional or different standards provided that such standard is consistent with the purposes of this section and does not impose an unjust or unreasonable burden on a customer-generator that seeks to participate in the State's net metering program.
State authority to establish additional requirements.--Consistent with the limits of its jurisdiction under this part, nothing in this section shall preclude a State from establishing or imposing-- ``(A) requirements or incentives to encourage qualified generation and net metering that are in addition to or in excess of the minimum standards established in this section (including but not limited to additional eligible fuels, higher capacity limits, and credit amounts that vary by fuel or capacity); ``(B) limits on the State-wide aggregate amount of generating capacity of customer-generators with qualified generation facilities and net metering systems, provided that such limits are not unduly discriminatory and are consistent with the purposes of this section; or ``(C) administrative and enforcement procedures and requirements such State deems necessary or appropriate to implement a net metering program under this section, if such procedures and requirements are consistent with the purposes of this section and does not impose an unjust or unreasonable burden on a customer-generator that seeks to participate in the State's net metering program.
Not a wholesale sale.--A net metering credit under a net metering program established under this section shall not be considered a sale for resale for the purposes of Federal or State law.