This Act may be cited as the ``Colusa Basin Watershed Integrated Resources Management Act''.
In this Act: (1) District.--The term ``District'' means the Colusa Basin Drainage District, California.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
State statute.--The term ``State statute'' means section 413 of the California Statutes 1987, chapter 1399 (commonly known as the ``Colusa Basin Drainage Act''), as in effect on the date of enactment of this Act.
The Secretary may provide financial assistance to the District for use by the District or by local agencies acting under the State statute, for planning, design, environmental compliance, and construction required in carrying out eligible projects in the Colusa Basin Watershed-- (1) to-- (A) reduce the risk of damage to urban and agricultural areas from flooding or the discharge of drainage water or tailwater; (B) assist in groundwater recharge efforts to alleviate overdraft and land subsidence; or (C) construct, restore, or preserve wetland and riparian habitat; and (2) to capture, as an incidental purpose of any of the purposes described in paragraph (1), surface water or stormwater for conservation, conjunctive use, and increased water supplies.
Eligible Projects.--A project shall be an eligible project for purposes of section 3 if the project is-- (1) identified in the document entitled ``Colusa Basin Water Management Program'', dated February 1995; and (2) carried out in accordance with that document and all environmental documentation requirements that apply to the project under the laws of the United States and the State of California.
Compatibility Requirement.--The Secretary shall ensure that projects for which assistance is provided under this Act are not inconsistent with watershed protection and environmental restoration efforts being carried out under the Central Valley Project Improvement Act (106 United States Statutes at Large 4706 et sequentes) or the CALFED Bay-Delta Program.
Non-Federal Share.--The Secretary shall require that the District and cooperating non-Federal agencies or organizations pay-- (1) 25 percent of the costs associated with construction of any project carried out with assistance provided under this Act; and (2) 100 percent of any operation, maintenance, and replacement and rehabilitation costs with respect to such a project.
Planning, Design, and Compliance Assistance.--Funds made available under this Act may be used to fund all costs incurred for planning, design, and environmental compliance activities by the District or by local agencies acting under the State statute, in accordance with agreements with the Secretary.
Treatment of Contributions.--For purposes of this section, the Secretary shall treat the value of land, interests in land (including rights-of-way and other easements), and necessary relocations contributed by the District to a project as payment by the District of the costs of the project.
Amounts expended under this Act shall be considered nonreimbursable for purposes of the Act of June 17, 1902 (32 United States Statutes at Large 388, chapter 1093), and Acts amendatory of and supplemental to that Act.
Funds made available under this Act may be made available to the District or a local agency only if the District or local agency, as applicable, enters into a binding agreement with the Secretary that-- (1) provides that the District or the local agency shall pay the non-Federal share of the costs of construction required by section 5(a); and (2) governs the funding of planning, design, and compliance activities costs under section 5(b).
For project work (including work associated with studies, planning, design, and construction) carried out by the District or by a local agency acting under the State statute before the date on which amounts are provided for the project under this Act, the Secretary shall, subject to amounts being made available in advance in appropriations Acts, reimburse the District or the local agency, without interest, an amount equal to the estimated Federal share of the cost of such work under section 5.
In General.--The Secretary may enter into cooperative agreements and contracts with the District to assist the Secretary in carrying out this Act.
Subcontracting.--Under a cooperative agreement or contract, the Secretary may authorize the District to enter into contracts and receive reimbursements, subject to amounts being made available in advance in appropriations Acts, for work carried out under the contract or subcontract.
RELATIONSHIP TO RECLAMATION REFORM ACT OF 1982.
Activities carried out, and financial assistance provided, under this Act shall not be considered a supplemental or additional benefit for purposes of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (43 United States Code 390aa et seq.).
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary to carry out this Act $25,000,000, plus such additional amount, if any, as may be required by reason of changes in costs of services of the types involved in the District's projects as shown by engineering and other relevant indexes, to remain available until expended.