This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Enhancements for Needed Drugs Act of 2004''.
GAO STUDIES AND REPORTS ON PRICES OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.
Review and Reports on Retail Prices of Prescription Drugs.-- (1) Initial review.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct a review of the retail cost of prescription drugs in the United States during 2000 through 2003, with an emphasis on the prescription drugs most utilized for individuals age 65 or older.
Subsequent review.--After conducting the review under paragraph (1), the Comptroller General shall continuously review the retail cost of such drugs through April 1, 2006, to determine the changes in such costs.
Reports.-- (A) Initial review.--Not later than September 1, 2004, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the initial review conducted under paragraph (1).
Subsequent review.--Not later than July 1, 2005, January 1, 2006, and July 1, 2006, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the subsequent review conducted under paragraph (2).
Annual GAO Study and Report on Retail and Acquisition Prices of Certain Prescription Drugs.-- (1) Ongoing study.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an ongoing study that compares the average retail cost in the United States for each of the 20 most utilized prescription drugs for individuals age 65 or older with-- (A) the average price at which private health plans acquire each such drug; (B) the average price at which the Department of Defense under the Defense Health Program acquires each such drug; (C) the average price at which the Department of Veterans Affairs under the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs acquires each such drug; and (D) the average negotiated price for each such drug that eligible beneficiaries enrolled in a prescription drug plan under part D of title XVIII of the Social Security Act, as added by section 101 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), that provides only basic prescription drug coverage have access to under such plans.
Annual report.--Not later than December 1, 2007, and annually thereafter, the Comptroller General shall submit to Congress a report on the study conducted under paragraph (1), together with such recommendations as the Comptroller General determines appropriate.
INCLUSION OF AVERAGE AGGREGATE BENEFICIARY COSTS AND SAVINGS IN COMPARATIVE INFORMATION FOR BASIC MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG PLANS.
Section 1860D-1(c)(3) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 101 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (A)-- (A) in the matter preceding clause (i), by striking ``subparagraph (B)'' and inserting ``subparagraphs (B) and (C)''; and (B) by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(vi) Average aggregate beneficiary costs and savings.--With respect to plan years beginning on or after January 1, 2007, the average aggregate costs, including deductibles and other cost-sharing, that a beneficiary will incur for covered part D drugs in the year under the plan compared to the average aggregate costs that an eligible beneficiary with no prescription drug coverage will incur for covered part D drugs in the year.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) Average aggregate beneficiary costs and savings information only for basic prescription drug plans.--The Secretary shall not provide comparative information under subparagraph (A)(vi) with respect to-- ``(i) a prescription drug plan that provides supplemental prescription drug coverage; or ``(ii) a Medicare Advantage plan.''.
NEGOTIATING FAIR PRICES FOR MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUGS.
In General.--Section 1860D-11 of the Social Security Act, as added by section 101 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), is amended by striking subsection (i) (relating to noninterference) and by inserting the following: ``(i) Authority To Negotiate Prices With Manufacturers.--In order to ensure that beneficiaries enrolled under prescription drug plans and MA-PD plans pay the lowest possible price, the Secretary shall have authority similar to that of other Federal entities that purchase prescription drugs in bulk to negotiate contracts with manufacturers of covered part D drugs, consistent with the requirements and in furtherance of the goals of providing quality care and containing costs under this part.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of section 101 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173).
DISALLOWANCE OF DEDUCTION FOR ADVERTISING EXPENDITURES OF TAXPAYERS WHO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST FOREIGN SELLERS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS TO DOMESTIC CONSUMERS.
General Rule.--Part IX of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to items not deductible) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ADVERTISING EXPENDITURES OF TAXPAYERS WHO DISCRIMINATE AGAINST FOREIGN SELLERS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS TO DOMESTIC CONSUMERS.
In General.--No deduction otherwise allowable under this chapter shall be allowed for any amount paid or incurred for advertising for the taxable year by any taxpayer who at any time during such taxable year discriminates against a qualified pharmacy or qualified wholesaler in the sale of prescription drugs.
Advertising.--For purposes of this section, the term `advertising' includes direct to consumer advertising and any activity designed to promote the use of a prescription drug directed to providers or others who may make decisions about the use of prescription drugs (other than the provision of free samples).
Qualified Pharmacy; Qualified Wholesaler.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified pharmacy.--The term `qualified pharmacy' means any pharmacy located outside the United States which sells prescription drugs to consumers living in the United States.
Qualified wholesaler.--The term `qualified wholesaler' means any wholesaler located outside the United States which sells prescription drugs to entities selling prescription drugs to consumers living in the United States.
Discrimination.--For purposes of subsection (a), a taxpayer shall be treated as discriminating against a qualified pharmacy or qualified wholesaler in the sale of prescription drugs if such taxpayer publicly, privately or otherwise refuses to do business with a person or entity on the basis that the person or entity will pass along discounts offered to the person or entity to consumers living in the United States.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part IX of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new item: ``Sec.
Advertising expenditures of taxpayers who discriminate against foreign sellers of prescription drugs to domestic consumers.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after the date of the enactment of this Act.
In General.--Section 1860D-42 of the Social Security Act, as added by section 101 of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Incentives to PDP Sponsors To Negotiate Lower Prices.-- ``(1) Authority.--The Secretary is authorized to provide incentive payments to PDP sponsors offering prescription drug plans that provide enrollees with access to negotiated prices used for payment of covered part D drugs under the plans that on average are not more than 10 percent greater than the lesser of-- ``(A) the average price at which the Department of Defense under the Defense Health Program acquires such drugs; or ``(B) the average price at which the Department of Veterans Affairs under the laws administered by the Secretary of Veterans Affairs acquires such drugs.
Information from va and dod.--Upon request of the Secretary of Health and Human Services, the Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Veterans Affairs shall make available to the Secretary of Health and Human Services such information regarding acquisition prices of prescription drugs as the Secretary of Health and Human Services determines is necessary to conduct the incentive payment program under this subsection.
Application.--No incentive payments may be made under this subsection except pursuant to an application that is submitted and approved in a time, manner, and form specified by the Secretary.
Funding.--There shall be available to the Secretary from the MA Regional Plan Stabilization Fund under section 1858(e) during the period beginning on January 1, 2007, and ending on December 31, 2013, a total of $500,000,000 for making incentive payments under this subsection.
Annual reports.--For each year in which an incentive payment is awarded under this subsection, the Secretary shall submit a report to Congress containing a description of the operation of the incentive payment program.''.
Stabilization Fund Amendments.--Section 1858(e)(1) of the Social Security Act, as added by section 221(c) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173), is amended-- (1) in the matter preceding subparagraph (A), by striking ``2'' and inserting ``3''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) PDP incentive payments.--To provide incentive payments to PDP sponsors pursuant to section 1860D- 42(c).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect as if included in the enactment of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173).
NAIC REVIEW AND REPORT ON CHANGES IN MEDIGAP POLICIES THAT PROVIDE COVERAGE OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS CONTAINED IN THE MEDICARE PRESCRIPTION DRUG, IMPROVEMENT, AND MODERNIZATION ACT OF 2003.
In General.--The Secretary shall request the National Association of Insurance Commissioners to conduct a review of the changes to the rules relating to medicare supplemental policies that provide prescription drug coverage contained in subsection (v) of section 1882 of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395ss), as added by section 104(a) of the Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement, and Modernization Act of 2003 (Public Law 108-173).
Impact on Medicare Beneficiaries.--The review conducted pursuant to subsection (a) should focus on the impact the changes described in such subsec