This Act may be cited as the ``Motor Vehicle Industry Competitiveness Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) A strong United States motor vehicle sector is critical to our international competitiveness and to the health of our industrial base.
The United States motor vehicle and motor vehicle parts industries directly employ 1,200,000 workers in high-paying jobs, and indirectly support another million jobs in supplier industries.
The United States motor vehicle industry accounts for 4.5 percent of the Gross National Product, 77 percent of the total consumption of the natural rubber industry, 67 percent of the lead industry, 40 percent of the machine tool industry, 25 percent of the glass industry, 20 percent of the semiconductor industry, 18 percent of the aluminum industry, and 12 percent of the steel industry.
The United States motor vehicle industry also accounts for 12.4 percent of all corporate research and development.
United States motor vehicle makers have experienced serious financial difficulty over the past several years, with the Big Three losing $8,000,000,000 in 1991 alone.
Hundreds of United States motor vehicle parts companies have gone out of business in the last several years, and tens of thousands of United States motor vehicle parts workers have lost their jobs.
The problems facing the United States motor vehicle sector are reflected in the trade deficit of that sector with Japan, which exceeded $30,000,000,000 in 1991 and accounted for almost half of the entire United States world trade deficit.
Despite years of negotiations through the MOSS process, United States motor vehicle parts companies have been excluded from the Japanese market, where they account for less than 1 percent of all sales.
This trade imbalance, which has been caused in part by Japanese structural barriers such as keiretsu, poses a threat to the health of the United States motor vehicle parts industry, as well as to the many United States industries that supply the motor vehicle parts industry.
High health care costs have a significant impact of the competitiveness of United States motor vehicle makers.
The Big Three must pass along to consumers as much as $700 more per car in health care costs than Japanese companies.
Worldwide excess capacity in the motor vehicle industry of several million units has put further pressure on the United States market and the United States motor vehicle industry.
Clear, broad-based government economic, trade, health and United States tax policies are needed to improve the competitiveness of the United States motor vehicle sector and to stem further job losses in these industries.
MOTOR VEHICLE INDUSTRY COMPETITIVENESS COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established the Motor Vehicle Industry Competitiveness Commission (hereinafter in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Functions.-- (1) Investigation and study.--The Commission shall make a complete investigation and study of the financial condition of the domestic motor vehicle sector, including the laws, regulations, and foreign trade barriers that pose impediments to its competitiveness.
Policy recommendations.--Based on the results of the investigation and study required to be conducted under paragraph (1), the Commission shall recommend to the President and Congress those policies that need to be adopted to-- (A) achieve the national goal of a strong and competitive motor vehicle sector; (B) facilitate the sales of United States-made motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts by improving competitiveness at home and opening markets abroad; (C) reduce the motor vehicle sector trade deficit with foreign countries, particularly Japan; (D) implement an industry-wide health care plan that helps relieve the burden of excessive health care costs on the motor vehicle and motor vehicle parts industries; and (E) promote job growth in the motor vehicle sector.
Specific issues.--In carrying out paragraph (1), the Commission shall specifically investigate and study the following: (A) The current financial condition of the motor vehicle industry and how the industry's financial condition is likely to change over the next 5 years, including-- (i) the profits or losses likely to be achieved by United States motor vehicle sector manufacturers (which term, for purposes of this Act, means motor vehicle manufacturers and motor vehicle parts manufacturers) over the next 5 years, and (ii) the market share gains or losses likely to be achieved by United States motor vehicle manufacturers in the United States and key markets abroad over the next 5 years.
The foreign barriers to export or foreign investment by United States motor vehicle sector manufacturers, especially in Japan.
The extent to which health care costs impede the competitiveness of United States motor vehicle sector manufacturers.
The extent to which the United States tax laws impede the competitiveness of United States motor vehicle sector manufacturers.
Whether the Federal Government should take any action with respect to United States trade or antitrust laws to open foreign markets to United States motor vehicle products, to open ``transplant'' facilities in the United States to United States motor vehicle parts, or to make the United States motor vehicle sector more competitive.
Whether the policies and strategies of the Federal Government have adequately addressed the competitiveness needs of the United States motor vehicle industry.
The potential impact of trade agreements or trade negotiations on employment in the United States industry.
The impact on the competitiveness of the United States motor vehicle industry of the 1989 Department of the Treasury ruling classifying multipurpose vehicles as cars instead of light trucks.
The impact of agreements involving other countries, including the European Community-Japan motor vehicle market-share arrangement, on the competitiveness of the United States motor vehicle industry.
Whether the Federal Government should take any legislative or administrative actions to improve the financial conditions of the United States motor vehicle industry.
The extent to which the manufacturing programs of the Federal Government, including those at the National Institute of Technology, of the Department of Commerce, can be better utilized to make the United States motor vehicle industry more competitive.
Membership.-- (1) Appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of 15 members as follows: (A) 3 members appointed by the President.
3 members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
3 members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
3 members appointed by the Senate Republican Leader of the Senate.
Qualifications.--Appointments under paragraph (1) shall be made from among individuals who are experts in motor vehicle trade and economic policy, including individuals from organizations representing United States motor vehicle sector manufacturers and employees of those manufacturers and from the Federal, State, and local governments.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Pay.--Members shall serve without pay.
Chairman.--The Chairman of the commission shall be elected by the members.
Staff Assistance From Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any department or agency of the Untied States may detail any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its functions under this Act.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services may provide the Commission with the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its functions under this Act.
Obtaining Official Data.--The Commission may secure directly from any department or agency of the United States information (other than information required by any statute of the United States to be kept confidential by such department or agency) necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this section.
Upon request of the Commission, the head of that department or agency shall furnish such nonconfidential information to the Commission.
Report.--Not later than six months after the date on which the initial appointment of the members of the Commission is completed, the Commission shall transmit to the President and Congress a report on the activities of the Commission, including the recommendations required under section 3(b)(2).
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the one hundred and eightieth day following the date of transmittal of the report under subsection (d).
All records and papers of the Commission shall thereupon be delivered by the Administrator of General Services for deposit in the National Archives.