This Act may be cited as the ``Older Americans Economic Security Act of 1993''.
TAX DEDUCTION FOR CARE OF CERTAIN ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS.
In General.--Part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to additional itemized deductions for individuals) is amended by redesignating section 220 as section 221 and by inserting after section 219 the following new section: ``SEC.
EXPENSES FOR CARE OF CERTAIN ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS.
Allowance of Deduction.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a deduction an amount equal to the amount by which the qualified elderly care expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year exceed 5 percent of the adjusted gross income of the taxpayer.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified elderly care expenses.--The term `qualified elderly care expenses' means payments by the taxpayer for in- home custodial care-- ``(A) provided to any qualifying elderly individual, and ``(B) not compensated for by insurance or otherwise.
Qualifying elderly individual.--The term `qualifying elderly individual' means any individual-- ``(A) who has attained age 65 before the close of the taxable year, and ``(B) who is-- ``(i) a parent or grandparent of the taxpayer during the taxable year, or ``(ii) a dependent (as defined in section 152) of the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Custodial care.--The term `custodial care' means services which constitute personal care and which do not entail or require the continuing attention of trained medical or paramedical personnel, such as help in walking and getting in and out of bed, assistance in bathing, dressing, feeding, and using a toilet, preparation of special diets, and supervision over the taking of medication which would otherwise usually be self-administered.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Determination of parents and grandparents.--Paragraph (2) of section 152(b) (relating to rules relating to general definition of dependent) shall apply to the determination of whether any of the relationships specified in clause (i) of subsection (b)(2)(B) exists.
Denial of double benefit.--No deduction or credit shall be allowed under any other provision of this chapter with respect to any amount for which a deduction is allowed under subsection (a).''
Deduction Not Subject to Floor on Miscellaneous Itemized Deductions.--Subsection (b) of section 67 of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (12), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (13) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(14) the deduction under section 220 (relating to expenses for care of certain elderly individuals).''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for part VII of subchapter B of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by striking the last item and inserting the following new items: ``Sec.
Expenses for care of certain elderly individuals.
INCLUSION OF CERTAIN GOODS AND SERVICES DONATED BY PHYSICIANS OR REGISTERED PROFESSIONAL NURSES TO ELDERLY INDIVIDUALS AS CHARITABLE DEDUCTIONS.
In General.--Subsection (c) of section 170 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to charitable contribution defined) is amended by inserting after paragraph (5) the following new paragraph: ``(6) An individual who has attained age 65 and who is not a member of the donor's family if the contribution or gift is the rendering of medical services or the provision of medical goods by a physician (as defined in section 213(d)(4)) or by a registered professional nurse.''
Valuation of Goods and Services Donated.--Section 170 of such Code (relating to charitable, etc., contributions and gifts) is amended by redesignating subsection (m) as subsection (n) and by inserting after subsection (l) the following new subsection: ``(m) Valuation of Contributions and Gifts Described in Subsection (c)(6).--The value of contributions and gifts described in subsection (c)(6) shall be determined as if provided to an individual under the insurance program established by part B of title XVIII of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code ch.
XVIII, part B), in accordance with the provisions of subsections (a) and (c) of section 1833 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395l).''
TAX-FREE WITHDRAWALS FROM INDIVIDUAL RETIREMENT ACCOUNTS TO PAY LONG-TERM CARE EXPENSES OR TO PURCHASE LONG-TERM CARE INSURANCE.
In General.--Subsection (d) of section 408 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to tax treatment of distributions from individual retirement accounts) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(8) Distributions to pay long-term care expenses or purchase long-term care insurance.-- ``(A) In general.--Paragraph (1) shall not apply to any amount paid or distributed out of an individual retirement account or individual retirement annuity to the individual for whose benefit the account or annuity is maintained if the entire amount received (including money and any other property) is used, within 30 days after the individual receives the payment or distribution-- ``(i) to pay long-term care expenses of the individual, or ``(ii) to purchase insurance covering such expenses.
Long-term care expenses defined.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `long-term care expenses' means, with respect to an individual, expenses incurred by the individual for-- ``(i) custodial or health care provided to the individual in a nursing home, and ``(ii) any goods or services provided to the individual outside a nursing home in connection with the provision of custodial or health care to the individual.''
The amendments made by this Act shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1993.