This Act may be cited as the ``Adams National Historical Park Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress finds that-- (1) in 1946, Secretary of the Interior J.A.
Krug, by means of the authority granted the Secretary of the Interior under section 2 of the Historic Sites Act of August 21, 1935, established the Adams Mansion National Historic Site, located in Quincy, Massachusetts; (2) in 1952, Acting Secretary of the Interior Vernon D. Northrup enlarged the site and renamed it the Adams National Historic Site, using the Secretary's authority as provided in the Historic Sites Act; (3) in 1972, Congress, through Public Law 92-272, authorized the Secretary of the Interior to add approximately 3.68 acres at Adams National Historic Site; (4) in 1978, Congress, through Public Law 95-625, authorized the Secretary of the Interior to accept by conveyance the birthplaces of John Adams and John Quincy Adams, both in Quincy, Massachusetts, to be managed as part of the Adams National Historic Site; (5) in 1980, Congress, through Public Law 96-435, authorized the Secretary of the Interior to accept the conveyance of the United First Parish Church in Quincy, Massachusetts, the burial place of John Adams, Abigail Adams, and John Quincy Adams and his wife, to be administered as part of the Adams National Historic Site; (6) the actions taken by past Secretaries of the Interior and past Congresses to preserve for the benefit, education and inspiration of present and future generations of Americans the home, property, birthplaces and burial site of John Adams, John Quincy Adams, and Abigail Adams, have resulted in a multi-site unit of the National Park System with no overarching enabling or authorizing legislation; and (7) that the sites and resources associated with John Adams, second President of the United States, his wife Abigail Adams, and John Quincy Adams, sixth President of the United States, require recognition as a national historical park in the National Park System.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to establish the Adams National Historical Park in the City of Quincy, in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts, to preserve, maintain and interpret the home, property, birthplaces, and burial site of John Adams and his wife Abigail, John Quincy Adams, and subsequent generations of the Adams family associated with the Adams property in Quincy, Massachusetts, for the benefit, education and inspiration of present and future generations of Americans.
As used in this Act: (1) Historical park.--The term ``historical park'' means the Adams National Historical Park established in section 4.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--In order to preserve for the benefit and inspiration of the people of the United States as a national historical park certain properties in Quincy, Massachusetts, associated with John Adams, second President of the United States, his wife, Abigail Adams, John Quincy Adams, sixth President of the United States, and his wife, Louisa Adams, there is established the Adams National Historical Park as a unit of the National Park System.
Boundaries.--The historical park shall be comprised of the following: (1) All property administered by the National Park Service in the Adams National Historic Site as of the date of enactment of this Act, as well as all property previously authorized to be acquired by the Secretary for inclusion in the Adams National Historic Site, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Adams National Historical Park'', numbered NERO 386/80,000, and dated April 1998.
All property authorized to be acquired for inclusion in the historical park by this Act or other law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Visitor and Administrative Sites.--To preserve the historical character and landscape of the main features of the historical park, the Secretary may acquire up to 10 acres for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities adjacent to or in the general proximity of the property depicted on the map identified in subsection (b)(1)(A).
Map.--The map of the historical park shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
In General.--The park shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with this section and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act entitled ``An Act to establish a National Park Service, and for other purposes'', approved August 25, 1916 (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1, 2, 3, and 4) and the Act of August 21, 1935 (49 United States Statutes at Large 666; 16 United States Code 461- 467), as amended.
Cooperative Agreements.--(1) The Secretary may consult and enter into cooperative agreements with interested entities and individuals to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the park.
Any payment made by the Secretary pursuant to a cooperative agreement under this paragraph shall be subject to an agreement that conversion, use, or disposal of the project so assisted for purposes contrary to the purposes of this Act, as determined by the Secretary, shall result in a right of the United States to reimbursement of all funds made available to such a project or the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to such funds as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal, whichever is greater.
Acquisition of Real Property.--For the purposes of the park, the Secretary is authorized to acquire real property with appropriated or donated funds, by donation, or by exchange, within the boundaries of the park.
Repeal of Superceded Administrative Authorities.-- (1) Section 312 of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-625; 92 United States Statutes at Large 3479) is amended by striking ``(a)'' after ``SEC.
312''; and strike subsection (b) in its entirety.
The first section of Public Law 96-435 (94 United States Statutes at Large 1861) is amended by striking ``(a)'' after ``That''; and strike subsection (b) in its entirety.
References to the Historic Site.--Any reference in any law (other than this Act), regulation, document, record, map, or other paper of the United States to the Adams National Historic Site shall be considered to be a reference to the historical park.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.