Part J of title X of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8271 et sequentes) is amended to read as follows: ``PART J--RURAL EDUCATION INITIATIVE ``SEC.
``This part may be cited as the `Rural Education Initiative Act of 1999'.
``Congress finds the following: ``(1) The National Center for Educational Statistics reports that 46 percent of our Nation's public schools serve rural areas.
While there are rural education initiatives identified at the State and local level, no Federal education policy focuses on the specific and unique needs of rural school districts and schools.
Small school districts often cannot use Federal grant funds distributed by formula because the formula allocation does not provide enough revenue to carry out the program the grant is intended to fund.
Rural schools often cannot compete for Federal funding distributed by competitive grants because the schools lack the personnel needed to prepare grant applications and the resources to hire specialists in the writing of Federal grant proposals.
A critical problem for rural school districts involves the hiring and retention of qualified administrators and certified teachers (especially in reading, science, and mathematics).
As a result, teachers in rural schools are almost twice as likely to provide instruction in three or more subject areas than teachers in urban schools.
Rural schools also face other tough challenges, such as shrinking local tax bases, high transportation costs, aging buildings, limited course offerings, and limited resources.
``Subpart 1--Small and Rural School Program ``SEC.
FORMULA GRANT PROGRAM AUTHORIZED.
Alternative Uses.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, an eligible local educational agency may use the applicable funding, that the agency is eligible to receive from the State educational agency for a fiscal year, to support local or statewide education reform efforts intended to improve the academic achievement of elementary school and secondary school students and the quality of instruction provided for the students.
Notification.--An eligible local educational agency shall notify the State educational agency of the local educational agency's intention to use the applicable funding in accordance with paragraph (1) not later than a date that is established by the State educational agency for the notification.
Eligibility.-- ``(1) In general.--A local educational agency shall be eligible to use the applicable funding in accordance with subsection (a) if-- ``(A)(i) the total number of students in average daily attendance at all of the schools served by the local educational agency is less than 600; and ``(ii) all of the schools served by the local educational agency are located in a community with a Rural-Urban Continuum Code of 6, 7, 8, or 9, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture; or ``(B) the agency meets the criteria established in subparagraph (A)(i) and the Secretary, in accordance with paragraph (2), grants the local educational agency's request to waive the criteria described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
Certification.--The Secretary shall determine whether or not to waive the criteria described in paragraph (1)(A)(ii) based on certification provided by the local educational agency, or the State educational agency on behalf of the local educational agency, that the local educational agency is located in an area defined as rural by a governmental agency of the State.
Applicable Funding.--In this section, the term `applicable funding' means funds provided under each of titles II, IV, VI, parts A and C of title VII, and part I of title X.
Disbursal.--Each State educational agency that receives applicable funding for a fiscal year shall disburse the applicable funding to local educational agencies for alternative uses under this section for the fiscal year at the same time that the State educational agency disburses the applicable funding to local educational agencies that do not intend to use the applicable funding for such alternative uses for the fiscal year.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds used under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant any other Federal, State, or local education funds that would otherwise be available for the purpose of this subpart.
Special Rule.--References in Federal law to funds for the provisions of law set forth in subsection (c) may be considered to be references to funds for this section.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to eligible local educational agencies to enable the local educational agencies to support local or statewide education reform efforts intended to improve the academic achievement of elementary school and secondary school students and the quality of instruction provided for the students.
Eligibility.-- ``(1) In general.--A local educational agency shall be eligible to receive a grant under this section if-- ``(A)(i) the total number of students in average daily attendance at all of the schools served by the local educational agency is less than 600; and ``(ii) all of the schools served by the local educational agency are located in a community with a Rural-Urban Continuum Code of 6, 7, 8, or 9, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture; or ``(B) the agency meets the criteria established in subparagraph (A)(i) and the Secretary, in accordance with paragraph (2), grants the local educational agency's request to waive the criteria described in subparagraph (A)(ii).
Certification.--The Secretary shall determine whether or not to waive the criteria described in paragraph (1)(A)(ii) based on certification provided by the local educational agency, or the State educational agency on behalf of the local educational agency, that the local educational agency is located in an area defined as rural by a governmental agency of the State.
Allocation.-- ``(1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), the Secretary shall award a grant to an eligible local educational agency for a fiscal year in an amount equal to the initial amount determined under paragraph (2) for the fiscal year minus the total amount received under the provisions of law described under section 10961(c) for the preceding fiscal year.
Determination of the initial amount.--The initial amount referred to in paragraph (1) is equal to $100 multiplied by the total number of students, over 50 students, in average daily attendance in such eligible agency plus $20,000, except that the initial amount may not exceed $60,000.
Ratable adjustment.-- ``(A) In general.--If the amount made available for this subpart for any fiscal year is not sufficient to pay in full the amounts that local educational agencies are eligible to receive under paragraph (1) for such year, the Secretary shall ratably reduce such amounts for such year.
Additional amounts.--If additional funds become available for making payments under paragraph (1) for such fiscal year, payments that were reduced under subparagraph (A) shall be increased on the same basis as such payments were reduced.
Census determination.-- ``(A) In general.--Each local educational agency desiring a grant under this section shall conduct a census not later than December 1 of each year to determine the number of kindergarten through grade 12 students in average daily attendance at the schools served by the local educational agency.
Submission.--Each local educational agency shall submit the number described in subparagraph (A) to the Secretary not later than March 1 of each year.
Disbursal.--The Secretary shall disburse the funds awarded to a local educational agency under this section for a fiscal year not later than July 1 of that year.
Special Rule.--A local educational agency that is eligible to receive a grant under this subpart for a fiscal year shall be ineligible to receive funds for such fiscal year under subpart 2.
Supplement Not Supplant.--Funds made available under this section shall be used to supplement and not supplant any other Federal, State or local education funds.
Academic Achievement.-- ``(1) In general.--Each local educational agency that uses or receives funds under section 10961 or 10962 for a fiscal year shall administer an assessment consistent with section 1111 of title I.
Special rule.--Each local educational agency that uses or receives funds under section 10961 or 10962 shall use the same assessment described in paragraph (1) for each year of participation in the program under such section.
State Educational Agency Determination Regarding Continuing Participation.--Each State educational agency that receives funding under the provisions of law described in section 10961(c) shall-- ``(1) after the second year that a local educational agency participates in a program under section 10961 or 10962 and on the basis of the results of the assessments described in subsection (a), determine whether the students served by the local educational agency participating in the program performed in accordance with section 1111 of title I; and ``(2) only permit those local educational agencies that so participated and met the requirements of section 1111(b)(2) of title I to continue to so participate.
``Subpart 2--Low-Income And Rural School Program ``SEC.
Reservations.--From amounts appropriated under section 10982 for this subpart for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve \1/2\ of 1 percent to make awards to elementary or secondary schools operated or supported by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to carry out the purpose of this subpart.
Grants to States.-- ``(1) In general.--From amounts appropriated under section 10982 for this subpart that are not reserved under subsection (a), the Secretary shall award grants for a fiscal year to State educational agencies that have applications approved under section 10973 to enable the State educational agencies to award subgrants to eligible local educational agencies for local authorized activities described in subsection (c)(2).
Allocation.--From amounts appropriated for this subpart, the Secretary shall allocate to each State educational agency for a fiscal year an amount that bears the same ratio to the amount of funds appropriated under section 10982 for this subpart that are not reserved under subsection (a) as the number of students in average daily attendance served by eligible local educational agencies in the State bears to the number of all such students served by eligible local educational agencies in all States for that fiscal year.
Direct awards to specially qualified agencies.-- ``(A) Nonparticipating state.--If a State educational agency elects not to participate in the program under this subpart or does not have an application approved under section 10973 a specially qualified agency in such State desiring a grant under this subpart shall apply directly to the Secretary to receive an award under this subpart.
Direct awards to specially qualified agencies.--The Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, the amount the State educational agency is eligible to receive under paragraph (2) directly to specially qualified agencies in the State.
Local Awards.-- ``(1) Eligibility.--A local educational agency shall be eligible to receive funds under this subpart if-- ``(A) 20 percent or more of the children aged 5 to 17, inclusive, served by the local educational agency are from families with incomes below the poverty line; and ``(B) all of the schools served by the agency are located in a community with a Rural-Urban Continuum Code of 6, 7, 8, or 9, as determined by the Secretary of Agriculture.
Uses of funds.--Grant funds awarded to local educational agencies or made available to schools under this subpart shall be used for-- ``(1) educational technology, including software and hardware; ``(2) professional development; ``(3) technical assistance; ``(4) teacher recruitment and retention; ``(5) parental involvement activities; or ``(6) academic enrichment programs.
STATE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
Award Basis.--A State educational agency shall award grants to eligible local educational agencies-- ``(1) on a competitive basis; or ``(2) according to a formula based on the number of students in average daily attendance served by the eligible local educational agencies or schools (as appropriate) in the State, as determined by the State.
Administrative Costs.--A State educational agency receiving a grant under this subpart may not use more than 5 percent of the amount of the grant for State administrative costs.
``Each State educational agency and specially qualified agency desiring to receive a grant under this subpart shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Such application shall include specific measurable goals and objectives to be achieved which may include specific educational goals and objectives relating to increased student academic achievement, decreased student drop-out rates, or such other factors that the State educational agency or specially qualified agency may choose to measure.
State Reports.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under this subpart shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
The report shall describe-- ``(1) the method the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies and to provide assistance to schools under this subpart; ``(2) how local educational agencies and schools used funds provided under this subpart; and ``(3) the degree to which progress has been made toward meeting the goals and objectives described in the application submitted under section 10973.
Specially Qualified Agency Report.--Each specially qualified agency that receives a grant under this subpart shall provide an annual report to the Secretary.
Such report shall describe-- ``(1) how such agency uses funds provided under this subpart; and ``(2) the degree to which progress has been made toward meeting the goals and objectives described in the application submitted under section 10971(b)(3)(A).
Report to Congress.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit to the Committee on Education and the Workforce for the House of Representatives and the Committee on Health, Education, Labor, and Pensions for the Senate an annual report.
The report shall describe-- ``(1) the methods the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies and to provide assistance to schools under this subpart; ``(2) how eligible local educational agencies and schools used funds provided under this subpart; and ``(3) progress made in meeting specific measurable educational goals and objectives.
``For the purposes of this subpart-- ``(1) The term `poverty line' means the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2))) applicable to a family of the size involved.
The term `specially qualified agency' means an eligible local educational agency, located in a State that does not participate in a program under this subpart in a fiscal year, that may apply directly to the Secretary for a grant in such year in accordance with section 10971(b)(3).
``Subpart 3--General Provisions ``SEC.
``For the purposes of this part, the term `State' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, and the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
``There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this part $125,000,000 for fiscal year 2000 and such sums as may be necessary for each of four succeeding fiscal years to be distributed equally between subparts 1 and 2.