This Act may be cited as the ``Palestinian Peace Promotion and Anti-Incitement Act''.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the Palestinian Authority has not fully lived up to its prior agreements with Israel to end incitement; and (2) the Palestinian Authority should do more to prepare the Palestinian people for peace with Israel.
LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE TO THE PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY.
Chapter 1 of part III of the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 is amended-- (1) by redesignating the second section 620J (as added by section 651 of Public Law 110-161) as section 620M; and (2) by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
LIMITATION ON ASSISTANCE TO THE PALESTINIAN AUTHORITY.
Prohibition of Funds.--No funds may be provided under this Act to the Palestinian Authority.
Waiver.--The prohibition included in subsection (a) shall not apply if the President certifies in writing to the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President pro tempore of the Senate, and the Committees on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and Foreign Relations of the Senate that waiving such prohibition is important to the national security interests of the United States.
Report.--Whenever the waiver authority pursuant to subsection (b) is exercised, the President shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate a report detailing the justification for the waiver, the purposes for which the funds will be spent, and the accounting procedures in place to ensure that the funds are properly disbursed.
Such report shall also detail the steps the Palestinian Authority has taken to arrest terrorists, confiscate weapons, and dismantle the terrorist infrastructure.
Certification.--If the President exercises the waiver authority under subsection (b), the Secretary of State shall certify and report to the Committees on Foreign Affairs of the House of Representatives and Foreign Relations of the Senate prior to the obligation of funds that-- ``(1) the Palestinian Authority has established a single treasury account for all Palestinian Authority financing and all financing mechanisms flow through this account, no parallel financing mechanisms exist outside of the Palestinian Authority treasury account, and there is a single comprehensive civil service roster and payroll; and ``(2) the Palestinian Authority no longer engages in a pattern of incitement against the United States or Israel and is engaged in peace preparation activities aimed at promoting peace with the Jewish State of Israel.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Incitement.--The term `incitement' means any of the following that is sponsored, supported, or directed by officials or employees of the Palestinian Authority or Palestinian Authority-controlled, sponsored, or supported electronic, broadcast, and print media, schools, mosques, and institutions: ``(A) Statements, media, communication, or other activities against any religion, ethnicity, or nationality.
Advocacy, endorsement, or glorification of violence, martyrdom, or terrorism.
Endorsement, glorification, honor, or other memorialization of any person or group that has advocated, sponsored, or committed acts of terrorism, including the naming after or dedication to such person or group of any school, community center, camp, stadium, public square, street, land, landmark, waterway, or other facility.
Peace preparation activities.--The term `peace preparation activities' means Arabic-language communications and educational activities sponsored by the Palestinian Authority, which are communicated or administered via electronic, broadcast and print media, schools, mosques and statements by government officials that may include the following: ``(A) Public acknowledgments of the State of Israel's right to exist as a Jewish state.
Firm public commitments to and endorsements of peaceful co-existence with the Jewish State of Israel.
Production, distribution, and public display via all media platforms, schools, mosques, educational materials and elsewhere of maps that show the State of Israel existing as `Israel' side-by-side with `Palestine' and halting all production, distribution, or public display of maps that do not include a state of Israel; and ``(D) renouncing any and all future rights or claims to commit acts of violence against Israel.