PROHIBITION OF RETALIATORY ACTIONS AGAINST MEMBERS OF THE ARMED FORCES MAKING ALLEGATIONS OF SEXUAL HARASSMENT OR UNLAWFUL DISCRIMINATION.
In General.--(1) Chapter 49 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Retaliatory personnel actions prohibited against members alleging sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination ``(a) Prohibition of Retaliatory Personnel Actions.--(1) No person may take (or threaten to take) an unfavorable personnel action, or withhold (or threaten to withhold) a favorable personnel action, as a reprisal against a member of the armed forces for making or preparing a communication described in paragraph (2) to a Member of Congress or an Inspector General (as defined in subsection (f)) or to any other person or organization pursuant to regulations or other established administrative procedures for such communications.
Any action prohibited by the preceding sentence (including the threat to take any action and the withholding or threat to withhold any favorable action) shall be considered for the purposes of this section to be a personnel action prohibited by this subsection.
A communication described in this paragraph is a communication in which the member making (or preparing) the communication alleges that the member has been the subject of sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination.
Inspector General Investigation of Allegations of Prohibited Personnel Actions.--(1) If a member of the armed forces submits to an Inspector General an allegation that a personnel action prohibited by subsection (a) has been taken (or threatened) against the member with respect to a communication described in paragraph (2), the Inspector General of the Department of Defense (or the Inspector General of the Department of Transportation, in the case of a member of the Coast Guard when the Coast Guard is not operating as a service in the Navy) shall expeditiously investigate the allegation.
The Inspector General of the Department of Defense may not delegate or assign such investigation to any office or organization within a military department.
A communication described in this paragraph is a communication to a Member of Congress or an Inspector General or to any other person or organization pursuant to regulations or other established administrative procedures in which the member of the armed forces makes a complaint or discloses information that the member reasonably believes constitutes evidence of sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination.
The Inspector General is not required to make an investigation under paragraph (1) in the case of an allegation made more than 90 days after the date on which the member becomes aware of the personnel action that is subject of the allegation.
Inspector General Investigation of Allegations of Sexual Harassment or Unlawful Discrimination.--If the Inspector General has not already done so, the Inspector General shall commence a separate investigation of the information that the member submitting the allegation under subsection (b) believes constitutes evidence of sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination.
Reports on Investigations.--(1) Not later than 30 days after completion of an investigation under this section, the Inspector General shall submit a report on the results of the investigation to the Secretary of Defense (or to the Secretary of Transportation in the case of a member of the Coast Guard when the Coast Guard is not operating as a service in the Navy) and the member of the armed forces who made the allegation.
If, in the course of an investigation of an allegation under this section, the Inspector General determines that it is not possible to submit the report required by paragraph (1) within 90 days after the date of receipt of the allegation being investigated, the Inspector General shall provide to the Secretary of Defense (or to the Secretary of Transportation in the case of a member of the Coast Guard when the Coast Guard is not operating as a service in the Navy) and to the member making the allegation a notice-- ``(A) of that determination (including the reasons why the report may not be submitted within that time); and ``(B) of the time when the report will be submitted.
The report on the results of the investigation shall contain a thorough review of the facts and circumstances relevant to the allegation and the complaint or disclosure and shall include documents acquired during the course of the investigation, including summaries of interviews conducted.
The report may include a recommendation as to the disposition of the complaint.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense, and the Secretary of Transportation with respect to the Coast Guard when it is not operating as a service in the Navy, shall prescribe regulations to carry out this section.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `unlawful discrimination' means discrimination on the basis of race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.
The term `Member of Congress' includes any Delegate or Resident Commissioner to Congress.
The term `Inspector General' means-- ``(A) an Inspector General appointed under the Inspector General Act of 1978; and ``(B) an officer of the armed forces assigned or detailed under regulations of the Secretary concerned to serve as an Inspector General at any command level in one of the armed forces.''.
The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``983.
Retaliatory personnel actions prohibited against members alleging sexual harassment or unlawful discrimination.''.
Deadline for Regulations.--The Secretary of Defense and the Secretary of Transportation shall prescribe the regulations required by subsection (e) of section 983 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), not later than 120 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Effective Date.--Section 983 of title 10, United States Code, as added by subsection (a), shall apply with respect to any personnel action taken (or threatened to be taken) on or after the date of the enactment of this Act as a reprisal prohibited by subsection (a) of that section.