This Act may be cited as the ``Best Buddies Empowerment for People with Intellectual Disabilities Act of 2007''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Best Buddies is the first national social and recreational program in the United States for people with mental retardation.
Best Buddies is dedicated to helping people with intellectual disabilities become part of mainstream society.
Best Buddies is determined to end social isolation for people with intellectual disabilities by establishing meaningful friendships with their non-disabled peers in order to help increase the self-esteem, confidence, and abilities of people with and without intellectual disabilities.
Since 1989, Best Buddies has enhanced the lives of people with intellectual disabilities by providing opportunities for one-to-one friendships and integrated employment.
Best Buddies is an international organization spanning 1300 middle school, high school, and college campuses.
The Best Buddies organization implements programs that will positively impact more than 350,000 individuals this year and expect to be able to reach 500,000 people by 2010.
The Best Buddies Jobs program continues the integration of people with intellectual disabilities into the community through supported employment.
The Best Buddies Citizens program pairs people with mental retardation in one-to-one friendships with other individuals in the corporate and civic communities.
The Best Buddies Colleges program pairs people with mental retardation in one-to-one friendships with college students.
The Best Buddies High Schools program pairs students with mental retardation in one-to-one friendships with high school students.
The Best Buddies e-Buddies program creates respective e-mail friendships between people with and without intellectual disabilities.
Purpose.--The purposes of this Act are to-- (1) provide support to Best Buddies to increase participation in and public awareness about Best Buddies programs that serve people with intellectual disabilities; (2) dispel negative stereotypes about people with intellectual disabilities; and (3) promote the extraordinary gifts of people with intellectual disabilities.
ASSISTANCE FOR BEST BUDDIES.
Education Activities.--The Secretary of Education may award grants to, or enter into contracts or cooperative agreements with, Best Buddies to carry out the following: (1) Activities to promote the expansion of Best Buddies, including activities to increase the participation of individuals with intellectual disabilities within the United States.
The design and implementation of Best Buddies education and outreach programs, including character education and volunteer programs that support the purposes of this Act, that can be integrated into classroom instruction and are consistent with academic content standards.
Limitations.-- (1) In general.--Amounts appropriated to carry out this Act may not be used for direct treatment of diseases, medical conditions, or mental health conditions.
Administrative activities.--Not more than three percent of amounts appropriated to carry out this Act may be used for administrative activities.
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act shall be construed to limit the use of non-Federal funds by Best Buddies.
APPLICATION AND ANNUAL REPORT.
Application.-- (1) In general.--To be eligible for a grant, contract, or cooperative agreement under section 3(a), Best Buddies shall submit an application at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary of Education or Secretary of State, as applicable, may require.
Content.--At a minimum, an application under this subsection shall contain the following: (A) A description of activities to be carried out with the grant, contract, or cooperative agreement.
Information on specific measurable goals and objectives to be achieved through activities carried out with the grant, contract, or cooperative agreement.
Annual Report.-- (1) In general.--As a condition on receipt of any funds under section 3(a), Best Buddies shall agree to submit an annual report at such time, in such manner, and containing such information as the Secretary of Education or Secretary of State, as applicable, may require.
Content.--At a minimum, each annual report under this subsection shall describe the degree to which progress has been made toward meeting the specific measurable goals and objectives described in the applications submitted under subsection (a).
There are authorized to be appropriated for grants, contracts, or cooperative agreements under section 3(a), $10,000,000 to the Secretary of Education for fiscal year 2009, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the four succeeding fiscal years.
The following provisions of law are hereby repealed: (1) Section 5523 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7265b).
Section 5533 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7267b).