This Act may be cited as the ``Even Start Quality Improvement Act''.
RESERVATION FOR SPECIAL TRAINING AND TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE.
In General.--Section 1232(b) of Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6381a(b)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Special Training and Technical Assistance.-- ``(A) In general.--For the first fiscal year after fiscal year 2002 for which the amount appropriated under section 1002(b)(3) exceeds the amount appropriated under such section for the preceding fiscal year by $8,000,000 or more, the Secretary shall reserve from such excess amount $5,000,000.
The Secretary shall use such reserved amount to provide special training, technical assistance, and professional development to eligible entities implementing Even Start programs, and to the staff of such programs, in order to improve the quality of services for eligible participants, and to assist personnel in meeting the professional development requirements described in section 1235(5).
Grant or contract.--The Secretary shall carry out subparagraph (A) by entering into a grant or contract with not less than 2 eligible organizations with experience and expertise in the provision of training, technical assistance, and professional development to family literacy providers, particularly eligible organizations with experience in the provision of such services to Even Start programs.
Such entities may include the National Even Start Association, the National Center for Family Literacy, and the William Federal Reporter Goodling Institute for Research in Family Literacy.
In awarding grants or contracts under this subparagraph, the Secretary shall give priority to eligible organizations that work cooperatively with other eligible organizations.
Activities.--Activities carried out with amounts reserved under this paragraph shall include-- ``(i) training and technical assistance; ``(ii) assistance to personnel in meeting the professional development requirements described in section 1235(5); and ``(iii) training and the development of materials to ensure that instructional programs are based on scientifically based reading research.
Identification of programs.--States shall identify, based on the indicators of program quality developed by the State under section 1240 and other information available to the State, a list of the Even Start programs in the State that are in need of training, technical assistance, and professional development.
Application for assistance.--Even Start programs identified under subparagraph (D) may submit an application for assistance under this paragraph to the Secretary.
Based on need and the quality of the application, the Secretary shall select the programs to be assisted and refer each approved application to an eligible organization described in subparagraph (B) that has expertise and experience in providing the type of assistance required by such Even Start programs.
Consultation.--In providing services under this paragraph, eligible organizations shall consult with the National Institute of Child Health and Human Development and the National Institute for Literacy for guidance in identifying-- ``(i) literacy and reading instructional approaches and practices that are based on scientifically based reading research; and ``(ii) best practices for serving adult learners.''.
Eligible Organization Defined.--Section 1232(e)(2) of Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6381a(e)(2)) is amended by inserting ``the National Even Start Association,'' after ``Center for Family Literacy,''.
STUDY OF EVEN START PARTICIPANTS.
In General.--The Secretary shall contract with a qualified entity (such as a private organization, governmental agency, or institution of higher education) with experience and expertise in family literacy services (as defined in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801)) to conduct a study of-- (1) children who participated in the program known as the ``William Federal Reporter Goodling Even Start Family Literacy Program'' (authorized, on the date of the enactment of this Act, under subpart 3 of part B of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6381-6381k)) and are in the 3rd or 4th grade during the study; (2) the parents of such children; and (3) other adults who participated with such children in such program.
Assessing Results of Children's Participation.-- (1) In general.--The study shall assess the impact of participation by such children in such program with respect to-- (A) whether or not such children are reading on grade level and otherwise performing on a level equal to or better than their peers; (B) school attendance; and (C) whether or not such children have been retained for more than 1 year in any grade and the reasons for such retention, if applicable.
Parental consent.--The consent of a child's parent (as defined in section 9101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 7801)) shall be obtained prior to commencing any effort to obtain data under paragraph (1) with respect to the child.
Assessing Results of Adults' Participation.-- (1) In general.--The study shall also assess the long-term impact of participation by parents (or other adults) in such program, through methods such as-- (A) personal interviews; and (B) testing of such individuals for retained or improved literacy skills (but only in cases in which there are baseline test results for an individual available for comparison that were obtained just prior to the individual's commencing or ceasing participation in such program).
Information included.--The study shall gather information regarding adult participants' current educational and employment endeavors and the perceived impact of participation in such program on the adult's ability to participate in their child's education.