This Act may be cited as the ``True American Heroes Act''.
CONGRESSIONAL GOLD MEDALS FOR GOVERNMENT WORKERS WHO RESPONDED TO THE ATTACKS ON THE WORLD TRADE CENTER AND PERISHED.
Presentation Authorized.--In recognition of the bravery and self-sacrifice of officers, emergency workers, and other employees of State and local government agencies, including the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, and of the United States Government, who responded to the attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City, and perished in the tragic events of September 11, 2001 (including those who are missing and presumed dead), the President is authorized to present, on behalf of the Congress, a gold medal of appropriate design for each such officer, emergency worker, or employee to the next of kin or other representative of each such officer, emergency worker, or employee.
Design and Striking.--For purposes of the presentation referred to in subsection (a), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike gold medals with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions to be determined by the Secretary to be emblematic of the valor and heroism of the men and women honored.
Determination of Recipients.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall determine the number of medals to be presented under this section and the appropriate recipients of the medals after consulting with appropriate representatives of Federal, State, and local officers and agencies and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Presentment Ceremony.--The President shall consult with the Speaker of the House of Representatives, the President Pro Tempore of the Senate, the majority leader and the minority leader of the House of Representatives, and the majority leader and the minority leader of the Senate with regard to the ceremony for presenting the gold medals under subsection (a).
Duplicative Gold Medals For Departments and Duty Stations.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall strike duplicates in gold of the gold medals struck pursuant to subsection (a) for presentation to each of the following: (A) The Governor of the State of New York.
The Mayor of the City of New York.
The Commissioner of the New York Police Department, the Commissioner of the New York Fire Department, the head of emergency medical services for the City of New York, and the Chairman of the Board of Directors of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Each precinct house, fire house, emergency response station, or other duty station or place of employment to which each person referred to in subsection (a) was assigned on September 11, 2001, for display in each such place in a manner befitting the memory of such persons.
Determination of Recipients.--The Secretary of the Treasury shall determine the number of medals to be presented under subsection (e) and the appropriate recipients of the medals after consulting with appropriate representatives of Federal, State, and local officers and agencies and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Duplicate Bronze Medals.--The Secretary of the Treasury may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medal struck pursuant to subsection (a) under such regulations as the Secretary may prescribe, at a price of $50 per medal.
Proceeds of Sale.--Amounts received from the sales of duplicate bronze medals under subsection (g) shall be deposited in a fund to be used to erect a memorial for the fallen emergency responders.
Use of the United States Mint at West Point, New York.--It is the sense of the Congress that the medals authorized under this section should-- (1) be designed, struck, and presented not more than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act; and (2) be struck at the United States Mint at West Point, New York, to the greatest extent possible.
CONGRESSIONAL GOLD MEDALS FOR PEOPLE ABOARD UNITED AIRLINES FLIGHT 93 WHO HELPED RESIST THE HIJACKERS AND CAUSED THE PLANE TO CRASH.
Congressional Findings.--The Congress finds as follows: (1) On September 11, 2001, United Airlines Flight 93, piloted by Captain James Dahl, departed from Newark International Airport at 8:01 a.m. on its scheduled route to San Francisco, California, with 7 crew members and 38 passengers on board.
Shortly after departure, United Airlines Flight 93 was hijacked by terrorists.
At 10:37 a.m. United Airlines Flight 93 crashed near Shanksville, Pennsylvania.
Evidence indicates that people aboard United Airlines Flight 93 learned that other hijacked planes had been used to attack the World Trade Center in New York City and resisted the actions of the hijackers on board.
The effort to resist the hijackers aboard United Airlines Flight 93 appears to have caused the plane to crash prematurely, potentially saving hundreds or thousands of lives and preventing the destruction of the White House, the Capitol, or another important symbol of freedom and democracy.
The leaders of the resistance aboard United Airlines Flight 93 demonstrated exceptional bravery, valor, and patriotism, and are worthy of the appreciation of the people of the United States.
Presentation of Congressional Gold Medals Authorized.--The President is authorized to award posthumously, on behalf of Congress and in recognition of heroic service to the Nation, gold medals of appropriate design to any passengers or crew members on board United Airlines Flight 93 who are identified by the Attorney General as having aided in the effort to resist the hijackers on board the plane.
Design and Striking.--For the purpose of the presentation referred to in subsection (b), the Secretary of the Treasury shall strike gold medals of a single design with suitable emblems, devices, and inscriptions, to be determined by the Secretary.
Duplicate Medals.--Under such regulations as the Secretary of the Treasury may prescribe, the Secretary may strike and sell duplicates in bronze of the gold medals struck under subsection (b) at a price sufficient to cover the cost of the bronze medals (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, and overhead expenses) and the cost of the gold medals.
The medals struck under this Act are national medals for purposes of chapter 51 of title 31, United States Code.
Passed the House of Representatives December 18, 2001.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.