This Act may be cited as the ``Air Force Science and Technology Reinvigoration Act''.
Congress finds the following: (1) When the Air Force was established in 1947 as an independent service, its founders expected that it would ensure that scientific research and technology development would be a priority of America's aeronautical defenses.
Scientific investigation, accompanied by the new knowledge it generates, is the cornerstone of air, space, and information superiority.
To maintain air, space, and information superiority, a strong research base is critical.
Sustaining a strong research and development base is a continuous effort, taking place both inside and outside the Air Force and involving the best minds of the Nation.
The vision of Air Force founder General Henry H. Arnold and others--that the Air Force should be built around science-- remains as vital today as it was more than 50 years ago.
Investment in Air Force research and development has resulted in benefits to American industry, especially the aerospace industry, and made significant contributions to the American economy.
SENSE OF CONGRESS REGARDING SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FUNCTIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) to ensure sufficient financial resources are devoted to emerging technologies, not less than 2.5 percent of the funds available for obligation by the Air Force should be dedicated to science and technology; (2) management and funding for science and technology by the Air Force should be separate from management and funding for acquisition by the Air Force; (3) to increase long-term investments, not less than 15 percent of science and technology funds available for obligation by the Air Force should be invested in new technology areas, including critical information technology programs, for the next 5 years; (4) to maintain a sufficient base of scientists and engineers to meet the technological challenges of the future, the Air Force should-- (A) increase the number of Air Force officers and civilian employees holding doctorate degrees in technical fields; and (B) increase the number and variety of technical degrees at the master's level granted to Air Force officers and civilian employees from both the Air Force Institute of Technology and civilian universities; and (5) to ensure Air Force science and technology does not stagnate, a concentrated effort should be made to eliminate 5 percent of science and technology programs each year, with funds from the discontinued programs used for new science and technology programs.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY FUNCTIONS OF THE DEPARTMENT OF THE AIR FORCE.
Separation of Research and Development Function from Equipping Function of Secretary of the Air Force.--Section 8013(b) of title 10, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in paragraph (4), by striking ``(including research and development)''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) Research and development.''.
Research and Development Function of the Office of the Secretary of the Air Force.--(1) Section 8014(c)(1) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(H) Research and Development.''.
Section 8014 of such title is amended-- (A) by striking out subsection (d); and (B) by redesignating subsections (e) and (f) as subsections (d) and (e), respectively.
Establishment of Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Science and Technology.--(1) Section 8016 of such title is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by striking out ``four'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``five''; and (B) in subsection (b), by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) One of the Assistant Secretaries shall be the Assistant Secretary of the Air Force for Science and Technology.
The Assistant Secretary shall have as his principal duty the overall supervision of science and technology functions of the Department of the Air Force.''.
Section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, is amended in the item relating to the Assistant Secretaries of the Air Force by striking out ``(4)'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``(5)''.
Establishment of Deputy Chief of Staff for Science and Technology.--Section 8035 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) One of the Deputy Chiefs of Staff shall be the Deputy Chief of Staff for Science and Technology.''.
Requirement.--The Secretary of the Air Force shall enter into a contract with the National Research Council of the National Academy of Sciences to study the technology base of the Air Force.
Matters Covered.--The study shall-- (1) recommend the minimum requirements to maintain a technology base that is sufficient, based on both historical developments and future projections, to project superiority in air and space weapons systems, and information technology; (2) address the effects on national defense and civilian aerospace industries and information technology by reducing funding below the minimum level described in paragraph (1) of section 3; and (3) recommend the appropriate level of staff holding baccalaureate, masters, and doctorate degrees, and the optimal ratio of civilian and military staff holding such degrees, to ensure that science and technology functions of the Air Force remain vital.
Report.--Not later than 120 days after the date on which the study required under subsection (a) is completed, the Secretary shall submit to Congress a report on the results of the study.