The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
TITLE I--NATIONAL AVIATION HERITAGE AREA Sec.
National Aviation Heritage Area.
Technical and financial assistance; other Federal agencies.
TITLE II--WRIGHT COMPANY FACTORY STUDY Sec.
TITLE I--NATIONAL AVIATION HERITAGE AREA SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``National Aviation Heritage Area Act''.
In this title: (1) Heritage area.--The term ``Heritage Area'' means the National Aviation Heritage Area established by section 103(a).
Management entity.--The term ``management entity'' means the Aviation Heritage Foundation, Incorporated, a nonprofit corporation established under the laws of the State of Ohio.
Management plan.--The term ``management plan'' means the management plan for the Heritage Area developed under section 104.
Partner.--The term ``partner'' means-- (A) a Federal, State, or local governmental entity; or (B) an organization, private industry, or person involved in promoting the conservation and preservation of the cultural and natural resources of the Heritage Area.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
NATIONAL AVIATION HERITAGE AREA.
Establishment.--There is established in the States of Ohio and Indiana the National Aviation Heritage Area.
Boundaries.-- (1) In general.--The Heritage Area shall include-- (A) a core area consisting of resources in Montgomery, Greene, Warren, Miami, Clark, Shelby, Auglaize, and Champaign Counties in the State of Ohio; (B) the Neil Armstrong Air & Space Museum, Wapakoneta, Ohio; (C) the Wilbur Wright Birthplace and Museum, Millville, Indiana; and (D) any sites, buildings, and districts within the core area described in subparagraph (A) that are recommended for inclusion in the Heritage Area in the management plan.
Map.-- (A) In general.--The Secretary shall prepare a map of the Heritage Area for inclusion in the management plan.
Availability.--The map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
In General.--Not later than 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the management entity shall submit to the Secretary for approval a management plan for the Heritage Area.
Requirements.--The management plan shall-- (1) incorporate an integrated and cooperative approach for the protection, enhancement, and interpretation of the natural, cultural, historic, scenic, and recreational resources of the Heritage Area; (2) take into consideration Federal, State, and local plans; (3) involve residents, public agencies, and private organizations in the Heritage Area; (4) include-- (A) an assessment of cultural landscapes in the Heritage Area; (B) provisions for the protection, interpretation, and enjoyment of the resources of the Heritage Area that are consistent with the purposes of this title; (C) an interpretation plan for the Heritage Area; (D) a program for the implementation of the management plan by the management entity that includes-- (i) provisions for facilitating ongoing collaboration among the partners to-- (I) promote heritage tourism; and (II) develop educational and cultural programs for the public; (ii) provisions for assisting partners in plans for restoration and construction of the Heritage Area; and (iii) to the maximum extent practicable, specific commitments from partners for the first 5 years of operation of the Heritage Area; and (E) an inventory of the resources contained in the core area of the Heritage Area, including-- (i) the Dayton Aviation Heritage Historical Park; (ii) the sites, buildings, and districts listed in section 202 of the Dayton Aviation Heritage Preservation Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-419); and (iii) any other property that-- (I) is related to the themes of the Heritage Area; and (II) should be preserved, restored, managed, or maintained because of the significance of the property; (5) identify sources of funding for the implementation of the management plan; and (6) describe and evaluate the management entity, including a description and evaluation of-- (A) the membership of the management entity; and (B) the organizational structure of the management entity.
Failure To Submit.--If the management entity fails to submit the management plan by the date described in subsection (a), the Secretary shall not provide any additional funding under this title to the management entity until the date on which the management entity submits a management plan to the Secretary.
Approval and Disapproval of Management Plans.-- (1) In general.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the receipt of the management plan under subsection (a), the Secretary, in consultation with the State of Ohio, shall approve or disapprove the plan.
Disapproval and revision.--If the Secretary disapproves a management plan under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall-- (A) advise the management entity in writing of the reasons for the disapproval; (B) make recommendations for revisions to the management plan; and (C) not later than 90 days after the receipt of any proposed revision of the management plan from the management entity, approve or disapprove the proposed revision.
Amendments.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall review each amendment to the management plan that the Secretary determines may make a substantial change to the management plan.
Use of funds.--Funds made available under this title shall not be expended to implement an amendment described in paragraph (1) until the Secretary approves the amendment.
In General.--The management entity shall administer the Heritage Area in accordance with this title.
Authorities.--The management entity may, for purposes of implementing the management plan, use Federal funds made available under this title to-- (1) make grants to, and enter into cooperative agreements with-- (A) the State of Ohio (including a political subdivision of the State); (B) a private organization; or (C) any person; (2) hire and compensate staff; (3) contract for goods and services; and (4) obtain funds from any source (including a program that has a cost-sharing requirement).
Duties of Management Entity.--In addition to developing the management plan under section 104, in carrying out this title, the management entity shall-- (1) give priority to the implementation of actions set forth in the management plan, including-- (A) assisting units of government and nonprofit organizations in preserving the resources of the Heritage Area; and (B) encouraging local governments to adopt land use policies that are consistent with-- (i) the management of the Heritage Area; and (ii) the goals of the management plan; (2) in developing and implementing the management plan, consider the interests of diverse governmental, business, and nonprofit organizations in the Heritage Area; (3) maintain a collaboration among the partners to promote heritage tourism; (4) assist partners in developing educational and cultural programs for the public; (5) encourage economic viability in the Heritage Area in accordance with the goals of the management plan; (6) assist units of government and nonprofit organizations in-- (A) establishing and maintaining interpretive exhibits in the Heritage Area; (B) developing recreational resources in the Heritage Area; (C) increasing public awareness of and appreciation for the historical, natural, and architectural resources and sites of the Heritage Area; (D) installing throughout the Heritage Area, clear, consistent, and environmentally appropriate signs that identify access points and sites of interest; and (E) restoring historic buildings that relate to the purposes of the Heritage Area; (7) conduct public meetings at least quarterly regarding the implementation of the management plan; (8) submit to the Secretary for approval substantial amendments to the management plan; and (9) for any fiscal year for which Federal funds are made available to carry out this Act under section 107-- (A) submit to the Secretary a report that describes, for the fiscal year-- (i) any activities conducted by the management entity with respect to the Heritage Area; and (ii) any expenses incurred by the management entity in carrying out this title; (B) make available to the Secretary for audit all records relating to the expenditure of the funds and any matching funds; and (C) require, for all agreements authorizing the expenditure of Federal funds by any entity, that the receiving entity make available to the Secretary for audit all records relating to the expenditure of the funds.
Prohibition of Acquisition of Real Property.-- (1) Use of federal funds.--The management entity shall not use Federal funds made available under this title to acquire real property or any interest in real property.
Funds from other sources.--The management entity may acquire real property or an interest in real property using non-Federal funds.
TECHNICAL AND FINANCIAL ASSISTANCE; OTHER FEDERAL AGENCIES.
Technical and Financial Assistance.-- (1) In general.--On the request of the management entity, the Secretary may provide to the Heritage Area technical assistance, on a reimbursable or nonreimbursable basis, and financial assistance for use in the development and implementation of the management plan.
Cooperative agreements.--The Secretary may enter into a cooperative agreement with the management entity or other public or private organizations for purposes of providing technical or financial assistance under paragraph (1).
Priority for assistance.--In providing technical or financial assistance under paragraph (1), the Secretary shall give priority to actions that assist in-- (A) conserving the significant historical, cultural, and natural resources of the Heritage Area; and (B) providing educational, interpretive, and recreational opportunities consistent with the purposes of the Heritage Area.
Operational Assistance.--Subject to the availability of appropriations, the Secretary may provide to public or private organizations in the Heritage Area such operational assistance as is appropriate to support the implementation of the management plan.
Duties of Other Federal Agencies.--A Federal agency conducting or supporting any activity directly affecting the Heritage Area shall-- (1) consult with the Secretary and the management entity with respect to the activity; (2) cooperate with the Secretary and the management entity in carrying out the duties of the Secretary and the management entity under this title; (3) to the maximum extent practicable, coordinate the activity with the duties of the Secretary and the management entity under this title; and (4) conduct or support the activity in a manner that, to the maximum extent practicable, will not have an adverse effect on the Heritage Area, as determined by the management entity.
Coordination Between the Secretary, the Secretary of Defense, and the Administrator of NASA.--Any decision relating to the application of this title to properties under the jurisdiction of the Secretary of Defense or the Administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration shall be made by the Secretary of Defense or the Administrator, respectively, in consultation with the Secretary.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this title $10,000,000, of which not more than $1,000,000 may be made available for any fiscal year.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the total cost of any activity assisted under this title shall be not more than 50 percent.
The authority of the Secretary to provide assistance under this title terminates on the date that is 15 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
TITLE II--WRIGHT COMPANY FACTORY STUDY SEC.
In this title: (1) Factory.--The term ``Factory'' means the Wright Company factory in Dayton, Ohio.
Park.--The term ``park'' means the Dayton Aviation Heritage National Historical Park in the State of Ohio.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
In General.--The Secretary shall conduct a special resource study that-- (1) updates the study required under section 104 of the Dayton Aviation Heritage Preservation Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-419); and (2) describes alternatives for incorporating the Factory as a unit of the Park.
Contents.--The study shall include an analysis of the alternatives described under subsection (a)(2), including an analysis of management and development options and costs.
Consultation.--In conducting the study, the Secretary shall consult with-- (1) the Delphi Corporation; (2) the Aviation Heritage Foundation; (3) State and local agencies; and (4) other interested parties in the area in which the Factory is located.
Not later than 3 years after the date on which funds are first made available to carry out this title, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate a report that describes the results of the study conducted under this title.
Passed the Senate September 15, 2004.
108th CONGRESS 2d Session S. 180 _______________________________________________________________________ AN ACT To establish the National Aviation Heritage Area, and for other purposes.