SCHEDULING COMMITTEES, DISCUSSIONS, AND AGREEMENTS.
In General.--Chapter 401 of title 49, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
Air carrier discussions and agreements relating to flight scheduling ``(a) Discussions To Reduce Delays.-- ``(1) Request.--An air carrier may file with the Secretary of Transportation a request for authority to discuss with one or more other air carriers or foreign air carriers agreements or cooperative arrangements relating to limiting flights at an airport during a time period that the Secretary determines that scheduled air transportation exceeds the capacity of the airport.
The purpose of the discussion shall be to reduce delays at the airport during such time period.
Approval.--The Secretary shall approve a request filed under this subsection if the Secretary finds that the discussions requested will facilitate voluntary adjustments in air carrier schedules that could lead to a substantial reduction in travel delays and improvement of air transportation service to the public.
The Secretary may impose such terms and conditions to an approval under this subsection as the Secretary determines are necessary to protect the public interest and to carry out the objectives of this subsection.
Notice.--Before a discussion may be held under this subsection, the Secretary shall provide at least 3 days notice of the proposed discussion to all air carriers and foreign air carriers that are providing service to the airport that will be the subject of such discussion.
Monitoring.--The Secretary or a representative of the Secretary shall attend and monitor any discussion or other effort to enter into an agreement or cooperative arrangement under this subsection.
Discussions open to public.--A discussion held under this subsection shall be open to the public.
Agreements.-- ``(1) Request.--An air carrier may file with the Secretary a request for approval of an agreement or cooperative arrangement relating to interstate air transportation, and any modification of such an agreement or arrangement, reached as a result of a discussion held under subsection (a).
Approval.--The Secretary shall approve an agreement, arrangement, or modification for which a request is filed under this subsection if the Secretary finds that the agreement, arrangement, or modification is not adverse to the public interest and is necessary to reduce air travel delays and that a substantial reduction in such delays cannot be achieved by any other immediately available means.
Secretarial imposed terms and conditions.--The Secretary may impose such terms and conditions on an agreement, arrangement, or modification for which a request is filed under this subsection as the Secretary determines are necessary to protect the public interest and air service to an airport that has less than .25 percent of the total annual boardings in the United States.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Rates, fares, charges, and in-flight services.--The participants in a discussion approved under subsection (a) may not discuss or enter into an agreement or cooperative arrangement regarding rates, fares, charges, or in-flight services.
City pairs.--The participants in a discussion approved under subsection (a) may not discuss particular city pairs or submit to another air carrier or foreign air carrier information concerning their proposed service or schedules in a fashion that indicates the city pairs involved.
Termination.--This section shall cease to be in effect after September 30, 2003; except that an agreement, cooperative arrangement, or modification approved by the Secretary in accordance with this section may continue in effect after such date at the discretion of the Secretary.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for such chapter is amended by adding at the end the following: ``40129.
Air carrier discussions and agreements relating to flight scheduling.''.
LIMITED EXEMPTION FROM ANTITRUST LAWS.
Section 41308 of title 49, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (b) by striking ``41309'' and inserting ``40129, 41309,''; and (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) by inserting ``40129 or'' before ``41309'' the first place it appears; and (B) by striking ``41309(b)(1),'' and inserting ``40129(b) or ``41309(b)(1), as the case may be,''.
AIR CARRIER DISCUSSIONS RELATING TO FLIGHT SCHEDULING TO REDUCE DELAYS.
Request.--An air carrier may file with the Attorney General a request for authority to discuss with one or more other air carriers or foreign air carriers agreements or cooperative arrangements relating to limiting flights at an airport during a time period that the Attorney General determines that scheduled air transportation exceeds the capacity of the airport.
The purpose of the discussion shall be to reduce delays at the airport during such time period.
Approval.--Notwithstanding the antitrust laws, the Attorney General shall approve a request filed under this section if the Attorney General finds that the discussions requested will facilitate voluntary adjustments in air carrier schedules that could lead to a substantial reduction in travel delays and improvement of air transportation service to the public and will not substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly.
The Attorney General may impose such terms and conditions to an approval under this section as the Attorney General determines are necessary to protect the public interest and to carry out the objectives of this section.
Notice.--Before a discussion may be held under this section, the Attorney General shall provide at least 3 days notice of the proposed discussion to all air carriers and foreign air carriers that are providing service or seeking to provide service to the airport that will be the subject of such discussion.
Monitoring.--The Attorney General or a representative of the Attorney General shall attend and monitor any discussion or other effort to enter into an agreement or cooperative arrangement under this section.
Discussions Open to Public.--A discussion held under this section shall be open to the public.
AIR CARRIER AGREEMENTS RELATING TO FLIGHT SCHEDULING.
Request.--An air carrier may file with the Attorney General a request for approval of an agreement or cooperative arrangement relating to interstate air transportation, and any modification of such an agreement or arrangement, reached as a result of a discussion held under section 1.
Approval.--Notwithstanding the antitrust laws, and subject to subsection (c), the Attorney General shall approve an agreement, arrangement, or modification for which a request is filed under this section if the Attorney General finds that the agreement, arrangement, or modification is not adverse to the public interest, is necessary to reduce air travel delays, and will not substantially lessen competition or tend to create a monopoly and that a substantial reduction in such delays cannot be achieved by any other immediately available means.
Unanimous Agreement Among Carriers Required.--The Attorney General may approve an agreement, arrangement, or modification for which a request is filed under this section only if the Attorney General finds that each air carrier and foreign air carrier providing service or seeking to provide service to the airport that is the subject of the agreement, arrangement, or modification has agreed to the agreement, arrangement, or modification.
Terms and Conditions.--The Attorney General may impose such terms and conditions on an agreement, arrangement, or modification for which a request is filed under this section as the Attorney General determines are necessary to protect the public interest and air service to an airport that has less than .25 percent of the total annual boardings in the United States.
Rates, Fares, Charges, and In-Flight Services.--The participants in a discussion approved under section 1 may not discuss or enter into an agreement or cooperative arrangement regarding rates, fares, charges, or in-flight services.
City Pairs.--The participants in a discussion approved under section 1 may not discuss particular city pairs or submit to another air carrier or foreign air carrier information concerning their proposed service or schedules in a fashion that indicates the city pairs involved.
CONSULTATION WITH SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION.
In making a determination whether to approve a request under section 1, or an agreement, arrangement, or modification under section 2, the Attorney General shall consider any comments of the Secretary of Transportation.
In this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Air carrier, airport, air transportation, foreign air carrier, and interstate air transportation.--The terms ``air carrier'', ``airport'', ``air transportation'', ``foreign air carrier'', and ``interstate air transportation'' have the meanings such terms have under section 40102 of title 49, United States Code.
Antitrust laws.--The term ``antitrust laws'' has the meaning such term has under section 41308(a) of title 49, United States Code.
Approval of Agreements.--The Attorney General may not approve an agreement, arrangement, or modification under section 2 after October 26, 2003.
Expiration of Agreements.--An agreement, arrangement, or modification approved by the Attorney General under section 2 may continue in effect until October 26, 2004, or an earlier date determined by the Attorney General.
Amend the title so as to read: ``A bill to permit air carriers to meet and discuss their schedules in order to reduce flight delays, and for other purposes.