UNION CHAPEL FOSSIL FOOTPRINT SITE PRESERVATION ACT.
Short Title.--This section may be cited as the ``Union Chapel Fossil Footprint Site Preservation Act''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Fossils have scientific and educational value and it is in the national interest to preserve and protect sites of paleontological significance.
The Union Chapel Mine is a paleontologically significant site that has been the focus of an extensive collaborative effort over the past 2 1/2 years by amateur collectors and professional paleontologists from the Geological Survey of Alabama, the University of Alabama, Emory University, the University of Florida, and the University of South Alabama.
The site is significant because it has yielded an unusually large quantity of rare pre-dinosaur fossil trackways dating from the early Pennsylvanian Period (approximately 310 million years ago, about 100 million years before the first dinosaurs).
Material obtained from spoil piles at the site includes over 1,300 vertebrate and invertebrate tracks, some new to science, as well as a wide array of fossil plants.
The trackways are due mainly to primitive amphibians, horseshoe crabs, and other arthropods.
These tracks now comprise the largest collection of specimens documenting the existence of these animals in north central Alabama during the Coal Age.
An extensive photographic database of over 1,800 digital images has been compiled using material from the site.
At least 4 presentations at scientific meetings have been delivered relating to findings at the site and a monograph and 2 manuscripts for publication in scientific journals are being prepared.
It is estimated by geologists working at the Union Chapel Mine that far more fossil material exists within the remaining spoil piles at the site and that undisturbed tracks and other trace fossils within the adjoining high wall may constitute an unparalleled resource for scientific exploration of this ancient ecosystem.
The Union Chapel Mine has now been recognized by international experts in the field as the most important Coal Age footprint site in the world.
Purposes.--The purposes of this Act include the following: (1) To authorize the Secretary to acquire by donation from the New Acton Coal Mining Company, Inc., the Union Chapel Paleozoic Footprint Preserve to preserve and develop it for further paleontological research.
To grant an exemption from the requirements of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1201 et sequentes), for further reclamation of the site to the owner of the Union Chapel Mine, the New Acton Coal Mining Company, Inc. of Cordova, Alabama.
To authorize the complete restoration of funds held in escrow pending further reclamation of the Union Chapel Mine by the Director of the Surface Coal Mining Commission of the State of Alabama to the New Acton Coal Mining Company, Inc. (d) Authorization to Acquire the Union Chapel Paleozoic Footprint Preserve.--If offered by a willing owner, the Secretary shall accept, by donation only, the 35 acres of land (and all related facilities and other appurtenances thereon) generally depicted on the map entitled ``Union Chapel Mine'', ASMC permit number 3778, for permanent preservation of that property.
Application of Certain Law.--The requirements of the Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (30 United States Code 1201 et sequentes), shall not apply to the New Acton Coal Mining Company, Inc. regarding further reclamation of the Union Chapel Paleozoic Footprint Preserve.
Return of Funds in Escrow.--All funds held in escrow on the date of the enactment of this Act pending further reclamation of the Union Chapel Mine by the Director of the Surface Coal Mining Commission of the State of Alabama may be returned to the New Acton Coal Mining Company, Inc. (g) Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to the Secretary $500,000 for the following: (1) To preserve and protect the paleontological resources located within the exterior boundaries of the Union Chapel Paleozoic Footprint Preserve.
To provide opportunities for scientific research in a manner compatible with paragraph (1).
To provide the public with opportunities for educational activities in a manner compatible with paragraph (1).
Map on File.--The map referred to in subsection (d) shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate office of the Department of the Interior.
Definitions.--For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: (1) Union chapel paleozoic footprint preserve.--The term ``Union Chapel Paleozoic Footprint Preserve'' means the property (and all facilities and other appurtenances thereon) described in subsection (d).
Union chapel mine.--The term ``Union Chapel Mine'' means the surface coal mine in Union Chapel, Alabama.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.