This Act may be cited as the ``Antimicrobial Pesticide Registration Reform Act of 1995''.
Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Federal Insecticide, Fungicide, and Rodenticide Act.
Definitions.--Amendments to the Act.--Section 2 (7 United States Code 136) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(hh) Antimicrobial Pesticide.--The term `antimicrobial pesticide' means a pesticide, including but not limited to an antimicrobial active ingredient or an antimicrobial end-use product (including composition, packaging, and labeling), that-- ``(1) is intended to-- ``(A) disinfect, sanitize, reduce, or mitigate growth or development of microbiological organisms; or ``(B) protect inanimate objects, industrial processes or systems, surfaces, water or other chemical substances from contamination, degradation, fouling, inefficiency, or deterioration caused by microbiological organisms (including, but not limited to bacteria, viruses, fungi, algae or composite slime); and ``(2) in the intended use is exempt from, or otherwise not subject to, a tolerance under section 408 or section 409 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 346a or 348).''.
Requirements for Registration.--Section 3 (7 United States Code 136a) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(g) Registration Requirements for Antimicrobial Pesticides.-- ``(1) Evaluation of process.--The Administrator shall identify and evaluate reforms to the antimicrobial registration process that will reduce current review periods for-- ``(A) new antimicrobial active ingredients; ``(B) new antimicrobial end-use products; ``(C) substantially similar or identical antimicrobial pesticides; and ``(D) amendments to existing antimicrobial pesticide registrations; by the maximum extent practicable consistent with the degree and type of review appropriate to the risks presented by the antimicrobial pesticide.
Review time period reduction goal.--The reforms identified under paragraph (1) shall be designed to achieve the goal of reducing the review periods for each of the antimicrobial pesticide registration actions described below to the shorter of either a 75 percent reduction from the current review time period or the following specific review periods: ``(A) 12 months for a new antimicrobial active ingredient pesticide registration.
6 months for a new antimicrobial use of a registered active ingredient.
3 months for a new antimicrobial use of a registered end-use product.
3 months for a new antimicrobial end-use product registration.
3 months for a substantially similar or identical antimicrobial product.
3 months for an amendment to a current antimicrobial registration that requires scientific review of data.
1 month for an application for an amendment to a current antimicrobial registration that does not require scientific review of data.
Advance notice of proposed rulemaking.--Not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall publish in the Federal Register an advance notice of proposed rulemaking to solicit input for rulemaking to-- ``(A) define the different classes of antimicrobial use patterns, including but not limited to household and similarly-formulated industrial and institutional disinfectants and sanitizing pesticides, preservatives, water treatment, and pulp and paper mill additives; ``(B) differentiate the types of review (such as those described in paragraphs (1) and (2)) undertaken for antimicrobial pesticides; ``(C) conform and degree and type of review to the risks and benefits presented by antimicrobial pesticides and the function of review under this Act considering the use patterns of the product, toxicity, and product type; ``(D) ensure that the review process is sufficient to maintain antimicrobial pesticide efficacy and that household and similarly-formulated industrial and institutional disinfectant and sanitizing pesticides continue to meet product performance standards and specific effectiveness levels reflected in subdivision G of the Agency's Pesticide Assessment Guidelines for each type of label claim made; and ``(E) implement effective deadlines for process management, that can be relied upon by both the registrant and the Agency.
Implementation.-- ``(A) Regulations.--Within 1 year of the date of enactment of this subsection, the Administrator shall propose regulations, to be effective within 180 days of their publication in the Federal Register, to carry out and meet the goals set forth in paragraph (2).
The Administrator shall consider the establishment of a certification process for regulatory actions involving risks that can be responsibly managed consistent with their degree in the most cost efficient manner.
The Administrator shall also consider, as an adjunct to the review process, the establishment of a certification process by approved laboratories.
In addition to considering certification processes, the Administrator shall also utilize all appropriate and cost effective review mechanisms, including-- ``(i) expanded use of notification and non- notification procedures; ``(ii) revised procedures for application review; and ``(iii) allocation of appropriate and sufficient resources to ensure streamlined management of antimicrobial pesticide registrations.
Transition period.--In the case of an antimicrobial pesticide application filed after 90 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the following shall apply: ``(i) The review period for the registration of an antimicrobial end-use pesticide that, if registered as proposed, would be substantially similar or identical in composition and labeling to a currently- registered antimicrobial pesticide identified in the application, or that would differ in composition and labeling from such currently- registered antimicrobial pesticide only in ways that would not significantly increase the risk of unreasonable adverse effects on the environment, shall be not more than 135 days.
The review period for an amendment to a current registration that does not require scientific review of data shall be no more than 135 days.
No rule promulgated under subparagraph (A) may extend, absent consent of the registrant, the time periods established under this subparagraph.
Alternative review periods.--In the case of antimicrobial pesticide applications other than those described in subparagraph (B), if the final rules to carry out this paragraph are not effective 545 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, the following review periods, beginning on the date of receipt by the Agency of a complete application, shall apply: ``(i) 18 months for a new active ingredient pesticide registration.
12 months for a new use of a registered active ingredient.
6 months for a new use of a registered end-use product.
6 months for a new end-use product registration.
135 days for a substantially similar or identical product.
6 months for an amendment to a current registration that requires scientific review of data.
135 days for an application for an amendment to a current registration that does not require scientific review of data.
Notification.-- ``(i) In general.--The Administrator shall notify the registrant prior to the end of the appropriate review period specified in subparagraph (B) or (C) whether an application has been granted or denied.
Final decision.--If the Administrator fails to timely notify the registrant under clause (i) whether an application has been granted or denied, the application shall be deemed to be denied and such denial shall be considered a final agency action subject to judicial review under section 551 of title 5, United States Code, et sequentes ``(E) Oversight.--The Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate shall thereafter conduct such oversight as is necessary to ensure that the reform goal for the antimicrobial registration process are met.
Annual report.--Not later than March 1 of each year after date of enactment of this subsection until the reform goals specified in this subsection have been achieved, the Administrator shall prepare and submit an annual report to the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition, and Forestry of the Senate.
This report shall include those measures taken to reduce the backlog of pending registration applications, progress toward achieving the reforms, and recommendations to improve the activities of the Agency pertaining to antimicrobial registrations.''.
Label and Labeling Statements.--Section 3(c) (7 United States Code 136a(c)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) Label and labeling statements.-- ``(A) Additional statements.--A registrant of an antimicrobial pesticide may not change the label or labeling statements required under this Act or by regulation including the pesticidal claims, ingredient statement, directions for use, warning and caution statements and Agency registration numbers, without the approval of the Administrator.
A registrant of an antimicrobial pesticide may make or alter other label or labeling statements or amendments that are truthful and not misleading and that do not relate to or affect such required label or labeling statements.
Use dilution.--For antimicrobial pesticides that are or may be diluted for use, the label or labeling required under this Act may have a different statement of caution or protective measures for use of recommended diluted solutions of the pesticide than for the use of concentrates of the pesticide.
Such a precautionary statement shall provide adequate protection for exposure to the diluted solution of the pesticide.''.
Disposal and Household and Similarly Formulated Industrial and Institutional Disinfectant and Sanitizer Products.--Section 19(h) (7 United States Code 136q(h)) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentence: ``Household and similarly-formulated industrial and institutional disinfectant and sanitizer products which are not otherwise subject to regulation under the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6901 et.
shall not be subject to regulation under this section.''.
Data Coordination and Synchronization.--Section 3(c)(2)(B) (7 United States Code 136a(c)(2)(B)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(vi) Whenever data of a type specified in the guidelines published under subparagraph (A) is requested by one or more State or Federal agencies, the Administrator shall, to the extent practicable, share data and information and shall coordinate and synchronize such data requests including, but not limited to, test protocols, timetables, and standards of review among the agencies so as to reduce burdens and to avoid unnecessary repetition and redundancy.
In addition, within one year after the date of enactment of this clause, the Administrator shall, by rule, develop and implement procedures for such coordination and synchronization by the Administrator so as to result in identical and concurrent data requirements by all the agencies.
Nothing in this clause shall be interpreted as affecting the authority of States to regulate pesticides as provided in section 24(a).