TAX CREDIT FOR EDUCATION EXPENSES AT 2-YEAR COLLEGES.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
EDUCATION EXPENSES AT 2-YEAR COLLEGES.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter an amount equal to the qualified higher education expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Limitations.-- ``(1) Amount of credit.--The amount allowed as a credit under subsection (a) for any taxable year with respect to any student shall not exceed $1,500.
Credit reduced by nontaxable federal assistance.--The amount of the credit allowed under subsection (a) (determined without regard to this paragraph) shall be reduced by any scholarship or grant provided by the Federal Government which is exempt from tax under this chapter.
Qualified Higher Education Expenses.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified higher education expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified higher education expenses' means tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of-- ``(i) the taxpayer, ``(ii) the taxpayer's spouse, or ``(iii) any dependent of the taxpayer with respect to whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151, in a 2-year degree program at an institution of higher education.
Exception for education involving sports, inc.--Such term does not include expenses with respect to any course or other education involving sports, games, or hobbies unless such expenses-- ``(i) are part of a 2-year degree program, or ``(ii) are deductible under this chapter.
Inclusion of reasonable living expenses.-- Such term shall include reasonable living expenses while away from home.
Exception for nonacademic fees.--Such term does not include any student activity fees, athletic fees, insurance expenses, or other expenses unrelated to a student's academic course of instruction.
Inflation adjustment.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of any taxable year beginning in a calendar year after 1997, the $1,500 amount contained in subsection (b)(1) shall be increased by an amount equal to-- ``(i) such dollar amount, multiplied by ``(ii) the cost-of-living adjustment under section 1(f)(3) for the calendar year in which the taxable year begins, except that section 1(f)(3)(B) shall be applied by substituting `1996' for `1992'.
Rounding.--If any amount as adjusted under subparagraph (A) is not a multiple of $50, such amount shall be rounded to the nearest multiple of $50 (or if such amount is a multiple of $25, such amount shall be rounded to the next highest multiple of $50).
Institution of higher education.--The term `institution of higher education' means an institution which-- ``(A) is described in section 1201(a) of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1141), as in effect on the date of enactment of this section, and ``(B) an area vocational education school (as defined in subparagraph (C) or (D) of section 521(4) of the Carl D. Perkins Vocational Education Act) which is in any State (as defined in section 521(33) of such Act), as such sections are in effect on the date of enactment of this section.
No Double Benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for qualified higher education expenses with respect to which a deduction is allowed under any other provision of this chapter.
Special Rules.-- ``(1) Limitation on taxable year of credit.-- ``(A) In general.--A credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for any taxable year only to the extent the qualified higher education expenses are in connection with attendance at an institution of higher education during the taxable year.
Certain prepayments allowed.--Subparagraph (A) shall not apply to qualified higher education expenses paid during a taxable year which are in connection with attendance at an institution of higher education which begins during the first 2 months of the following taxable year.
Adjustment for certain scholarships and veterans' benefits.--The amount of qualified higher education expenses otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to the education of an individual shall be reduced (before the application of subsection (b)) by the sum of the amounts received with respect to such individual for the taxable year as-- ``(A) a qualified scholarship which under section 117 is not includable in gross income, ``(B) an educational assistance allowance under chapter 30, 31, 32, 34, or 35 of title 38, United States Code, or ``(C) a payment (other than a gift, bequest, devise, or inheritance within the meaning of section 102(a)) for educational expenses, or attributable to attendance at an eligible educational institution, which is exempt from income taxation by any law of the United States.
Regulations.--The Secretary may prescribe such regulations as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out this section, including regulations requiring recordkeeping and information reporting.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25 the following: ``Sec.
Education expenses at 2-year colleges.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1996.