OF DISPUTES AND CLAIMS.
Relinquishment, Extinguishment, and Compromise of Santo Domingo Claims.-- (1) Extinguishment.-- (A) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), in consideration of the benefits provided under this Act, and in accordance with the Settlement Agreement pursuant to which the Pueblo has agreed to relinquish and compromise certain claims, the Pueblo's land and trespass claims described in subparagraph (B) are hereby extinguished, effective as of the date specified in paragraph (5).
Claims.--The claims described in this subparagraph are the following: (i) With respect to the Pueblo's claims against the United States, its agencies, officers, and instrumentalities, all claims to land, whether based on aboriginal or recognized title, and all claims for damages or other judicial relief or for administrative remedies pertaining in any way to the Pueblo's land, such as boundary, trespass, and mismanagement claims, including any claim related to-- (I) any federally administered lands, including National Forest System lands designated in the Settlement Agreement for possible sale or exchange to the Pueblo; (II) any lands owned or held for the benefit of any Indian tribe other than the Pueblo; and (III) all claims which were, or could have been brought against the United States in docket No.
355, pending in the United States Court of Federal Claims.
With respect to the Pueblo's claims against persons, the State of New Mexico and its subdivisions, and Indian tribes other than the Pueblo, all claims to land, whether based on aboriginal or recognized title, and all claims for damages or other judicial relief or for administrative remedies pertaining in any way to the Pueblo's land, such as boundary and trespass claims.
All claims listed on pages 13894- 13895 of volume 48 of the Federal Register, published on March 31, 1983, except for claims numbered 002 and 004.
Rule of construction.--Nothing in this Act (including paragraph (1)) shall be construed-- (A) to in any way effectuate an extinguishment of or otherwise impair-- (i) the Pueblo's title to lands acquired by or for the benefit of the Pueblo since December 28, 1927, or in a tract of land of approximately 150.14 acres known as the ``sliver area'' and described on a plat which is appendix H to the Settlement Agreement; (ii) the Pueblo's title to land within the Santo Domingo Pueblo Grant which the Pueblo Lands Board found not to have been extinguished; or (iii) the Pueblo's water rights appurtenant to the lands described in clauses (i) and (ii); and (B) to expand, reduce, or otherwise impair any rights which the Pueblo or its members may have under existing Federal statutes concerning religious and cultural access to and uses of the public lands.
Confirmation of determination.--The Pueblo Lands Board's determination on page 1 of its Report of December 28, 1927, that Santo Domingo Pueblo title, derived from the Santo Domingo Pueblo Grant to the lands overlapped by the La Majada, Sitio de Juana Lopez and Mesita de Juana Lopez Grants has been extinguished is hereby confirmed as of the date of that Report.
Transfers prior to enactment.-- (A) In general.--In accordance with the Settlement Agreement, any transfer of land or natural resources, prior to the date of enactment of this Act, located anywhere within the United States from, by, or on behalf of the Pueblo, or any of the Pueblo's members, shall be deemed to have been made in accordance with the Act of June 30, 1834 (4 United States Statutes at Large 729; commonly referred to as the Trade and Intercourse Act), section 17 of the Act of June 7, 1924 (43 United States Statutes at Large 641; commonly referred to as the Pueblo Lands Act), and any other provision of Federal law that specifically applies to transfers of land or natural resources from, by, or on behalf of an Indian tribe, and such transfers shall be deemed to be ratified effective as of the date of the transfer.
Rule of construction.--Nothing in subparagraph (A) shall be construed to affect or eliminate the personal claim of any individual Indian which is pursued under any law of general applicability that protects non-Indians as well as Indians.
Effective date.--The provisions of paragraphs (1), (3), and (4) shall take effect upon the entry of a compromise final judgment, in a form and manner acceptable to the Attorney General, in the amount of $8,000,000 in the case of Pueblo of Santo Domingo v. United States (Indian Claims Commission docket No.
The judgment so entered shall be paid from funds appropriated pursuant to section 1304 of title 31, United States Code.
Trust Funds; Authorization of Appropriations.-- (1) Establishment.--There is hereby established in the Treasury a trust fund to be known as the ``Pueblo of Santo Domingo Land Claims Settlement Fund''.
Funds deposited in the Fund shall be subject to the following conditions: (A) The Fund shall be maintained and invested by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to the Act of June 24, 1938 (25 United States Code 162a).
Subject to the provisions of paragraph (3), monies deposited into the Fund may be expended by the Pueblo to acquire lands within the exterior boundaries of the exclusive aboriginal occupancy area of the Pueblo, as described in the Findings of Fact of the Indian Claims Commission, dated May 9, 1973, and for use for education, economic development, youth and elderly programs, or for other tribal purposes in accordance with plans and budgets developed and approved by the Tribal Council of the Pueblo and approved by the Secretary.
If the Pueblo withdraws monies from the Fund, neither the Secretary nor the Secretary of the Treasury shall retain any oversight over or liability for the accounting, disbursement, or investment of such withdrawn monies.
No portion of the monies described in subparagraph (C) may be paid to Pueblo members on a per capita basis.
The acquisition of lands with monies from the Fund shall be on a willing-seller, willing-buyer basis, and no eminent domain authority may be exercised for purposes of acquiring lands for the benefit of the Pueblo pursuant to this Act.
The provisions of Public Law 93-134, governing the distribution of Indian claims judgment funds, and the plan approval requirements of section 203 of Public Law 103-412 shall not be applicable to the Fund.
Authorization of appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated $15,000,000 for deposit into the Fund, in accordance with the following schedule: (A) $5,000,000 to be deposited in the fiscal year which commences on October 1, 2001.
$5,000,000 to be deposited in the next fiscal year.
The balance of the funds to be deposited in the third consecutive fiscal year.
Limitation on disbursal.--Amounts authorized to be appropriated to the Fund under paragraph (2) shall not be disbursed until the following conditions are met: (A) The case of Pueblo of Santo Domingo v. Rael (No.
CIV-83-1888) in the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico, has been dismissed with prejudice.
A compromise final judgment in the amount of $8,000,000 in the case of Pueblo of Santo Domingo v. United States (Indian Claims Commission docket No.
355) in a form and manner acceptable to the Attorney General, has been entered in the United States Court of Federal Claims in accordance with subsection (a)(5).
Deposits.--Funds awarded to the Pueblo consistent with subsection (c)(2) in docket No.
355 of the Indian Claims Commission shall be deposited into the Fund.
Activities Upon Compromise.--On the date of the entry of the final compromise judgment in the case of Pueblo of Santo Domingo v. United States (Indian Claims Commission docket No.
355) in the United States Court of Federal Claims, and the dismissal with prejudice of the case of Pueblo of Santo Domingo v. Rael (No.
CIV-83-1888) in the United States District Court for the District of New Mexico, whichever occurs later-- (1) the public lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management and described in section 6 of the Settlement Agreement, and consisting of approximately 4,577.10 acres of land, shall thereafter be held by the United States in trust for the benefit of the Pueblo, subject to valid existing rights and rights of public and private access, as provided for in the Settlement Agreement; (2) the Secretary of Agriculture is authorized to sell and convey National Forest System lands and the Pueblo shall have the exclusive right to acquire these lands as provided for in section 7 of the Settlement Agreement, and the funds received by the Secretary of Agriculture for such sales shall be deposited in the fund established under the Act of December 4, 1967 (16 United States Code 484a) and shall be available to purchase non- Federal lands within or adjacent to the National Forests in the State of New Mexico; (3) lands conveyed by the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to this section shall no longer be considered part of the National Forest System and upon any conveyance of National Forest lands, the boundaries of the Santa Fe National Forest shall be deemed modified to exclude such lands; (4) until the National Forest lands are conveyed to the Pueblo pursuant to this section, or until the Pueblo's right to purchase such lands expires pursuant to section 7 of the Settlement Agreement, such lands are withdrawn, subject to valid existing rights, from any new public use or entry under any Federal land law, except for permits not to exceed 1 year, and shall not be identified for any disposition by or for any agency, and no mineral production or harvest of forest products shall be permitted, except that nothing in this subsection shall preclude forest management practices on such lands, including the harvest of timber in the event of fire, disease, or insect infestation; and (5) once the Pueblo has acquired title to the former National Forest System lands, these lands may be conveyed by the Pueblo to the Secretary of the Interior who shall accept and hold such lands in the name of the United States in trust for the benefit of the Pueblo.
AFFIRMATION OF ACCURATE BOUNDARIES OF SANTO DOMINGO PUEBLO GRANT.
In General.--The boundaries of the Santo Domingo Pueblo Grant, as determined by the 1907 Hall-Joy Survey, confirmed in the Report of the Pueblo Lands Board, dated December 28, 1927, are hereby declared to be the current boundaries of the Grant and any lands currently owned by or on behalf of the Pueblo within such boundaries, or any lands hereinafter acquired by the Pueblo within the Grant in fee simple absolute, shall be considered to be Indian country within the meaning of section 1151 of title 18, United States Code.
Limitation.--Any lands or interests in lands within the Santo Domingo Pueblo Grant, that are not owned or acquired by the Pueblo, shall not be treated as Indian country within the meaning of section 1151 of title 18, United States Code.
Acquisition of Federal Lands.--Any Federal lands acquired by the Pueblo pursuant to section 5(c)(1) shall be held in trust by the Secretary for the benefit of the Pueblo, and shall be treated as Indian country within the meaning of section 1151 of title 18, United States Code.
Land Subject to Provisions.--Any lands acquired by the Pueblo pursuant to section 5(c), or with funds subject to section 5(b), shall be subject to the provisions of section 17 of the Act of June 7, 1924 (43 United States Statutes at Large 641; commonly referred to as the Pueblo Lands Act).
Rule of Construction.--Nothing in this Act or in the Settlement Agreement shall be construed to-- (1) cloud title to federally administered lands or non- Indian or other Indian lands, with regard to claims of title which are extinguished pursuant to section 5; or (2) affect actions taken prior to the date of enactment of this Act to manage federally administered lands within the boundaries of the Santo Domingo Pueblo Grant.
Authorization for Acquisition of State Trust Lands.--Not later than 2 years after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall acquire by exchange the State trust lands in township 15 north, range 4 east, section 2, and all interests therein, including improvements, mineral rights, and water rights.
In exercising the authority to acquire such lands by exchange, the Secretary is authorized to use unappropriated public lands within the State of New Mexico.
The properties so exchanged shall be of approximately equal value and the Secretary may credit or debit the ledger account established in the Memorandum of Understanding between the Bureau of Land Management, the New Mexico State Land Office, and the New Mexico Commissioner of Public Lands, in order to equalize the values of the properties exchanged.
Once such lands are acquired, the Secretary shall convey such lands to the Pueblo by sale, exchange, or otherwise, and the Pueblo shall have the exclusive right to acquire these lands.
Once the Pueblo has acquired title to the former State trust lands, these lands may be conveyed by the Pueblo to the Secretary who shall accept and hold such lands in the name of the United States in trust for the benefit of the Pueblo.
Authorization for Exchange of Restricted Lands.--Authorization is hereby given for the exchange of restricted land of the Pueblo for lands private title to which was put in issue in the lawsuit styled Pueblo of Santo Domingo v. Rael (Civil No.
Any land exchange agreements between the Pueblo and any of the parties to such lawsuit that are executed no later than December 31, 2001, are hereby approved.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit the provision of section 5(a) pertaining to the extinguishment of the land claims of the Pueblo.
The lands to which the Pueblo acquires title in such land exchange agreements may be conveyed by the Pueblo to the Secretary, who shall accept and hold such lands in the name of the United States in trust for the benefit of the Pueblo.
Boundary Dispute Resolutions Approved.--Resolutions 97-010 and C 22-99 enacted by the Tribal Council of the Pueblo de Cochiti, and Resolution S.D.
12-99-36 enacted by the Tribal Council of the Pueblo of Santo Domingo, pertaining to boundary disputes between the Pueblo de Cochiti and the Pueblo of Santo Domingo, are hereby approved, including the Pueblo de Cochiti's agreement to relinquish its claim to the southwest corner of its Spanish land grant, to the extent of its overlap with the Santo Domingo Pueblo Grant, and to disclaim any right to receive compensation from the United States or any other party with respect to such overlapping lands.