This Act may be cited as the ``Aviation Noise Limit Act of 1993''.
Congress finds the following: (1) The accurate assessment and control of aviation noise impact is necessary to protect the public health and welfare while increasing and improving aviation capacity.
Airspace management without noise impact assessment and moderation can have a significant impact on an area distant from an airport.
The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports, which currently serves as the basis of noise compatibility programs receiving Federal assistance, does not adequately protect the public health and welfare.
The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports does not take into account the characteristics of an area, including the area's proximity to an airport and the area's non-aircraft background noise.
The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports is less restrictive than the criteria used by many State and local governments, usurping a zoning role normally allocated to the States.
The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports is inconsistent with the maintenance of accepted interior levels of quiet for existing residences and has been demonstrated unsuccessful in identifying problems and predicting community reaction.
The Federal system for determining noise impact at airports does not protect against significant disturbances in human activities such as sleep and conversation and promotes Federal interference with the constitutionally protected right to quiet enjoyment of private property.
Research showing that low levels of noise affects human health and welfare requires changes in Federal programs managing noise levels.
Population density, background noise levels, and distance from an airport are factors which affect an individual's expectations with respect to aviation noise and an individual's acceptance of aviation noise.
Changes to the noise environment of a developed and populated area should be treated differently from changes to the noise environment of a nonpopulated or industrial area.
Reduction of Aviation Noise in Areas in the Vicinity of Airports.-- (1) Development of plan.--The Secretary shall develop a staged plan to reduce by at least 75 percent on or before January 1, 2001, the number of individuals residing in residential areas in the vicinity of an airport who are exposed to a yearly day-night average sound level of 60 decibels or above.
Considerations.--In developing the plan pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary shall consider various methods for aviation noise reduction, including soundproofing, relocation incentives, use of quieter aircraft, operations restrictions, and revision of air routes.
Federal departments and agencies.--As part of the plan to be developed pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary shall make recommendations on actions and policy changes on the part of Federal departments and agencies (including but not limited to the Department of Transportation) which could assist in meeting the objective described in paragraph (1).
Modification of regulations.--The Secretary shall modify regulations issued pursuant to section 102 of the Aviation and Safety Noise Abatement Act of 1979 to assist in meeting the objective described in paragraph (1).
Management and Reduction of Aviation Noise in Other Areas.-- (1) Airspace traffic changes.--Beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator may make an airspace traffic change only if the Administrator determines that the change will not result in an increase in aviation noise in violation of paragraph (2).
Requirements.--A violation of any of the following requirements, which apply only to residential areas that are not in the vicinity of an airport, shall be considered to be a violation of this paragraph: (A) Hourly average sound level.--The hourly average sound level, with combined aviation and nonaviation sources, over any 1-hour period may not exceed 6 decibels above the background sound level for such 1- hour period.
Single event maximum sound level.--Under normal circumstances, the single event maximum sound level-- (i) may not exceed 70 decibels; (ii) during nighttime hours, may not exceed 55 decibels; and (iii) may not be more than 20 decibels above the background sound level for the 1-hour period in which the event occurs.
The requirement of this subparagraph shall be considered to have been met if there are no more than 3 violations of the limits contained in this subparagraph in a 24-hour period.
Day-night average sound level.--If the day- night average sound level, with combined aviation and nonaviation sources, exceeds 45 decibels, then aviation activity may not contribute more than 3 decibels to such sound level.
Past airspace traffic changes.--The Administrator shall review airspace traffic changes made by the Administrator which continue to be subject to significant complaint or controversy and shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that such air traffic changes do not result in increases in aviation noise which violate aviation noise limits contained in paragraph (2).
Determination of Vicinity of Airport.-- (1) Alternative boundaries.--In the event that operations procedures of an airport result in a ground noise distribution substantially different from the geographic area defined in section 4(10), an airport operator may, on or before the 180th day following the date of the enactment of this Act, transmit to the Secretary for approval alternative boundaries of the vicinity of the airport which conform to the ground noise distribution of the airport; except that the geographic area enclosed by such alternative boundaries may not include an area with a day-night average sound level of less than 60 decibels for the 1-year period ending on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Acquisition of property.--In the event that an airspace traffic change or other action makes it unfeasible or impracticable to meet the sound level limits contained in subsection (b) within a residential area, then such area may be added to the area considered to be in the vicinity of the airport upon acquisition of the property or by acquisition of easements to the property by the airport operator or the Secretary of Transportation.
Report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall transmit to Congress a report containing the plan to be developed pursuant to subsection (a)(1), and a description of actions taken with respect to airspace changes pursuant to subsection (b)(3), together with recommendations for appropriate administrative and legislative actions.
RESPONSIBILITY OF SECRETARY OF TRANSPORTATION.
In complying with this Act, the Secretary of Transportation shall assume responsibility for all non-military aviation activity, within and outside controlled airspace, and shall regulate such activity to ensure compliance with the requirements of this Act in normal circumstances.
For the purposes of this Act, the following definitions apply: (1) Administrator.--The term ``Administrator'' means the Administrator of the Federal Aviation Administration.
Airspace traffic change.--The term ``airspace traffic change'' means a change in aircraft flight paths, operating procedures, nature of aircraft traffic, and quantity of aircraft traffic which is applicable in normal circumstances.
Average sound level.--The term ``average sound level'' means the level, in decibels, of the mean-square, A-weighted sound pressure during a specified period, with reference to the square of the standard reference sound pressure of 20 micropascals.
Background sound level.--The term ``background sound level'' means the hourly average sound level, in decibels, measured at a site representative of a relatively quiet residential location within an area (with aircraft noise contributions excluded).
Day-night average sound level.--The term ``day-night average sound level'' means the 24-hour average sound level, in decibels, for the period from midnight to midnight, obtained after the addition of 10 decibels to sound levels during nighttime hours.
Nighttime hours.--The term ``nighttime hours'' means the periods between midnight and 7 a.m. and between 10 p.m. and midnight local time.
Normal circumstances.--The term ``normal circumstances'' means all circumstances other than unusually adverse weather and emergency circumstances.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Transportation.
Single event maximum sound level.--The term ``single event maximum sound level'' means the level, in decibels, of the maximum A-weighted sound pressure during an aircraft overflight obtained using a standard sound level meter under a slow response setting.
Vicinity of an airport.--The term ``vicinity of an airport'' means the geographic area surrounding an airport established before the date of the enactment of this Act described nominally as follows: (A) The area extending in all directions a distance of 1.5 miles from each runway established before such date of the enactment.
The rectangular area defined by drawing a straight center line a distance of 4 miles from the end of each runway established before such date of the enactment in the direction of heaviest traffic and extending 1.5 miles perpendicular from the center line on each side of such runway.