TITLE I--LEIF ERICSON MILLENNIUM COMMEMORATIVE COIN SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Leif Ericson Millennium Commemorative Coin Act''.
$1 Silver Coins.--In conjunction with the simultaneous minting and issuance of commemorative coins by the Republic of Iceland in commemoration of the millennium of the discovery of the New World by Leif Ericson, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 1 dollar coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this title from any available source, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the millennium of the discovery of the New World by Leif Ericson.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2000''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Leifur Eiriksson Foundation and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this title.
Commencement of Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this title beginning January 1, 2000.
Termination of Minting Authority.--No coins may be minted under this title after December 31, 2000.
In General.--All sales of coins minted under this title shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
Distribution.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this title shall be promptly paid by the Secretary to the Leifur Eiriksson Foundation for the purpose of funding student exchanges between students of the United States and students of Iceland.
Audits.--The Leifur Eiriksson Foundation shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code, with regard to the amounts received by the Foundation under subsection (b).
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this title.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this title from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
TITLE II--CAPITOL VISITOR CENTER COMMEMORATIVE COIN SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``United States Capitol Visitor Center Commemorative Coin Act of 1999''.
Congress finds that-- (1) Congress moved to Washington, District of Columbia, and first convened in the Capitol building in the year 1800; (2) the Capitol building is now the greatest visible symbol of representative democracy in the world; (3) the Capitol building has approximately 5,000,000 visitors annually and suffers from a lack of facilities necessary to properly serve them; (4) the Capitol building and persons within the Capitol have been provided with excellent security through the dedication and sacrifice of the United States Capitol Police; (5) Congress has appropriated $100,000,000, to be supplemented with private funds, to construct a Capitol Visitor Center to provide continued high security for the Capitol and enhance the educational experience of visitors to the Capitol; (6) Congress would like to offer the opportunity for all persons to voluntarily participate in raising funds for the Capitol Visitor Center; and (7) it is appropriate to authorize coins commemorating the first convening of the Congress in the Capitol building with proceeds from the sale of the coins, less expenses, being deposited for the United States Capitol Preservation Commission with the specific purpose of aiding in the construction, maintenance, and preservation of a Capitol Visitor Center.
Denominations.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue the following coins under this title: (1) Bimetallic coins.--Not more than 200,000 $10 bimetallic coins of gold and platinum, in accordance with such specifications as the Secretary determines to be appropriate.
$1 silver coins.--Not more than 500,000 $1 coins, which shall-- (A) weigh 26.73 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (C) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Half dollar.--Not more than 750,000 half dollar clad coins, each of which-- (A) shall weigh 11.34 grams; (B) have a diameter of 1.205 inches; and (C) be minted to the specifications for half dollar coins contained in section 5112(b) of title 31, United States Code.
$5 Gold Coins.--If the Secretary determines that the minting and issuance of bimetallic coins under subsection (a)(1) is not feasible, the Secretary may mint and issue instead not more than 100,000 $5 coins, which shall-- (1) weigh 8.359 grams; (2) have a diameter of 0.850 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent gold and 10 percent alloy.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Platinum and Gold.--The Secretary shall obtain platinum and gold for minting coins under this title from available sources.
Silver.--The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this title from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act, and from other available sources.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the first meeting of the United States Congress in the United States Capitol Building.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title, there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2001''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary, after consultation with the United States Capitol Preservation Commission (in this title referred to as the ``Commission'') and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular combination of denomination and quality of the coins minted under this title.
First Use of Year 2001 Date.--The coins minted under this title shall be the first commemorative coins of the United States to be issued bearing the inscription of the year ``2001''.
Promotion Consultation.--The Secretary shall-- (1) consult with the Commission in order to establish a role for the Commission or an entity designated by the Commission in the promotion, advertising, and marketing of the coins minted under this title; and (2) if the Secretary determines that such action would be beneficial to the sale of coins minted under this title, enter into a contract with the Commission or an entity referred to in paragraph (1) to carry out the role established under paragraph (1).
Sale Price.--The coins minted under this title shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this title at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this title before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales under this title shall include a surcharge established by the Secretary, in an amount equal to not more than-- (1) $50 per coin for the $10 coin or $35 per coin for the $5 coin; (2) $10 per coin for the $1 coin; and (3) $3 per coin for the half dollar coin.
All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins minted under this title shall be deposited in the Capitol Preservation Fund in accordance with section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, and shall be made available to the Commission for the purpose of aiding in the construction, maintenance, and preservation of a Capitol Visitor Center.
TITLE III--LEWIS AND CLARK EXPEDITION COMMEMORATIVE COIN SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Lewis and Clark Expedition Bicentennial Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the expedition commanded by Meriwether Lewis and William Clark, which came to be called ``The Corps of Discovery'', was one of the most remarkable and productive scientific and military exploring expeditions in all American history; (2) President Thomas Jefferson gave Lewis and Clark the mission to ``explore the Missouri River & such principal stream of it, as, by its course and communication with the waters of the Pacific Ocean, whether the Columbia, Oregon, Colorado, or any other river may offer the most direct and practical water communication across this continent for the purposes of commerce''; (3) the Expedition, in response to President Jefferson's directive, greatly advanced our geographical knowledge of the continent and prepared the way for the extension of the American fur trade with American Indian tribes throughout the land; (4) President Jefferson directed the explorers to take note of and carefully record the natural resources of the newly acquired territory known as Louisiana, as well as diligently report on the native inhabitants of the land; (5) the Expedition departed St. Louis, Missouri on May 14, 1804; (6) the Expedition held its first meeting with American Indians at Council Bluff near present-day Fort Calhoun, Nebraska, in August 1804, spent its first winter at Fort Mandan, North Dakota, crossed the Rocky Mountains by the mouth of the Columbia River in mid- November of that year, and wintered at Fort Clatsop, near the present-day city of Astoria, Oregon; (7) the Expedition returned to St. Louis, Missouri, on September 23, 1806, after a 28-month journey covering 8,000 miles during which it traversed 11 future States: Illinois, Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, North Dakota, South Dakota, Montana, Idaho, Washington, and Oregon; (8) accounts from the journals of Lewis and Clark and the detailed maps that were prepared by the Expedition enhance knowledge of the western continent and routes for commerce; (9) the Expedition significantly enhanced amicable relationships between the United States and the autonomous American Indian nations, and the friendship and respect fostered between American Indian tribes and the Expedition represents the bestof diplomacy and relationships between divergent nations and cultures; and (10) the Lewis and Clark Expedition has been called the most perfect expedition of its kind in the history of the world and paved the way for the United States to become a great world power.
Denomination.--In commemoration of the bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition, the Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this title referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 $1 coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 26.73 grams; (2) have a diameter of 1.500 inches; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this title shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5136 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this title shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary may obtain silver for minting coins under this title from any available source, including stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The design of the coins minted under this title shall be emblematic of the expedition of Lewis and Clark.
Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this title there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``2004'' and the years ``1804-1806''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Obverse of coin.--The obverse of each coin minted under this title shall bear the likeness of Meriwether Lewis and William Clark.
General design.--In designing this coin, the Secretary shall also consider incorporating appropriate elements from the Jefferson Peace and Friendship Medal which Lewis and Clark presented to the Chiefs of the various Indian tribes they encountered and shall consider recognizing Native American culture.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this title shall be selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Commission of Fine Arts and shall be reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Quality of Coins.--Coins minted under this title shall be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities.
Mint Facility.--Only one facility of the United States Mint may be used to strike any particular quality of the coins minted under this title.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this title only during the period beginning on January 1, 2004, and ending on December 31, 2004.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this title shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this title at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this title before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales of coins minted under this title shall include a surcharge of $10 per coin.
In General.--Subject to section 5134(f) of title 31, United States Code, the proceeds from the surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this title shall be promptly paid by the Secretary as follows: (1) National lewis and clark bicentennial council.--Two-thirds to the National Lewis and Clark Bicentennial Council, for activities associated with commemorating the bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
National park service.--One-third to the National Park Service for activities associated with commemorating the bicentennial of the Lewis and Clark Expedition.
Audits.--Each organization that receives any payment from the Secretary under this section shall be subject to the audit requirements of section 5134(f)(2) of title 31, United States Code.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this title will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this title unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.