This Act may be cited as the ``Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction Act of 2004''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The possession by hostile states or terrorist groups of nuclear, chemical, and biological weapons of mass destruction or related materials or means of delivery represents the greatest threat to the national security of the United States in the 21st century.
It is the highest priority of the United States to protect its territory, people, armed forces, allies, and friends from attacks by dangerous regimes or terrorist groups using weapons of mass destruction or related materials or means of delivery.
It is the policy of the United States to ensure and strengthen verification and compliance with the Treaty on the Non-proliferation of Nuclear Weapons, done at Washington, London, and Moscow July 1, 1968, and entered into force March 5, 1970 (commonly known as the ``Nuclear Non-Proliferation Treaty''), the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and Use of Chemical Weapons and on Their Destruction, with Annexes, done at Paris January 13, 1993, and entered into force April 29, 1997 (commonly known as the ``Chemical Weapons Convention''), the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production and Stockpiling of Bacteriological (Biological) and Toxin Weapons and on Their Destruction, done at Washington, London, and Moscow April 10, 1972, and entered into force March 26, 1975 (commonly known as the ``Biological Weapons Convention''), the safeguards system of the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), and the commitments and control lists of the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR), the Australia Group (AG), the Nuclear Suppliers Group (NSG), and the Wassenaar Arrangement on Export Controls for Conventional Arms and Dual-Use Goods and Technologies (WA).
The national security interests of the United States have been well-served by the enactment of the Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991 (title II of Public Law 102-228; 22 United States Code 2551 note), (commonly known as the ``Nunn-Lugar Act''), its successor law, the Cooperative Threat Reduction Act of 1993 (title XII of Public Law 103-160; 22 United States Code 5951 note), and the Defense Against Weapons of Mass Destruction Act of 1996 (title XIV of Public Law 104-201; 50 United States Code 2301 et sequentes), (commonly known as the ``Nunn-Lugar-Domenici Act'').
The Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program has, as of October 2004-- (A) deactivated 6,462 nuclear warheads; (B) destroyed 550 intercontinental ballistic missiles; (C) eliminated 469 intercontinental ballistic missile silos; (D) destroyed 13 mobile intercontinental ballistic missile launchers; (E) eliminated 135 bombers; (F) destroyed 733 nuclear air-to-surface missiles; (G) eliminated 408 submarine-launched ballistic missile launchers; (H) eliminated 530 submarine-launched ballistic missiles; (I) destroyed 27 strategic nuclear submarines; and (J) sealed 194 nuclear test tunnels or holes.
On February 11, 2004, President George W. Bush called for the expansion of the Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction program, stating: ``I propose to expand our efforts to keep weapons from the Cold War and other dangerous materials out of the wrong hands.
In 1991, Congress passed the Nunn-Lugar legislation.
Senator Lugar had a clear vision, along with Senator Nunn, about what to do with the old Soviet Union.
Under this program, we're helping former Soviet states find productive employment for former weapons scientists.
We're dismantling, destroying, and securing weapons and materials left over from the Soviet WMD arsenal.
We have more work to do there.''
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) all United States capabilities must be utilized to prevent acts of catastrophic terrorism using weapons of mass destruction or related materials or means of delivery; (2) in order to prevent acts of catastrophic terrorism using weapons of mass destruction or related materials or means of delivery, the United States must pursue a strategy making full and effective use of multilateral and bilateral agreements, export controls, missile defense, arms control, threat reduction assistance, interdiction efforts, export controls, and United States proliferation sanctions; (3) the United States must not allow the world's most dangerous weapons to fall into the hands of dangerous regimes and terrorist groups; (4) the United States must hold nations accountable for all violations of international nonproliferation treaties, norms, and standards of conduct, and to the extent that it is consistent with United States law and policy, provide assistance to ensure that such treaties, norms, and standards of conduct are upheld rather than violated; and (5) the President must be provided the authority to use Nunn-Lugar Cooperative Threat Reduction funds in a manner consistent with the high value Congress and the President have placed on Cooperative Threat Reduction programs to reduce the threat posed to the national security of the United States and international peace and security by the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction or related materials or means of delivery.
COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAMS DEFINED.
In this Act, the term ``Cooperative Threat Reduction programs'' means programs and activities specified in section 1501(b) of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 1997 (Public Law 104-201; 110 United States Statutes at Large 2731; 50 United States Code 2362 note).
Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991.--Section 211(b) of the Soviet Nuclear Threat Reduction Act of 1991 (title II of Public Law 102-228; 22 United States Code 2551 note) is repealed.
Cooperative Threat Reduction Act of 1993.--Section 1203(d) of the Cooperative Threat Reduction Act of 1993 (title XII of Public Law 103-160; 22 United States Code 5952(d)) is repealed.
Russian Chemical Weapons Destruction Facilities.--Section 1305 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2000 (Public Law 106-65; 22 United States Code 5952 note) is repealed.
INAPPLICABILITY OF OTHER RESTRICTIONS.
Section 502 of the Freedom for Russia and Emerging Eurasian Democracies and Open Markets Support Act of 1992 (Public Law 102-511; 106 United States Statutes at Large 3338; 22 United States Code 5852) shall not apply to any Cooperative Threat Reduction program.
Cooperative Threat Reduction programs may be carried out notwithstanding any other provision of law, subject to congressional notification and reporting requirements that apply to the use of funds available for Cooperative Threat Reduction programs or the carrying out of projects or activities under such programs.
MODIFICATIONS OF AUTHORITY TO USE COOPERATIVE THREAT REDUCTION PROGRAM FUNDS OUTSIDE THE FORMER SOVIET UNION.
Section 1308 of the National Defense Authorization Act for Fiscal Year 2004 (Public Law 108-136; 117 United States Statutes at Large 1662; 22 United States Code 5963) is amended-- (1) by striking ``President'' each place it appears and inserting ``Secretary of Defense''; (2) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking paragraph (2); and (B) by striking ``each of the following'' and all that follows through the end and inserting the following: ``that such project or activity will-- ``(1)(A) assist the United States in the resolution of a critical emerging proliferation threat; or ``(B) permit the United States to take advantage of opportunities to achieve long-standing nonproliferation goals; and ``(2) be completed in a short period of time.
''; (3) by striking subsections (c) and (d); and (4) by redesignating subsection (e) as subsection (c).
SPECIAL REPORTS ON ADHERENCE TO ARMS CONTROL AGREEMENTS AND NONPROLIFERATION COMMITMENTS.
Reports Required.--At least annually, the Secretary of State shall submit to the Committee on Foreign Relations, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Committee on Appropriations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations, the Committee on Armed Services, and the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives a report on each country in which a Cooperative Threat Reduction program is being carried out.
The report shall describe that country's commitments to-- (1) making substantial national investments in infrastructure to secure, safeguard, and destroy weapons of mass destruction; (2) forgoing any military modernization exceeding legitimate defense requirements, including replacement of weapons of mass destruction; (3) forgoing any use of fissionable materials or any other components of deactivated nuclear weapons in a new nuclear weapons program; (4) complying with all relevant arms control agreements; (5) adopting and enforcing national and international export controls over munitions and dual-use items; and (6) facilitating the verification by the United States and international community of that country's compliance with such commitments.
Form.--The reports required under subsection (a) may be submitted with the reports required under section 403 of the Arms Control and Disarmament Act (Public Law 87-297; 22 United States Code 2593a).