This Act may be cited as the ``MacBride Principles of Economic Justice Act of 1997''.
AMENDMENTS TO ANGLO-IRISH AGREEMENT SUPPORT ACT OF 1986.
In General.-- (1) Purposes.--Section 2(b) of the Anglo-Irish Agreement Support Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-415; 100 United States Statutes at Large 947) is amended by adding at the end the following new sentences: ``United States contributions should be used in a manner that effectively increases employment opportunities in communities with rates of unemployment significantly higher than the local or urban average of unemployment in Northern Ireland.
In addition, such contributions should be used to benefit individuals residing in such communities.''.
Conditions and understandings.--Section 5(a) of such Act is amended-- (A) in the first sentence-- (i) by striking ``The United States'' and inserting the following: ``(1) In general.--The United States''; (ii) by striking ``in this Act may be used'' and inserting the following: ``in this Act-- ``(A) may be used''; (iii) by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (iv) by adding at the end the following: ``(B) should be provided to individuals or entities in Northern Ireland which employ practices consistent with the principles of economic justice.
''; and (B) in the second sentence, by striking ``The restrictions'' and inserting the following: ``(2) Additional requirements.--The restrictions''.
Prior certifications.--Section 5(c)(2) of such Act is amended-- (A) in subparagraph (A), by striking ``in accordance with the principle of equality'' and all that follows and inserting ``to individuals and entities whose practices are consistent with principles of economic justice; and''; and (B) in subparagraph (B), by inserting before the period at the end the following: ``and will create employment opportunities in regions and communities of Northern Ireland suffering from high rates of unemployment''.
Annual reports.--Section 6 of such Act is amended-- (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (3), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) the extent to which the practices of each individual or entity receiving assistance from United States contributions to the International Fund has been consistent with the principles of economic justice.''.
Requirements relating to funds.--Section 7 of such Act is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(c) Prohibition.--Nothing included herein shall require quotas or reverse discrimination or mandate their use.''.
Definitions.--Section 8 of such Act is amended-- (A) in paragraph (1), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(3) the term `principles of economic justice' means the following principles: ``(A) Increasing the representation of individuals from underrepresented religious groups in the workforce, including managerial, supervisory, administrative, clerical, and technical jobs.
Providing adequate security for the protection of minority employees at the workplace.
Banning provocative sectarian or political emblems from the workplace.
Providing that all job openings be advertised publicly and providing that special recruitment efforts be made to attract applicants from underrepresented religious groups.
Providing that layoff, recall, and termination procedures do not favor a particular religious group.
Abolishing job reservations, apprenticeship restrictions, and differential employment criteria which discriminate on the basis of religion.
Providing for the development of training programs that will prepare substantial numbers of minority employees for skilled jobs, including the expansion of existing programs and the creation of new programs to train, upgrade, and improve the skills of minority employees.
Establishing procedures to assess, identify, and actively recruit minority employees with the potential for further advancement.
Providing for the appointment of a senior management staff member to be responsible for the employment efforts of the entity and, within a reasonable period of time, the implementation of the principles described in subparagraphs (A) through (H).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 180 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.