ESTABLISHMENT OF REGIONAL PRIVATE INDUSTRY COUNCILS UNDER THE JOB TRAINING PARTNERSHIP ACT.
In General.--Part D of title IV of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1731 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``SEC.
REGIONAL PRIVATE INDUSTRY COUNCILS.
Establishment.-- ``(1) In general.--In the case of a labor market area that is located in more than one State, the Secretary, upon request of the Governor of each State in which the labor market area is located, shall establish a regional private industry council for the labor market area in accordance with this section.
Rule of construction.--A regional private industry council established for a labor market area under paragraph (1) shall be in addition to the private industry council established under section 102 for each service delivery area in which the labor market area is located.
Membership.-- ``(1) In general.--Each regional private industry council shall consist of members determined by each Governor consistent with the requirements contained in subsections (a) and (c) of section 102 of this Act.
Chairman.--The chairman of the council shall be selected from among members of the council who are representatives of the private sector.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for fixed and staggered terms and may serve until their successors are appointed.
Any vacancy in the membership of the council shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Any member of the council may be removed for cause in accordance with procedures established by the council.
Certification.--The Secretary shall certify a regional private industry council if the Secretary determines that its composition and appointments are consistent with the provisions of this section.
Such certification shall be made or denied within 30 days after the date on which a list of members and necessary supporting documentation are submitted to the Secretary.
When the Secretary certifies the council, it shall be convened within 30 days.
Functions.--Consistent with the requirements contained in section 103 of this Act, the Secretary shall establish the functions of each regional private industry council established under this section for the purpose of providing policy guidance for, and exercise oversight with respect to, activities under the job training plan for the labor market area of the council in partnership with the unit or units of general local government within the labor market area.
Funding.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, to the extent practicable, amounts appropriated to carry out this part for any fiscal year shall be provided to labor market areas with respect to which a regional private industry council has been established under this section in accordance with the same terms and conditions applicable to amounts provided to service delivery areas under this Act.
Job Training Plan.-- ``(1) In general.--No funds appropriated to carry out this part for any fiscal year may be provided to any labor market area under this section except pursuant to a job training plan for two program years that, to the extent practicable, meets the requirements contained in section 104 of this Act.
Review and approval.--Consistent with the requirements contained in section 105 of this Act, not less than 120 days before the beginning of the first of the two program years covered by the job training plan-- ``(A) the proposed plan or summary thereof shall be published; ``(B) the proposed plan shall be made available for review and comment to all appropriate individuals and entities; ``(C) the proposed plan shall be reasonably available to the general public through such means as public hearings and local news facilities; ``(D) the final plan, or a summary thereof, shall be published not later than 80 days before the first of the two program years and shall be submitted to each Governor; ``(E) the final plan shall be submitted to the Secretary; and ``(F) the Secretary shall approve or disapprove the final plan not later than 30 days after the date on which the plan is submitted.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of contents of the Job Training Partnership Act (29 United States Code 1501 note) is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 456 the following: ``Sec.
Regional private industry councils.''