This Act may be cited as the ``Deadly Driver Reduction and Matthew P. Hammell Memorial Act''.
MINIMUM PENALTY FOR AN INDIVIDUAL WHO OPERATES A MOTOR VEHICLE WHILE UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF ALCOHOL.
In General.--Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``Sec.
National minimum penalty for an individual who operates a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol ``(a) Withholding of Apportionments for Noncompliance.-- ``(1) Fiscal year 2001.--The Secretary shall withhold 5 percent of the amount required to be apportioned to any State under each of paragraphs (1), (3), and (5)(B) of section 104(b) on October 1, 2000, if the State does not meet the requirements of paragraph (3) on that date.
Thereafter.--The Secretary shall withhold 10 percent (including any amounts withheld under paragraph (1)) of the amount required to be apportioned to any State under each of paragraphs (1), (3), and (5)(B) of section 104(b) on October 1, 2001, and on October 1 of each fiscal year thereafter, if the State does not meet the requirements of paragraph (3) on that date.
Requirements.-- ``(A) In general.--A State meets the requirements of this paragraph if the State has enacted and is enforcing a law that provides for a minimum penalty consistent with the following: ``(i) In the case of the first offense of an individual of operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol, revocation of the individual's driver's license for at least 180 days.
In the case of the second offense of an individual of any alcohol-related offense while operating a motor vehicle (including operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol), revocation of the individual's driver's license for at least 1 year.
In the case of the third or subsequent offense of an individual of any alcohol-related offense while operating a motor vehicle (including operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol), permanent revocation of the individual's driver's license.
Terms of revocation.--A revocation under subparagraph (A) shall not be subject to any exception or condition, including an exception or condition to avoid hardship to any individual.
Period of Availability; Effect of Compliance and Noncompliance.-- ``(1) Period of availability of withheld funds.-- ``(A) Funds withheld on or before september 30, 2002.--Any funds withheld under subsection (a) from apportionment to any State on or before September 30, 2002, shall remain available until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year for which the funds are authorized to be appropriated.
Funds withheld after september 30, 2002.--No funds withheld under this section from apportionment to any State after September 30, 2002, shall be available for apportionment to the State.
Apportionment of withheld funds after compliance.-- If, before the last day of the period for which funds withheld under subsection (a) from apportionment are to remain available for apportionment to a State under paragraph (1), the State meets the requirements of subsection (a)(3), the Secretary shall, on the first day on which the State meets the requirements, apportion to the State the funds withheld under subsection (a) that remain available for apportionment to the State.
Period of availability of subsequently apportioned funds.--Any funds apportioned under paragraph (2) shall remain available for expenditure until the end of the third fiscal year following the fiscal year in which the funds are so apportioned.
Sums not obligated at the end of that period shall lapse or, in the case of funds apportioned under section 104(b)(5)(B), shall lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in accordance with section 118.
Effect of noncompliance.--If, at the end of the period for which funds withheld under subsection (a) from apportionment are available for apportionment to a State under paragraph (1), the State does not meet the requirements of subsection (a)(3), the funds shall lapse or, in the case of funds withheld from apportionment under section 104(b)(5)(B), shall lapse and be made available by the Secretary for projects in accordance with section 118.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The analysis for chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``162.
National minimum penalty for an individual who operates a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol.