This Act may be cited as the ``Naturalization and Family Protection for Military Members Act of 2003''.
REQUIREMENTS FOR NATURALIZATION THROUGH SERVICE IN THE ARMED FORCES OF THE UNITED STATES.
Reduction of Period for Required Service.--Section 328(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1439(a)) is amended by striking ``three years'' and inserting ``2 years''.
Prohibition on Imposition of Fees Relating to Naturalization.-- Title III of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1401 et seq.)
is amended-- (1) in section 328(b)-- (A) in paragraph (3)-- (i) by striking ``honorable.
The'' and inserting ``honorable (the''; and (ii) by striking ``discharge.''
and inserting ``discharge); and''; and (B) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) notwithstanding any other provision of law, no fee shall be charged or collected from the applicant for filing a petition for naturalization or for the issuance of a certificate of naturalization upon citizenship being granted to the applicant, and no clerk of any State court shall charge or collect any fee for such services unless the laws of the State require such charge to be made, in which case nothing more than the portion of the fee required to be paid to the State shall be charged or collected.
''; and (2) in section 329(b)-- (A) in paragraph (2), by striking ``and'' at the end; (B) in paragraph (3), by striking the period at the end and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(4) notwithstanding any other provision of law, no fee shall be charged or collected from the applicant for filing a petition for naturalization or for the issuance of a certificate of naturalization upon citizenship being granted to the applicant, and no clerk of any State court shall charge or collect any fee for such services unless the laws of the State require such charge to be made, in which case nothing more than the portion of the fee required to be paid to the State shall be charged or collected.''.
Naturalization Proceedings Overseas for Members of the Armed Forces.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of Homeland Security, the Secretary of State, and the Secretary of Defense shall ensure that any applications, interviews, filings, oaths, ceremonies, or other proceedings under title III of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1401 et sequentes) relating to naturalization of members of the Armed Forces are available through United States embassies, consulates, and as practicable, United States military installations overseas.
Technical and Conforming Amendment.--Section 328(b)(3) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1439(b)(3)) is amended by striking ``Attorney General'' and inserting ``Secretary of Homeland Security''.
NATURALIZATION BENEFITS FOR MEMBERS OF THE SELECTED RESERVE OF THE READY RESERVE.
Section 329(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1440(a)) is amended by inserting ``as a member of the Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve or'' after ``has served honorably''.
EXTENSION OF POSTHUMOUS BENEFITS TO SURVIVING SPOUSES, CHILDREN, AND PARENTS.
Treatment as Immediate Relatives.-- (1) Spouses.--Notwithstanding the second sentence of section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)), in the case of an alien who was the spouse of a citizen of the United States at the time of the citizen's death and was not legally separated from the citizen at the time of the citizen's death, if the citizen served honorably in an active duty status in the military, air, or naval forces of the United States and died as a result of injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by that service, the alien (and each child of the alien) shall be considered, for purposes of section 201(b) of such Act, to remain an immediate relative after the date of the citizen's death, but only if the alien files a petition under section 204(a)(1)(A)(ii) of such Act within 2 years after such date and only until the date the alien remarries.
For purposes of such section 204(a)(1)(A)(ii), an alien granted relief under the preceding sentence shall be considered an alien spouse described in the second sentence of section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of such Act.
Children.-- (A) In general.--In the case of an alien who was the child of a citizen of the United States at the time of the citizen's death, if the citizen served honorably in an active duty status in the military, air, or naval forces of the United States and died as a result of injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by that service, the alien shall be considered, for purposes of section 201(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)), to remain an immediate relative after the date of the citizen's death (regardless of changes in age or marital status thereafter), but only if the alien files a petition under subparagraph (B) within 2 years after such date.
Petitions.--An alien described in subparagraph (A) may file a petition with the Secretary of Homeland Security for classification of the alien under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)).
For purposes of such Act, such a petition shall be considered a petition filed under section 204(a)(1)(A) of such Act (8 United States Code 1154(a)(1)(A)).
Parents.-- (A) In general.--In the case of an alien who was the parent of a citizen of the United States at the time of the citizen's death, if the citizen served honorably in an active duty status in the military, air, or naval forces of the United States and died as a result of injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by that service, the alien shall be considered, for purposes of section 201(b) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)), to remain an immediate relative after the date of the citizen's death (regardless of changes in age or marital status thereafter), but only if the alien files a petition under subparagraph (B) within 2 years after such date.
Petitions.--An alien described in subparagraph (A) may file a petition with the Secretary of Homeland Security for classification of the alien under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)).
For purposes of such Act, such a petition shall be considered a petition filed under section 204(a)(1)(A) of such Act (8 United States Code 1154(a)(1)(A)).
Exception.--Notwithstanding section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)), for purposes of this paragraph, a citizen described in subparagraph (A) does not have to be 21 years of age for a parent to benefit under this paragraph.
Applications for Adjustment of Status by Surviving Spouses, Children, and Parents.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c) of section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1255), any alien who was the spouse, child, or parent of an alien described in paragraph (2), and who applied for adjustment of status prior to the death described in paragraph (2)(B), may have such application adjudicated as if such death had not occurred.
Alien described.--An alien is described in this paragraph if the alien-- (A) served honorably in an active duty status in the military, air, or naval forces of the United States; (B) died as a result of injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by that service; and (C) was granted posthumous citizenship under section 329A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1440-1).
Spouses and Children of Lawful Permanent Resident Aliens.-- (1) Treatment as immediate relatives.-- (A) In general.--A spouse or child of an alien described in paragraph (3) who is included in a petition for classification as a family-sponsored immigrant under section 203(a)(2) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1153(a)(2)) that was filed by such alien, shall be considered (if the spouse or child has not been admitted or approved for lawful permanent residence by such date) a valid petitioner for immediate relative status under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)).
Such spouse or child shall be eligible for deferred action, advance parole, and work authorization.
Petitions.--An alien spouse or child described in subparagraph (A) may file a petition with the Secretary of Homeland Security for classification of the alien under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)).
For purposes of such Act, such a petition shall be considered a petition filed under section 204(a)(1)(A) of such Act (8 United States Code 1154(a)(1)(A)).
Self-petitions.--Any spouse or child of an alien described in paragraph (3) who is not a beneficiary of a petition for classification as a family-sponsored immigrant may file a petition for such classification under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)) with the Secretary of Homeland Security, but only if the spouse or child files a petition within 2 years after such date.
Such spouse or child shall be eligible for deferred action, advance parole, and work authorization.
Alien described.--An alien is described in this paragraph if the alien-- (A) served honorably in an active duty status in the military, air, or naval forces of the United States; (B) died as a result of injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by that service; and (C) was granted posthumous citizenship under section 329A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1440-1).
Parents of Lawful Permanent Resident Aliens.-- (1) Self-petitions.--Any parent of an alien described in paragraph (2) may file a petition for classification under section 201(b)(2)(A)(i) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1151(b)(2)(A)(i)), but only if the parent files a petition within 2 years after such date.
For purposes of such Act, such petition shall be considered a petition filed under section 204(a)(1)(A) of such Act (8 United States Code 1154(a)(1)(A)).
Such parent shall be eligible for deferred action, advance parole, and work authorization.
Alien described.--An alien is described in this paragraph if the alien-- (A) served honorably in an active duty status in the military, air, or naval forces of the United States; (B) died as a result of injury or disease incurred in or aggravated by that service; and (C) was granted posthumous citizenship under section 329A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1440-1).
Adjustment of Status.--Notwithstanding subsections (a) and (c) of section 245 of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1255), an alien physically present in the United States who is the beneficiary of a petition under paragraph (1), (2)(B), or (3)(B) of subsection (a), paragraph (1)(B) or (2) of subsection (c), or subsection (d)(1) of this section, may apply to the Secretary of Homeland Security for adjustment of status to that of an alien lawfully admitted for permanent residence.
Waiver of Certain Grounds of Inadmissibility.--In determining the admissibility of any alien accorded an immigration benefit under this section, the grounds for inadmissibility specified in paragraphs (4), (6), (7), and (9) of section 212(a) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1182(a)) shall not apply.
Benefits to Survivors; Technical Amendment.--Section 329A of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1440-1) is amended-- (1) by striking subsection (e); and (2) by striking ``Attorney General'' each place that term appears and inserting ``Secretary of Homeland Security''.
Technical and Conforming Amendments.--Section 319(d) of the Immigration and Nationality Act (8 United States Code 1430(d)) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``, child, or parent'' after ``surviving spouse''; (2) by inserting ``, parent, or child'' after ``whose citizen spouse''; and (3) by striking ``who was living'' and inserting ``who, in the case of a surviving spouse, was living''.
This Act and the amendments made by this Act shall take effect as if enacted on September 11, 2001.