CONGRESSIONAL FINDINGS AND DECLARATION OF POLICY.
Findings.--The Congress makes the following findings: (1) The People's Liberation Army is the principal instrument of repression within the People's Republic of China, responsible for occupying Tibet since 1950, massacring hundreds of students and demonstrators for democracy in Tiananmen Square on June 4, 1989, and running the Laogai (``reform through labor'') slave labor camps.
The People's Liberation Army is engaged in a massive military buildup, which has involved a doubling since 1992 of announced official figures for military spending by the People's Republic of China.
The People's Liberation Army is engaging in a major ballistic missile modernization program which could undermine peace and stability in East Asia, including 2 new intercontinental missile programs, 1 submarine-launched missile program, a new class of compact but long-range cruise missiles, and an upgrading of medium- and short-range ballistic missiles.
The People's Liberation Army is working to coproduce the SU-27 fighter with Russia, and is in the process of purchasing several substantial weapons systems from Russia, including the 633 model of the Kilo-class submarine and the SS- N-22 Sunburn missile system specifically designed to incapacitate United States aircraft carriers and Aegis cruisers.
The People's Liberation Army has carried out acts of aggression in the South China Sea, including the February 1995 seizure of the Mischief Reef in the Spratley Islands, which is claimed by the Philippines.
In July 1995 and in March 1996, the People's Liberation Army conducted missile tests to intimidate Taiwan when Taiwan held historic free elections, and those tests effectively blockaded Taiwan's 2 principal ports of Keelung and Kaohsiung.
The People's Liberation Army has contributed to the proliferation of technologies relevant to the refinement of weapons-grade nuclear material, including transferring ring magnets to Pakistan.
The People's Liberation Army and associated defense companies have provided ballistic missile components, cruise missiles, and chemical weapons ingredients to Iran, a country that the executive branch has repeatedly reported to Congress is the greatest sponsor of terrorism in the world.
In May 1996, United States authorities caught the People's Liberation Army enterprise Poly Technologies and the civilian defense industrial company Norinco attempting to smuggle 2,000 AK-47s into Oakland, California, and offering to sell urban gangs shoulder-held missile launchers capable of ``taking out a 747'' (which the affidavit of the United States Customs Service of May 21, 1996, indicated that the representative of Poly Technologies and Norinco claimed), and Communist Chinese authorities punished only 4 low-level arms merchants by sentencing them on May 17, 1997, to brief prison terms.
The People's Liberation Army contributes to the People's Republic of China's failure to meet the standards of the 1995 Memorandum of Understanding with the United States on intellectual property rights by running factories which pirate videos, compact discs, and computer software that are products of the United States.
The People's Liberation Army contributes to the People's Republic of China's failing to meet the standards of the February 1997 Memorandum of Understanding with the United States on textiles by operating enterprises engaged in the transshipment of textile products to the United States through third countries.
The estimated $2 billion to $3 billion in annual earnings of People's Liberation Army enterprises subsidize the expansion and activities of the People's Liberation Army described in this subsection.
The commercial activities of the People's Liberation Army are frequently conducted on noncommercial terms, or for noncommercial purposes such as military or foreign policy considerations.
Policy.--It is the policy of the United States that commercial activities of the People's Liberation Army of China or any Communist Chinese military company are not extended normal tariff treatment by the United States or treated as normal commercial intercourse with the United States.
PROHIBITION ON MFN TREATMENT FOR IMPORTS FROM THE PEOPLE'S LIBERATION ARMY.
Determination of Communist Chinese Military Companies.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall compile a list of persons who are Communist Chinese military companies and who are operating directly or indirectly in the United States or any of its territories and possessions, and shall publish the list of such persons in the Federal Register.
On an ongoing basis, the Secretary of Defense, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury, the Attorney General, the Director of Central Intelligence, and the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation, shall make additions or deletions to the list based on the latest information available.
Communist chinese military company.--For purposes of making the determination required by paragraph (1), the term ``Communist Chinese military company''-- (A) means a person that is-- (i) engaged in providing commercial services, manufacturing, producing, or exporting, and (ii) owned or controlled by the People's Liberation Army, and (B) includes, but is not limited to, any person identified in the United States Defense Intelligence Agency publication numbered VP-1920-271-90, dated September 1990, or PC-1921-57-95, dated October 1995, and any update of such reports for the purposes of this Act.
Tariffs.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, nondiscriminatory treatment (most-favored-nation treatment) shall not apply to goods that are produced, manufactured, or exported by the People's Liberation Army or a Communist Chinese military company.
Treasury Authority.-- (1) Authority.--The Secretary of the Treasury may exercise the authorities set forth in section 203(a) of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1702(a)) with respect to any commercial activity in the United States by a Communist Chinese military company, without regard to section 202 of that Act.
Penalties.--The penalties set forth in section 206 of the International Emergency Economic Powers Act (50 United States Code 1705) shall apply to violations of any license, order, or regulation issued under paragraph (1).
Effective Date.--Subsection (a) shall apply with respect to goods entered, or withdrawn from warehouse for consumption, on or after the 105th day after the date of the enactment of this Act.
For purposes of this Act, the term ``People's Liberation Army'' means the land, naval, and air military services, the police, and the intelligence services of the Communist Government of the People's Republic of China, and any member of any such service or of such police.