This Act may be cited as the ``Bear Protection Act''.
Congress finds that-- (1) there are 8 extant species of bear: Asian black bear, brown bear, polar bear, American black bear, spectacled bear, giant panda, sun bear, and sloth bear; (2) the Asian black bear populations have been decimated in recent years by illegal trade to supply the growing demand for medicines and cosmetics containing valuable bear viscera; (3) without immediate action to end United States involvement in the lucrative black market trade in bear viscera, American bear populations may suffer the same devastating losses as Asian bear populations; (4) increasingly, undercover operations have discovered that poachers are establishing extensive smuggling networks to illegally commercialize American bears; (5) because it is practically impossible to distinguish the viscera of CITES Appendix I bears from the viscera of other bear species, there is an urgent need to eliminate the trade in the viscera of all bear species; (6) as a party to CITES, a world leader in wildlife conservation, and a large market for and supplier of bear viscera and products, the United States shares responsibility for supporting and implementing measures to stop the illegal trade in CITES Appendix I Asian black bears and CITES Appendix II American black bears; (7) inconsistency in State prohibition of commercialization of bear gall and inadequate Federal regulation of such commercialization make law enforcement difficult; and (8) individual States, which have the right to set, maintain, and enforce quotas for the legal hunting of black bears, will be assisted in their management efforts by the enactment of a Federal law banning the import of, export of, and interstate commerce in bear viscera.
The purpose of this Act is to ensure the long-term viability of the world's 8 bear species and specifically to perpetuate healthy populations of American bears.
It is the policy of the United States that effective long-term conservation of the world's bear species, including North American bears, depends in part on the prohibition of the lucrative trade in bear viscera.
In this Act: (1) Bear viscera.--The term ``bear viscera'' means the body fluids or internal organs (including the gallbladder) of a species of bear.
CITES.--The term ``CITES'' means the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, done at Washington on March 3, 1973 (27 UST 1087; TIAS 8249).
Other terms.--The terms ``import'', ``person'', ``State'', and ``transport'' have the meanings provided in section 2 of the Lacey Act Amendments of 1981 (16 United States Code 3371).
A person who-- (1) imports into the United States, or exports from the United States, bear viscera or products that contain or claim to contain bear viscera; or (2) sells, barters, offers to sell or barter, purchases, possesses with intent to sell or barter, transports, acquires, or receives in interstate or foreign commerce, bear viscera or products that contain or claim to contain bear viscera; shall be subject to section 7(a).
In General.--A person who engages in conduct described in section 6 shall be subject to the penalties and sanctions provided in sections 4 and 5 of the Lacey Act Amendments of 1981 (16 United States Code 3373 and 3374).
Enforcement.-- (1) In general.--This Act shall be enforced in the manner provided in subsections (a), (b), and (c) of section 6 of the Lacey Act Amendments of 1981 (16 United States Code 3375).
Use of penalty amounts for rewards and incidental expenses.--Amounts received as penalties, fines, or forfeiture of property under subsection (a) shall be used in accordance with section 6(d) of the Lacey Act Amendments of 1981 (16 United States Code 3375(d)).
DISCUSSIONS CONCERNING TRADE PRACTICES.
In General.--The Secretary of the Interior and the United States Trade Representative shall-- (1) discuss issues involving trade in bear viscera with the appropriate representatives of such countries trading with the United States as are determined jointly by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of Commerce to be the leading importers, exporters, or consumers of bear viscera; and (2) attempt to establish coordinated efforts with the countries to protect bears.
Report.--Not later than 5 years after the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary of the Interior shall submit to Congress a report describing the progress of efforts to end illegal trade in bear viscera.