This Act may be cited as the ``Rural Education Development Initiative for the 21st Century Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) While there are rural education initiatives identified at the State and local level, no Federal education policy focuses on the specific needs of rural school districts and schools, especially those that serve poor students.
The National Center for Educational Statistics (NCES) reports that while 46 percent of our Nation's public schools serve rural areas, they only receive 22 percent of the Nation's education funds annually.
A critical problem for rural school districts involves the hiring and retention of qualified administrators and certified teachers (especially in special education, science, and mathematics).
Consequently, teachers in rural schools are almost twice as likely to provide instruction in two or more subjects than teachers in urban schools.
Rural schools also face other tough challenges, such as shrinking local tax bases, high transportation costs, aging buildings, limited course offerings, and limited resources.
Data from the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) consistently shows large gaps between the achievement of students in high-poverty schools and those in other schools.
High-poverty schools face special challenges in preparing their students to reach high standards of performance on State and national assessments.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to provide rural school students in the United States with increased learning opportunities.
In this Act: (1) The terms ``elementary school'', ``local educational agency'', and ``State educational agency'' have the meanings given such terms in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801).
The term ``eligible local educational agency'' means a local educational agency that serves-- (A) a school-age population, 20 percent or more of whom are from families with incomes below the poverty line; and ``(B)(i) only schools designated by the Secretary with a school locale code of 6, 7, or 8; or (ii) a school-age population of 800 or fewer.
The term ``poverty line'' has the meaning given such term by section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)) applicable to a family of the size involved.
The term ``rural area'' means the area defined by the Secretary using school locale codes 6, 7, and 8.
The term ``school-age population'' means the number of students aged 5 through 17.
The term ``school locale code'' has the meaning given such term by the Secretary.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``specially qualified agency'' means an eligible local educational agency, located in a State that does not participate in a program under this Act in a fiscal year, that may apply directly to the Secretary for a grant in such year under section 4(a)(3).
RURAL EDUCATION INITIATIVE AUTHORIZED.
Grants to States.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (3), from the amount appropriated under section 10 and not reserved under subsection (c) for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall award grants to State educational agencies that have applications approved under section 5 to enable such agencies to award grants to eligible local educational agencies for local authorized activities described in subsection (c).
Formula.-- (A) In general.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under this section shall receive an amount that bears the same relation to the amount of funds appropriated under section 10 that are not reserved under subsection (c) for a fiscal year as the number of students in average daily attendance served by eligible local education agencies in the State bears to the number of all such students served by eligible local education agencies in all States for that fiscal year.
Data.--In determining the school-age population under subparagraph (A) the Secretary shall use the most recent data available from the Bureau of the Census.
Direct awards to specially qualified agencies.--If a State educational agency elects not to participate in the program under this Act or does not have an application approved under section 5, the Secretary may award, on a competitive basis, the amount the State educational agency is eligible to receive under paragraph (2) directly to specially qualified agencies in the State.
Local Authorized Activities.--Funds made available under this Act may be used for-- (1) local educational technology efforts as described in section 3134 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6844); (2) professional development activities designed to prepare teachers who are teaching out of their primary subject area; (3) academic enrichment programs described in section 10204 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8034); (4) innovative academic enrichment programs related to the educational needs of students at-risk of academic failure, including remedial instruction in one or more of the core subject areas of English, mathematics, science, and history; and (5) activities to recruit and retain highly qualified teachers in special education, mathematics, or science.
Reservation of Funds.--From the amount appropriated under section 10 for a fiscal year, the Secretary shall reserve 0.5 percent to make awards to elementary or secondary schools operated or supported by the Bureau of Indian Affairs to carry out the purpose of this Act.
Relation to Other Federal Funding.--Funds received under this Act by a State educational agency or a specially qualified agency shall not be taken into consideration in determining the eligibility for, or amount of, any other Federal funding awarded to such agency.
Each State educational agency or specially qualified agency desiring a grant under this Act shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may require.
Such application shall include specific measurable goals and objectives relating to increased student academic achievement, decreased student drop-out rates, or such other factors that the State educational agency or specially qualified agency may choose to measure.
STATE DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDS.
Award Basis.--A State educational agency that receives funds under this Act shall award grants to eligible local educational agencies or provide assistance to schools described in subsection (b)(2)-- (1) on a competitive basis; or (2) according to a formula based on the number of students served by the eligible local educational agencies or schools (as appropriate) in the State, as determined by the State.
A State educational agency or specially qualified agency that receives funds under this Act may not use more than 5 percent of the grant funds for State activities or administrative costs related to the program.
State Educational Agency Reports.-- (1) Contents.--Each State educational agency that receives a grant under this Act shall submit an annual report to the Secretary describing-- (A) the methods the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies under this Act; (B) how eligible local educational agencies and schools used funds provided under this Act; and (C) the degree to which progress has been made toward meeting the goals and objectives described the application submitted under section 5.
Availability.--The Secretary shall make available the annual State reports received under paragraph (1) for dissemination to the Congress, interested parties (including educators, parents, students, and advocacy and civil rights organizations), and the public.
Specially Qualified Agency Reports.--Each specially qualified agency that receives a grant under this Act shall submit an annual report to the Secretary describing how such agency used funds received under this Act to coordinate with other Federal, State, and local programs.
Report by Secretary to Congress.--The Secretary shall prepare and submit to Congress an annual report which shall describe-- (1) the methods the State educational agency used to award grants to eligible local educational agencies and to provide assistance to schools under this Act; (2) how eligible local educational agencies used funds provided under this Act; and (3) progress made by State educational agencies and eligible local educational agencies receiving assistance under this Act in meeting specific, annual, measurable performance goals and objectives established by such agencies for activities assisted under this Act.
If, at the end of the third consecutive year in which a State educational agency or specially qualified agency receives funds under this Act, the Secretary determines that such agency has not substantially met its performance goals and objectives described in the application submitted under section 5, such agency shall be ineligible to receive additional funds under this Act for a period of one year after the date of such determination.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $300,000,000 for each of fiscal years 2002 through 2005.