This Act may be cited as the ``Brownfield Cleanup and Redevelopment Act''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) Hundreds of thousands of obsolete industrial sites nationwide are polluted with medium to low amounts of environmental contamination.
Reusing these sites requires cleanup of the contamination, adding costs and uncertainties to the redevelopment process.
Left unused, these contaminated sites mean loss of tax revenues and job opportunities for the community and pose potential risks to nearby residents or people who venture onto the site.
State efforts to encourage voluntary cleanup and redevelopment of such sites are hindered by Federal requirements for environmental permits to conduct the cleanups and by the lack of Federal certification of such State efforts.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to encourage cleanup and redevelopment of contaminated industrial facilities (known as ``brownfields'') as economically viable alternatives to previously undeveloped ``greenfield'' sites.
CERTIFICATION OF STATE VOLUNTARY CLEANUP PROGRAMS.
In General.--Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Administrator'') shall establish certification criteria for State voluntary cleanup programs at eligible facilities.
If a State meets the criteria for certification, the Administrator shall certify the State to carry out the cleanup program in such State at eligible facilities in lieu of any Federal program that addresses the cleanup of such facilities under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 or the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
Biennial Audits and Revocation of State Certification.--The Administrator shall ensure that State programs continue to meet the terms of the certification issued pursuant to subsection (a) by conducting biennial audits of State voluntary cleanup programs.
If the Administrator finds that the State is not administering the program in accordance with the terms of the certification, the Administrator shall notify the State of deficiencies and of the Administrator's intention to withdraw the State's certification if the deficiencies are not resolved within 6 months.
Withdrawal of State certification shall not affect any cleanup completed and approved by the State as of the date of such withdrawal.
Specific Criteria.--The Administrator shall require that, in order for a State voluntary cleanup program to be certified under subsection (a), the program shall, at a minimum, contain each of the following provisions-- (1) The program shall provide that only eligible facilities, as described in subsection (d), may participate in the program.
The program shall provide adequate opportunities for public participation in the development and implementation of cleanup plans for eligible facilities.
Public participation requirements shall include but not be limited to providing opportunity for affected parties to review and comment on cleanup documents and plans, and providing opportunity for public input to the remedy selection process.
Affected parties shall include but not be limited to local work force representatives, adjacent community residents, and local environmental and other public interest organizations.
The program shall provide technical assistance throughout each voluntary cleanup.
The program shall provide adequate oversight and enforcement authority to ensure that the voluntary cleanups comply with Federal and State laws (except permit requirements as provided in subsection (e)).
provide for a certification from the State to the owner or prospective purchaser of an eligible facility that the cleanup is complete.
Eligible Facilities.--For purposes of this Act, the term ``eligible facility'' means a facility or property in a State that is determined by the State to have environmental contamination that-- (1) could prevent the timely use, development, or reuse of the facility or property; and (2) is limited in scope and can be comprehensively and readily evaluated.
Such term shall not include any of the following: (A) A facility that is eligible for abatement action under section 106 of the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980.
A facility that, as of the date of the enactment of this Act, is subject to Federal enforcement action under the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act of 1980 (42 United States Code 9601 et sequentes).
A facility included, or proposed for inclusion, on the National Priorities List or on the comprehensive environmental response, compensation, and liability inventory system (``CERCLIS'') that has been evaluated as high priority under the hazard ranking system.
A facility required to have a permit under section 3005 of the Solid Waste Disposal Act that does not have a permit under that section and does not qualify for authorization to operate in interim status under subsection (e) of that section.
A land disposal unit with respect to which a closure notification under subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6921 et sequentes) is submitted and closure requirements are specified in a closure plan or permit.
A facility subject to corrective action under section 3004(u) or 3008(h) of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 5924(u) or 6928(h)) that is evaluated as high priority under the Environmental Protection Agency's National Corrective Action Priority System as set forth in regulations under subtitle C of the Solid Waste Disposal Act.
A facility at which assistance for response activities may be obtained pursuant to subtitle I of the Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 United States Code 6991 et sequentes) from the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund established under section 9508 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986.
A facility owned or operated by a department, agency, or instrumentality of the United States.
Relationship to Permit Requirements.--No Federal, State, or local permit shall be required for any cleanup conducted under a State voluntary cleanup program certified under this section, if the cleanup is carried out in compliance with the certified program.