sense of the congress Section 1.
It is the sense of the Congress that-- (1) while there have been massive governmental efforts and expenditure of funds to complete the resolution of the thrift crisis and despite improvement in the condition of most segments of the thrift industry, there is a risk that the structure of the deposit insurance funds since FIRREA could undermine even the healthiest segments of the thrift industry by impeding their ability to compete and precipitating another costly crisis in that industry.
The structural issues involve-- (a) the presence of two separate insurance funds, the BIF and SAIF funds; (b) the projected, substantial disparity in deposit insurance premiums to be paid by BIF and SAIF members and the potential for a competitive imbalance; (c) the presence of a designated reserve ratio of 1.25 percent of insured deposits for BIF and SAIF funds; and (d) the effect which existing debt obligations have on the ability of the SAIF fund to accumulate reserves and to become fiscally sound.
to ensure the continued availability of housing credit and to avoid another costly crisis in the thrift industry as a result of some of these structural impediments involving the FIRREA-mandated separate fund concept, an Advisory Commission shall be formed to advise the President and the Congress on the viability of merging or maintaining the separation of the deposit insurance funds and the impact of such action on the health of the BIF and SAIF funds, the confidence of depositors in the federal deposit insurance system, and the regulation of and competitive balance between banks and thrifts.
establishment of an advisory commission Sec.
There is hereby established an Advisory Commission to be known as the Advisory Commission on BIF and SAIF funds (thereafter referred to as the ``Advisory Commission'').
Membership of the Advisory Commission.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Advisory Commission shall be composed of 7 members appointed no later than ninety days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The members shall be appointed as follows: (A) Two citizens of the United States appointed by the President.
One citizen of the United States appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate upon the recommendation of the majority leader of the Senate.
One citizen of the United States appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate upon the recommendation of the minority leader of the Senate.
One citizen of the United States appointed by the Speaker of the House upon the recommendation of the majority leader of the House of Representatives.
One citizen of the United States appointed by the Speaker of the House upon the recommendation of the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
The Secretary of the Treasury or his designate.
Additional qualifications.-- (A) In general.--Members of the Advisory Commission who are appointed under any subparagraph of paragraph (1) shall be appointed from among individuals who are specially qualified to serve on the Advisory Commission by virtue of their education, training, or experience.
Limitation.--Of the total number of members of the Advisory Commission who are described in subparagraph (A), not more than one such member may be, at the time of any such member's appointment and during any such member's service on the Advisory Commission-- (i) a director, officer, or employee of any savings association; (ii) a director, officer, or employee of any bank; or (iii) a director, officer, employee or agent of any consumer organization.
Terms.--Members shall be appointed for the life of the Advisory Commission.
Chairperson.--The chairperson of the Advisory Commission shall be the Secretary of the Treasury or his designate.
Quorum.--A majority of the members of the Advisory Commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business.
Voting.--Each member of the Advisory Commission shall be entitled to 1 vote, which shall be equal to the vote of every other member of the Advisory Commission.
Vacancies.--No vacancy on the Advisory Commission shall affect the powers of the Advisory Commission and any such vacancy shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation and expenses.-- (A) No basic pay.--Except as provided in subparagraph (B), members of the Advisory Commission shall receive no additional pay, allowances, or benefits by reason of their service on the Advisory Commission.
Per diem and travel expenses.--Members of the Advisory Commission who are appointed from among private citizens of the United States may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem, in lieu of substance, as authorized by law for persons serving intermittently in the government service to the extent that funds are available for such purposes.
Meetings.--The Advisory Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of the members.
Functions of the Advisory Commission.-- (1) Contents and specific recommendations.--The Advisory Commission shall conduct an investigation and evaluation of and shall report and make recommendations on the future status of the deposit insurance system.
Issues to be considered.--Pursuant to its responsibilities under this section the Advisory Commission shall consider the following issues: (A) An analysis of whether a deposit insurance premium disparity between banks and thrifts is likely and the competitive impact thereof.
The practical justification for maintaining two separate Federal deposit funds.
The impact on the soundness of the Federal deposit insurance system by the continuation of a separate insurance fund for banks and savings associations.
Whether a merger of the Bank Insurance Fund and Savings Association Insurance Fund can be accomplished in a manner which is equitable and the legal and structural impediments which need to be addressed in such a merger.
The timing of a merger of the two funds, should such occur.
Whether the designated ratio of reserves of 1.25 per centum of insured deposits, which must now be held by each deposit insurance fund, is appropriate in light of current and future needs and considerations.
The impact of any remaining regulatory differences between banks and thrifts on the soundness of a merged fund.
The impact of a fund merger on a consolidation of the bank and thrift regulatory agencies.
Final report.-- (A) Report required.--Not later than the end of the one-year period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, the Advisory Commission shall submit to the President, the Committee on Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs of the Senate, a final report which contains a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Advisory Board, including such recommendations for administrative and legislative action as the Advisory Commission determines to be appropriate.
Majority vote.--A recommendation may be made by the Advisory Commission to the President and to the Congress only if it is adopted by a majority of the members of the Advisory Commission.
Additional, dissenting, and supplemental views.--The report required under subparagraph (A) shall contain any additional, dissenting, or supplemental views of any member of the Advisory Commission.
Powers of the Advisory Board.-- (1) Hearings.--The Advisory Commission may hold such hearings and sit and act at such times and places as the Advisory Commission may find advisable.
Rules and regulations.--The Advisory Commission may adopt such rules and regulations as may be necessary to establish its procedures and to govern the manner of operations, organizations, and personnel.
Assistance from federal agencies.-- (A) Information.--The Advisory Commission may request from the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality such information as the Advisory Commission may require for the purpose of this section.
Each such agency or instrumentality shall furnish such information to the Advisory Commission upon request made by the Chairperson of the Advisory Commission.
Administrative support services and personnel.--Upon request of the Chairperson of the Advisory Commission, the head of any Federal agency or instrumentality shall, to the extent possible and subject to the discretion of such head-- (i) make any of the facilities and services of such agency or instrumentality available to the Advisory Commission; and (ii) detail any of the personnel of such agency or instrumentality to the Advisory Commission, on a nonreimbursable basis, to assist the Advisory Commission in carrying out its duties under this section, except that any expenses of the Advisory Commission incurred under this clause shall be subject to the limitation on total expenses set forth in subsection (d)(2).
Mails.--The Advisory Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other Federal agencies.
Contracting.--The Advisory Commission may, to such extent and in such amounts as provided in advance in appropriation Acts, enter into contracts with State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals for the purpose of conducting research or surveys necessary to enable the Advisory Commission to discharge its duties under this section, subject to the limitation on total expenses set forth in subsection (d)(2).
Staff.-- (A) In general.--Subject to such rules and regulations as may be adopted by the Advisory Commission and the limitation on total expenses set forth in subsection (e)(2), the Chairperson of the Advisory Commission may appoint, terminate, and fix the compensation of an executive director and such additional staff as the Chairperson deems advisable to assist the Advisory Commission.
Pay rates.--Individuals appointed under subparagraph (A) may be paid at rates not to exceed a rate equal to the maximum rate for GS-18 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Certain provisions of title 5, united states code, not applicable.--Appointments may be made under subparagraph (A) without regard to-- (i) provisions of title 5, United States Code, concerning appointments in the competitive service, and (ii) provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, or of any other provision of law relating to number, classification, and General Schedule rates.
Advisory committee.--The Advisory Commission shall be considered an advisory committee under the Federal Advisory Committee Act.
Expenses of Advisory Board.-- (1) In general.--Any expense of the Advisory Commission shall be paid from such funds as may be available to the Secretary of the Treasury.
Limitation.--The total expenses of the Advisory Commission shall not exceed $500,000.
GAO audit.--Prior to the termination of the Advisory Commission pursuant to subsection (f), the Comptroller General of the United States shall conduct an audit of the financial books and records of the Advisory Commission to determine that the limitation on expenses under paragraph (2) has not been exceeded, and shall include its determination in an opinion to be included in the report of the Advisory Commission.
Termination of the Advisory Commission.--The Advisory Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is thirty days after the date on which the Advisory Commission submits the report required under subsection (b)(3).