This Act may be cited as the ``Mandatory Spending Control Act of 1993''.
The purpose of this Act is to determine appropriate methods for limiting the growth of mandatory spending, including decreased funding levels, growth limits, and improved cost efficiency.
MANDATORY SPENDING CONTROL COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established an independent commission to be known as the ``Mandatory Spending Control Commission''.
Duties.--The Commission shall carry out the duties specified for it in this Act.
Appointment.--(1)(A) The Commission shall be composed of 9 members appointed by the President, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.
By January 1, 1995, the President shall submit to the Senate the nominations of those first appointed to the Commission.
In selecting individuals for nominations for appointments to the Commission, the President should consult with-- (A) the Speaker of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of 2 members; (B) the majority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of 2 members; (C) the minority leader of the House of Representatives concerning the appointment of 1 member; and (D) the minority leader of the Senate concerning the appointment of 1 member.
At the time the President nominates individuals for appointment to the Commission, the President shall designate 1 such individual to serve as Chairman of the Commission.
A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Terms.--(1) Except as provided by paragraphs (2) and (3), members (including the member designated as chairman) shall be appointed for terms of 3 years.
Of the members first appointed-- (A) 1 appointed in consultation with the Speaker, 1 appointed in consultation with the majority leader of the Senate, and 1 appointed by the President shall be appointed for terms of 1 year; and (B) 1 appointed in consultation with the minority leader of the House of Representatives, 1 appointed in consultation with the minority leader of the Senate, and 1 appointed by the President shall be appointed for terms of 2 years.
Any member appointed to fill a vacancy occurring before the expiration of the term for which his predecessor was appointed shall be appointed only for the remainder of that term.
A member may serve after the expiration of his term until his successor has taken office.
No individual may serve on the Commission for more than 1 term.
Meetings.--(1) Each meeting of the Commission, other than meetings in which classified information is to be discussed, shall be open to the public.
All the proceedings, information, and deliberations of the Commission shall be open, upon request, to the chairman and ranking minority party member of the Committee on the Budget of each House of Congress.
Pay and Travel Expenses.--(1)(A) Each member, other than the Chairman, shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
The Chairman shall be paid for each day referred to in subparagraph (A) at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay payable for level III of the Executive Schedule under section 5314 of title 5, United States Code.
Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director of Staff.--(1) The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a Director who has not served as a Federal employee during the one-year period preceding the date of such appointment.
The Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--(1) Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Director, with the approval of the Commission, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except that an individual so appointed may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for a position above GS-15 of the General Schedule.
Not more than one-third of the personnel employed by or detailed to the Commission may be on detail from any Government agency or from the legislative branch.
Upon request of the Chairman, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Consultants and Property.--(1) The Commission may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
The Commission may lease space and acquire personal property to the extent funds are available.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated $3,000,000 to the Commission for fiscal year 1995 and for each subsequent fiscal year to carry out its duties under this Act.
Upon confirmation of all Commissioners, each cabinet level department shall transfer from its administrative expenses account necessary funding to the Commission on a pro rata basis based on that department's funding percentage of the total executive branch budget.
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the thirtieth calendar day beginning after the President notifies the Commission, in writing, that the budget has been in balance (or in surplus) for two consecutive fiscal years, unless, as a part of that notificiation, the President states that for budgetary reasons he has determined that the Commission shall not so terminate.
PROCEDURE FOR MAKING RECOMMENDATION FOR PROPOSED CUTS.
Review and Recommendations by the Commission.--(1) Before May 15 of each calendar year, the Commission shall examine and review all mandatory spending programs, and conduct public hearings, to determine appropriate methods for limiting the growth of these programs to 103 percent of aggregate spending for mandatory programs for the preceding fiscal year.
The Commission shall request recommendations for mandatory spending reductions from the heads of executive departments and agencies, chairmen of congressional committees, the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, the Director of the Office of Management and Budget, the Director of the General Accounting Office, and any other persons who may be of assistance.
These heads shall also provide to the Commission information respecting programs within their jurisdiction.
The Commission may also consider unsolicited comments.
Individuals named in paragraph (2) shall endeavor to promptly comply with requests made to them by the Commission under that paragraph.
The Commission shall, by May 15th, transmit to the President a report containing the Commission's findings and conclusions based on a review and analysis of the recommendations.
Review by the President.--The President shall, by June 1st, transmit to the Commission a report containing the President's comments and suggestions respecting the Commission's recommendations.
Final Recommendations.--After reviewing the comments and suggestions of the President, the Commission shall transmit, by June 15th, a report of its final recommendations to the Congress and to the public.
This report shall take into account any net reduction in spending for mandatory programs set forth in the concurrent resolution on the budget (as agreed to) for the fiscal year covered by the report.
If that concurrent resolution is in compliance with the growth limitation provision for that fiscal year as set forth in subsection (a)(1), then the report of the Commission shall recommend no congressional action respecting that fiscal year.
Growth Limitation.--All reports described in this section shall be in full compliance with the growth limitation provision of subsection (a)(1).
Criteria for Recommendations.--All reports described in this section shall set forth the criteria upon which its recommendations are based.
CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF COMMISSION'S REPORT.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- (1) the term ``implementing bill'' means only a bill which is introduced as provided under subsection (b), and contains the proposed legislative recommendations contained in the final report submitted to the Congress under section 4(e) without modification; and (2) the term ``session day'' means a day that either the Senate or the House of Representatives is in session.
Introduction.--On the fifth calendar day beginning after the date on which a final report is submitted to the Congress under section 4(e), an implementing bill shall be introduced-- (1) in the Senate by the majority leader for himself and the minority leader; and (2) in the House of Representatives by the majority leader for himself and the minority leader.
Discharge.--If the committee to which an implementing bill is referred has not reported that bill within one month, that committee shall be immediately discharged from further consideration of such bill, and such bill shall be placed on the appropriate calendar of the House involved.
Consideration.--(1)(A) On or after the first day after the date on which the committee to which an implementing bill is referred has reported, or has been discharged (under subsection (c)) from further consideration of, such a bill, it is in order (even though a previous motion to the same effect has been disagreed to) for any member of the House of Representatives or the Senate, respectively, to move to proceed to the consideration of the bill (but only the day after the calendar day on which the member announces to the House concerned the member's intention to do so).
All points of order against an implementing bill (and against consideration of that bill) are waived except the point of order set forth in subsection (g).
(i) A motion to proceed to the consideration of an implementing bill is highly privileged in the House of Representatives and is privileged in the Senate and is not debatable.
A motion described in clause (i) is not subject to amendment, to a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, or to a motion to table.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which a motion described in clause (i) is agreed to or not agreed to shall not be in order.
If a motion described in clause (i) is agreed to, the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, shall immediately proceed to consideration of the bill without intervening motion, order, or other business, and the bill shall remain the unfinished business of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, until disposed of.
(A) Debate on an implementing bill and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection therewith shall be limited to not more than 4 hours in the House of Representatives and 10 hours in the Senate, which shall be divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill.
An amendment to an implementing bill is not in order.
This provision is not subject to a motion to suspend, nor can a unanimous consent agreement wave this section.
A motion further to limit debate on an implementing bill is in order and not debatable.
A motion to postpone consideration of an implementing bill, a motion to proceed to the consideration of other business, a motion to table, or a motion to recommit the bill is not in order.
A motion to reconsider the vote by which an implementing bill is agreed to or not agreed to is not in order.
Immediately following the conclusion of the debate on an implementing bill and a single quorum call at the conclusion of the debate if requested in accordance with the rules of the House of Representatives or the Senate, as the case may be, the vote on final passage of the bill shall occur.
Appeals from the decisions of the Chair relating to the application of the rules of the House of Representatives or of the Senate, as the case may be, to the procedure relating to an implementing bill shall be decided without debate.
Consideration by Other House.--(1) If, before the passage by one House of an implementing bill that was introduced in that House, that House receives from the other House an implementing bill-- (A) the bill of the other House shall not be referred to a committee and may not be considered in the House that receives it otherwise than on final passage under subparagraph (B)(ii); and (B)(i) the procedure in the House that receives such a bill with respect to such a bill that was introduced in that House shall be the same as if no bill had been received from the other House; but (ii) the vote on final passage shall be on the bill of the other House.
Upon disposition of an implementing bill that is received by one House from the other House, it shall no longer be in order to consider such a bill that was introduced in the receiving House.
Date Certain.--If the Senate and the House of Representatives have not acted upon the implementing bill by July 20th, then on that day or the next day of session thereafter the bill shall be called up by the Presiding Officer of each House upon convening and a roll call vote shall be conducted on passage, but after that House of Congress has debated the bill pursuant to the provisions of subsections (d)(2)(A) and (C).
If the bill passes one House, the bill shall be transmitted on the same legislative day to the other House and that House shall vote on passage of that bill on its next session day.
Point of Order.--It shall not be in order in the House of Representatives or the Senate to consider any implementing bill that is not in full compliance with the growth limitation provision of section 4(a)(1) or that contains any provision that increases taxes.
Rules of the Senate and House of Representatives.--This section is enacted by Congress-- (1) as an exercise of the rulemaking power of the Senate and House of Representatives, respectively, and is deemed to be part of the rules of each House, respectively, but applicable only with respect to the procedure to be followed in that House in the case of an implementing bill, and it supersedes other rules only to the extent that it is inconsistent with such rules; and (2) with full recognition of the constitutional right of either House to change the rules (so far as they relate to the procedure of that House) at any time, in the same manner, and to the same extent as in the case of any other rule of that House.
BUDGET OUTLAY REDUCTIONS PERMANENT.
All obligational authority reduced pursuant to this Act shall be done in a manner that shall make such reductions permanent.
No reductions in direct spending pursuant to this Act shall be treated as a net deficit decrease for purposes of section 252 of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
COMPLIANCE REPORT BY COMPTROLLER GENERAL.
Within 15 days after the end of a session of Congress, the Comptroller General shall submit to the Congress and the President a report stating whether the requirements of this Act have been complied with and indicating the respects (if any) in which they have not.
Definition.--(1) As used in this Act, the term ``direct spending'' has the meaning given to that term by section 250(c) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985.
As used in this Act, the term ``mandatory spending'' has the meaning given to ``direct spending'' by section 250(c) of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985, except that, for purposes of this Act only, it includes social security and excludes net interest and deposit insurance.
Scorekeeping.--The Congressional Budget Office shall prepare all necessary estimates to carry out this Act in conformance with its scorekeeping guidelines.