This Act may be cited as the ``Small Business Pollution Prevention Opportunity Act of 2001''.
CREDIT FOR DRY OR WET CLEANING EQUIPMENT USING NONHAZARDOUS PRIMARY PROCESS SOLVENTS.
In General.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amount of credit) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following paragraph: ``(4) the dry or wet cleaning equipment credit.''.
Dry or Wet Cleaning Equipment Credit.--Section 48 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to energy credit; reforestation credit) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(c) Dry or Wet Cleaning Equipment Using Nonhazardous Primary Process Solvents.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 46, the dry or wet cleaning equipment credit for any taxable year is 20 percent of the basis of each qualified dry or wet cleaning property placed in service during the taxable year (40 percent of such basis in the case of such property placed in service in an empowerment zone, enterprise community, or renewal community).
Limitation.--The credit under this subsection for the taxable year shall apply to qualified dry or wet cleaning property placed in service during such year at each business premise of the taxpayer.
Qualified dry or wet cleaning property.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified dry or wet cleaning property' means equipment designed primarily to clean textiles by professionals using special technology, detergents and additives to minimize potential for adverse effects, or appropriately dry or apply restorative finishing procedures to such textiles if-- ``(A) such equipment does not use any hazardous solvent as the primary process solvent, ``(B) the original use of such property commences with the taxpayer, and ``(C) with respect to which depreciation (or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable.
Primary process solvent.--For purposes of paragraph (3), the term `primary process solvent' means the primary liquid in which clothing, other fabric, and sensitive textiles are cleaned or which is used to appropriately dry or apply restorative finishing procedures to textiles, cleaned, excluding detergent formulations.
Hazardous solvent.--For purposes of paragraph (3), the term `hazardous solvent' means any solvent any portion of which consists of a chlorinated solvent, a volatile organic compound, or any other hazardous regulated substance, or which contains any substance determined by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Director of the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, the Director of the International Agency for Research on Cancer, the Director of the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences' National Toxicology Program, or the director of any other appropriate Federal agency to possess-- ``(A) carcinogenic potential in humans, or ``(B) bioaccumulative properties.''.
Credit Allowed Against Regular and Minimum Tax.-- (1) In general.--Section 38(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to limitation based on amount of tax) is amended by redesignating paragraph (3) as paragraph (4) and by inserting after paragraph (2) the following: ``(3) Special rules for dry or wet cleaning equipment credit.-- ``(A) In general.--In the case of the dry or wet cleaning equipment credit-- ``(i) this section and section 39 shall be applied separately with respect to the credit, and ``(ii) in applying paragraph (1) to the credit-- ``(I) subparagraph (A) thereof shall not apply, and ``(II) the limitation under paragraph (1) (as modified by subclause (I)) shall be reduced by the credit allowed under subsection (a) for the taxable year (other than the dry or wet cleaning equipment credit).
Dry or wet cleaning equipment credit.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `dry or wet cleaning equipment credit' means the credit allowable under subsection (a) by reason of section 46(4).''.
Conforming amendment.--Subclause (II) of section 38(c)(2)(A)(ii) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or the dry or wet cleaning equipment credit'' after ``employment credit''.
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The section heading for section 48 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
ENERGY CREDIT; REFORESTATION CREDIT; DRY OR WET CLEANING EQUIPMENT CREDIT.''.
The item relating to section 48 in the table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``Sec.
Energy credit; reforestation credit; dry or wet cleaning equipment credit.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to property placed in service on or after January 1, 2001.