This Act may be cited as the ``Justice for the Victims of Pan Am 103 Act of 2001''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) 270 people, including 189 Americans, were killed in the terrorist bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland on December 21, 1988; (2) On January 31, 2001 the three judges of the Scottish court meeting in the Netherlands to try the two Libyan suspects in the bombing of Pan Am 103 found that ``the conception, planning and execution of the plot which led to the planting of the explosive device was of Libyan origin''; (3) The Court found conclusively that Abdel Basset Ali Megrahi ``caused an explosive device to detonate on board Pan Am 103'' and sentenced him to a life term in prison; (4) The Court accepted the evidence that Abdel Basset Ali Megrahi was a member of the Jamahiriyah Security Organization, one of the main Libyan intelligence services; (5) United Nations Security Council Resolutions 731 and 748 of 1992 applied economic sanctions against Libya until Libya extradited the Pan Am 103 suspects and cooperated with the court, and, although the United Nations has suspended the sanctions, the Secretary-General's report of June 30, 1999, which stated that Libya was cooperating with the court did not recommend permanently dropping the sanctions.
The United Nations Security Council has required Libya to pay compensation to the families of the victims of Pan Am 103 if the suspects are found guilty, and end support for international terrorism before multilateral sanctions can be permanently lifted; SEC.
In this Act: (1) Government of libya.--The term ``Government of Libya'' includes any agency or instrumentality of the Government of Libya.
United states assistance.--The term ``United States assistance'' means-- (A) any assistance under the Foreign Assistance Act of 1961 (including programs under title IV of chapter 2, relating to the Overseas Private Investment Corporation); (B) sales, or financing on any terms, under the Arms Export Control Act; (C) the provision of agricultural commodities under the Agricultural Trade Development and Assistance Act of 1954; and (D) financing under the Export-Import Bank Act of 1945.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) the Government of Libya and its leader, Moammar Gaddafi, should be condemned, in the strongest possible terms, for support of international terrorism, including the bombing of Pan Am 103; (2) the Government of Libya should immediately make a full and complete public accounting of and apology for the bombing of Pan Am 103 and provide adequate and due compensation to the families of the victims of Pan Am 103; (3) the President, Secretary of State, and other United States Government officials should encourage other countries to maintain international sanctions against Libya until Libya provides a full and complete public accounting and apology and accepted public responsibility for the bombing of Pan Am 103, pays compensation to the families of the victims of Pan Am 103, and ends support for international terrorism; (4) the President should instruct the United States Permanent Representative to the United Nations to encourage the members of the United Nations Security Council to maintain United Nations sanctions against Libya until Libya provides a full and complete public accounting and apology and accepted public responsibility for the bombing of Pan Am 103, pays compensation to the families of the victims of Pan Am 103, and ends support for international terrorism, and to oppose any efforts to lift United Nations sanctions until these conditions are met; and (5) the President should consult fully with Congress in considering policy toward Libya.
POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES TOWARD LIBYA.
In General.--It shall be the policy of the United States to oppose the removal of United Nations sanctions, United States sanctions (including sanctions imposed pursuant to the authorities of law specified in subsection (b)), the travel ban, and all other United States restrictions on Libya until the conditions specified in section 7 have been satisfied.
Covered Sanctions.--The authorities of law specified in this subsection are the following: (1) The International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1981 (Public Law 97-113).
The International Security and Development Cooperation Act of 1985 (Public Law 99-83).
The Foreign Operations, Export Financing, and Related Programs Appropriations Act, 1994 (Public Law 103-87).
The Iran and Libya Sanctions Act of 1996 (Public Law 104-172).
PROHIBITION ON UNITED STATES ASSISTANCE FOR LIBYA.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, United States assistance shall not be provided to the Government of Libya until the President determines and certifies to the Committee on Foreign Relations of the Senate and the Committee on International Relations of the House of Representatives that the conditions specified in section 7 have been satisfied.
The conditions specified in this section are the following: (1) All cases of United States nationals who were victims of Libyan terrorism have been resolved.
The Government of Libya has provided compensation to the families of the victims of Pan Am 103.
The Government of Libya has provided a full and complete public accounting and apology and accepted public responsibility for the bombing.
The Government of Libya has taken real and concrete steps to end support for international terrorism.