This Act may be cited as the ``Desalinization Research and Development Act of 1994''.
In view of the increasing shortage of usable surface and ground water in many parts of the United States and the world, it is the policy of the United States to perform research to develop low-cost alternatives in the desalinization and reuse of saline or biologically impaired water to provide water of a quality suitable for environmental enhancement, agricultural, industrial, municipal, and other beneficial consumptive or nonconsumptive uses, and to provide, through cooperative activities with local sponsors, desalinization and water reuse processes or facilities which provide proof-of-concept demonstrations of advanced technologies for the purpose of developing and conserving the water resources of this Nation and the world.
As used in this Act-- (1) the term ``desalinization'' means the use of any process or technique for the removal and, when feasible, adaptation to beneficial use, of organic and inorganic elements and compounds from saline or biologically impaired waters, by itself or in conjunction with other processes; (2) the term ``saline water'' means sea water, brackish water, and other mineralized or chemically impaired water; (3) the term ``United States'' means the States of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and the territories and possessions of the United States; (4) the term ``usable water'' means water of a high quality suitable for environmental enhancement, agricultural, industrial, municipal, and other beneficial consumptive or nonconsumptive uses; and (5) the term ``sponsor'' means any local, State, or interstate agency responsible for the sale and delivery of usable water that has the legal and financial authority and capability to provide the financial and real property requirements needed for a desalinization facility.
RESPONSIBILITY FOR THE PROGRAM.
Research and Development.--The Secretary of the Interior shall have primary program management and oversight for conduct of the research and development under this Act and shall coordinate these activities with the Secretary of the Army.
Desalinization Development Program.--The Secretary of the Interior shall jointly execute the Desalinization Development Program established under section 6 with the Secretary of the Army.
In General.--In order to gain basic knowledge concerning the most efficient means by which usable water can be produced from saline water, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Army shall conduct a basic research and development program as established by this Act.
Contents of Program.--For the basic research and development program, the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Army shall-- (1) conduct, encourage, and promote fundamental scientific research and basic studies to develop the best and most economical processes and methods for converting saline water into usable water through research grants and contracts-- (A) to conduct research and technical development work, (B) to make studies in order to ascertain the optimum mix of investment and operating costs, (C) to determine the best designs for different conditions of operation, and (D) to investigate increasing the economic efficiency of desalinization processes by using them as dual-purpose co-facilities with other processes involving the use of water; (2) engage, by competitive or noncompetitive contract or any other means, necessary personnel, industrial or engineering firms, Federal laboratories and other facilities, and educational institutions suitable to conduct research or other work; (3) study methods for the recovery of byproducts resulting from the desalinization of water to offset the costs of treatment and to reduce the environmental impact from those byproducts; and (4) prepare a management plan for conduct of the research and development program established under this section.
Program Responsibility.--The Secretary of the Interior shall have program responsibility for the Desalinization Development Program established under this section (referred to in this section as the ``Desalinization Development Program'').
Design and Construction.--The Secretary of the Army and the Secretary of the Interior both shall have authority to design and construct facilities under the Desalinization Development Program.
Selection of Desalinization Development Facilities.--Candidate facilities shall be submitted by the sponsor directly to the Secretary of the Army or the Secretary of the Interior.
Sponsors shall submit their application for the design and construction of a facility and certification that they can provide the required cost sharing.
Facilities shall be selected subject to availability of Federal funds.
Cost Sharing.-- (1) Initial cost.--The initial cost of a facility shall include-- (A) design cost, (B) construction cost, (C) lands, easements, and rights-of-way costs, and (D) relocation costs.
General rule.--The sponsor for a facility under the Desalinization Development Program shall pay, during construction, at least 25 percent of the initial cost of the facility, including providing all lands, easements, and rights- of-way and performing all related necessary relocations.
25-percent minimum contribution.--If the value of the contributions required under paragraph (2) of this subsection is less than 25 percent of the initial cost of the facility, the sponsor shall pay during construction of the facility such additional amounts as are necessary so that the total contribution of the sponsor is equal to 25 percent of the initial cost of the facility.
50-percent maximum.--The sponsor share under paragraph (2) shall not exceed 50 percent of the initial cost of the facility.
Maximum Initial Cost.--The initial cost of a facility under subsection (d)(1) may not exceed $10,000,000.
Operation and Maintenance.--Operation, maintenance, repair, and rehabilitation of facilities shall be the responsibility of the sponsor.
Revenue.--All revenue generated from the sale of usable water from the facilities shall be retained by the sponsors.
PARTICIPATION BY INTERESTED AGENCIES AND OTHER PERSONS.
Coordination With Other Agencies.-- (1) In general.--Research and development activities undertaken by the Secretary of the Interior under this Act shall be coordinated or conducted jointly, as appropriate-- (A) with the Department of Commerce, specifically with respect to marketing and international competition, and (B) with-- (i) the Departments of Defense, Agriculture, State, Health and Human Services, and Energy, (ii) the Environmental Protection Agency, (iii) the Agency for International Development, and (iv) other concerned Government and private entities.
Other agencies.--Other interested agencies may furnish appropriate resources to the Secretary of the Interior to further the activities in which they are interested.
Availability of Research.--All research sponsored or funded under authority of this Act shall be provided in such manner that information, products, processes, and other developments resulting from Federal expenditures or authorities shall (with exceptions necessary for national defense and the protection of patent rights) be available to the general public consistent with this Act.
Relationship to Antitrust Laws.--Section 10 of the Federal Nonnuclear Energy Research and Development Act of 1974 (42 United States Code 5909) shall apply to the activities of individuals, corporations, and other business organizations in connection with grants and contracts made by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to this Act.
TECHNICAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE ASSISTANCE.
The Secretary of the Interior is authorized to accept technical and administrative assistance from a State, public, or private agency in connection with research and development activities relating to desalinization of water and may enter into contracts or agreements stating the purpose for which the assistance is contributed and, in appropriate circumstances, providing for the sharing of costs between the Secretary of the Interior and such agency.
In carrying out this Act, the Secretary of the Interior or the Secretary of the Army, as appropriate, may-- (1) make grants to educational and scientific institutions; (2) contract with educational and scientific institutions and engineering and industrial firms; (3) engage, by competition or noncompetitive contract or any other means, necessary personnel, industrial and engineering firms and educational institutions; (4) use the facilities and personnel of Federal, State, municipal, and private scientific laboratories; (5) contract for or establish and operate facilities and tests to conduct research, testing, and development necessary for the purposes of this Act; (6) acquire processes, data, inventions, patent applications, patents, licenses, lands, interests in lands and water, facilities, and other property by purchase, license, lease, or donation; (7) assemble and maintain domestic and foreign scientific literature and issue pertinent bibliographical data; (8) conduct inspections and evaluations of domestic and foreign facilities and cooperate and participate in their development; (9) conduct and participate in regional, national, and international conferences relating to the desalinization of water; (10) coordinate, correlate, and publish information which will advance the development of the desalinization of water; and (11) cooperate with Federal, State, and municipal departments, agencies and instrumentalities, and with private persons, firms, educational institutions, and other organizations, including foreign governments, departments, agencies, companies, and instrumentalities, in effectuating the purposes of this Act.
Establishment.--The President shall instruct the Agency for International Development to sponsor an international desalinization conference within twelve months following the date of the enactment of this Act.
Participants in such conference should include scientists, private industry experts, desalinization experts and operators, government officials from the nations that use and conduct research on desalinization, and those from nations that could benefit from low-cost desalinization technology, particularly in the developing world, and international financial institutions.
Purpose.--The conference established in subsection (a) shall explore promising new technologies and methods to make affordable desalinization a reality in the near term, and shall further propose a research agenda and a plan of action to guide longer-term development of practical desalinization applications.
Funding.--Funding for the international desalinization conference may come from operating or program funds of the Agency for International Development.
The Agency for International Development shall encourage financial and other support from other nations, including those that have desalinization technology and those that might benefit from it.
Prior to the expiration of the twelve-month period following the date of enactment of this Act, and each twelve-month period thereafter, the Secretary of the Interior, in consultation with the Secretary of the Army, shall prepare a report to the President and Congress concerning the administration of this Act.
Such report shall include the actions taken by the Secretary of the Interior and the Secretary of the Army during the calendar year preceding the calendar year in which such report is filed, and shall include actions planned for the next following calendar year.
Research and Development.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 5 $5,000,000 for fiscal year 1995, $10,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, and such sums as may be necessary for each of fiscal years 1997 through 1999.
Desalinization Development Program.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out section 6 such sums as may be necessary, up to a total of $50,000,000, for fiscal years 1995 through 1999.
Funds made available under this subsection shall be made available in equal amounts to the Department of the Interior and the civil works program of the Army Corps of Engineers.
Passed the Senate August 4 (legislative day, July 20), 1994.
Attest: MARTHA S. POPE, Secretary.