This Act may be cited as the ``Rural America Health Care Improvement Act''.
TITLE I--PROVISIONS RELATING TO PUBLIC HEALTH SERVICE ACT SEC.
ADMINISTRATOR OF PROGRAMS; FUNDING.
Administrator.--For purposes of this title, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Health and Human Services.
Funding.--The authorizations of appropriations established in this title are in addition to any other authorizations of appropriations that are available for the purposes of this title.
NATIONAL HEALTH SERVICE CORPS.
Additional Funding; General Corps Program; Allocation for Certain Nonphysician Health Professionals.--For the purpose of carrying out subpart II of part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act, and for the purpose of carrying out subsection (b), there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $200,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
Allocation for Participation of Certain Nonphysician Health Professionals in Scholarship and Loan Repayment Programs.-- (1) In general.--Of the amounts appropriated under this section, the Secretary shall reserve such amounts as may be necessary to ensure that, of the number of individuals who are participants in the Scholarship Program under section 338A of the Public Health Service Act, or in the Loan Repayment Program under section 338B of such Act, the total number who are being educated as health professionals specified in paragraph (2), or are serving as such professionals, respectively, is increased to 20 percent.
Relevant professions.--The health professionals referred to in paragraph (1) are nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, and registered nurses, and physician assistants.
DEVELOPMENT OF COMMUNITY-OPERATED HEALTH PLANS IN RURAL AND FRONTIER AREAS.
Community-Operated Health Plans.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private entities for the purpose of carrying out projects to develop health plans to provide services exclusively in rural and frontier areas.
Requirements for health plans.--For purposes of this section, the term ``health plan'' means a community-rated plan or an experience-rated plan.
Community Involvement.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved meets the following conditions: (1) In developing the proposal of the applicant for a project under such subsection, the applicant has consulted with the local governments of the geographic area to be served by the health plan developed through the project, with individuals who reside in the area, and with a reasonable number and variety of health professionals who provide services in the area.
The applicant agrees that the principal legal authority over the operation of the health plan will be vested in individuals who reside in such geographic area.
In the proposal the applicant specifies how a full continuum of services will be provided.
In the proposal the applicant specifies how the proposed health plan will utilize existing health care facilities in a manner that avoids unnecessary duplication.
Use of Funds.-- (1) In general.--Funds made available under this section may be used for the following: (A) To develop integrated health networks, utilizing existing local providers and facilities where appropriate, with community involvement.
For information systems, including telecommunications.
Limitations.--Funds made available under this section shall not be used for the following: (A) For a telecommunications system, unless the system is coordinated with, and does not duplicate, such a system existing in the area.
For paying off existing debt.
Funding.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
PRIMARY HEALTH CARE FOR MEDICALLY UNDERSERVED RURAL COMMUNITIES; INCREASED CAPACITY OF HOSPITALS AND OUTPATIENT FACILITIES.
In General.--The Secretary may make grants to public and nonprofit private hospitals in medically underserved rural communities, and to public and nonprofit private outpatient facilities in such communities, for the purpose of carrying out projects to develop or increase the capacity of the hospitals and facilities to provide primary health services.
Medically Underserved Rural Community.--For purposes of this section, the term ``medically underserved rural community'' means-- (1) a rural area that has a substantial number of individuals who are members of a medically underserved population, as defined in section 330 of the Public Health Service Act; or (2) a rural area a significant portion of which is a health professional shortage area designated under section 332 of such Act.
Certain Expenditures.-- (1) In general.--The purposes for which the Secretary may authorize a grant under subsection (a) to be expended include the renovation of facilities, the purchase of equipment, and the recruitment and retention of personnel.
Certain facilities.--The purposes for which the Secretary may authorize a grant under subsection (a) to be expended include-- (A) the development of rural emergency medical care hospitals; and (B) the development of nurse-managaged health centers for the provision of primary health care services in rural areas and for coordinating with health care providers and networks.
Definitions.-- (1) Rural emergency medical care hospitals.--For purposes of this section, a rural emergency medical care hospital is a facility with the following characteristics: (A) It is a hospital that is in danger of closing due to low inpatient utilization rates and operating losses.
The closure of the facility would limit the access of individuals residing in the facility's service area to emergency services.
The facility has entered into (or intends to enter into) an agreement with another hospital that will accept the transfer of patients.
A physician is available on-call to provide emergency medical services on a 24-hour-a-day basis.
The facility must have a practitioner who is qualified to provide advanced cardiac life support services (as determined by the State in which the facility is located) on-site at the facility on a 24- hour-a-day basis.
The facility meets such staffing requirements as would apply under section 1861(e) of the Social Security Act, except that the facility need not meet hospital standards relating to the number of hours during a day, or days during a week, in which the facility must be open, but must provide emergency care on a 24-hour-a-day basis.
Nurse-managed health centers.--For purposes of this section, the term ``nurse-managed health center'' means a health center meeting the following conditions (to the extent in accordance with applicable law): The services of the center are primary health services; the principal providers of such services through the center are nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, and clinical nurse specialists; the principal managers of the center are professional nurses; and the procedures of the center provide patients with direct access to nurse practitioners, certified nurse midwives, or clinical nurse specialists.
Funding.-- (1) Hospitals.--For the purpose of making grants to hospitals under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
Outpatient facilities.--For the purpose of making grants to outpatient facilities under subsection (a), there are authorized to be appropriated $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1996, $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and $50,000,000 for fiscal year 1998.
TRAINING OF RURAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS OTHER THAN PHYSICIANS.
Funding for Programs Under Public Health Service Act.--With respect to programs of title VII or VIII of the Public Health Service Act that provide for the training of individuals as health professionals other than physicians, there are authorized to be appropriated for the purpose of carrying out such programs, through entities described in subsection (b), $50,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1996 through 1998.
Eligibility.--With respect to a program referred to in subsection (a), an entity described in this subsection is an entity-- (1) that is eligible to receive grants or contracts under the program (as provided in the applicable provisions of title VII or VIII of the Public Health Service Act); and (2) a substantial number of whose designated graduates are providing health services in a rural area.
Definition of Designated Graduate.--For purposes of this section, the term ``designated graduate'', with respect to an entity, means an individual completing the training involved during the 5-year period preceding the fiscal year for which the entity is applying to receive a grant or contract under the applicable program referred to in subsection (a).
Certain Programs.--Programs carried out under subsection (a) shall include programs for nurse practitioners, physician assistants, and nurse midwives.
TITLE II--PROVISIONS RELATING TO MEDICARE SEC.
MEDICARE INCENTIVES FOR PHYSICIANS TO PROVIDE PRIMARY CARE.
Underserved Area Bonus Payments; Increase in Amount of Payment for Primary Care Services.--Section 1833(m) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395l(m)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``10 percent'' and inserting ``a percent'', (2) by striking ``service'' the last place it appears and inserting ``services'', and (3) by adding the following new sentence: ``The percent referred to in the previous sentence is 20 percent in the case of primary care services, as defined in section 1842(i)(4), and 10 percent for services other than primary care services furnished in health professional shortage areas located in rural areas as defined in section 1886(d)(2)(D).''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by subsection (a) are effective for services furnished on or after January 1, 1996.
TITLE III--TAX INCENTIVES FOR HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS SEC.
NONREFUNDABLE CREDIT FOR CERTAIN PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 22 the following new section: ``SEC.
PRIMARY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDERS.
Allowance of Credit.--There shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the product of-- ``(1) the number of months during such taxable year-- ``(A) during which the taxpayer is a qualified primary health services provider, and ``(B) which are within the taxpayer's mandatory service period, and ``(2) $1,000 ($500 in the case of a qualified practitioner who is not a physician).
Qualified Primary Health Services Provider.--For purposes of this section, the term `qualified primary health services provider' means, with respect to any month, any qualified practitioner who-- ``(1) has in effect a certification by the Bureau as a provider of primary health services and such certification is, when issued, for a health professional shortage area in which the qualified practitioner is commencing the providing of primary health services, ``(2) is providing primary health services full time in the health professional shortage area identified in such certification, and ``(3) has not received a scholarship under the National Health Service Corps Scholarship Program or any loan repayments under the National Health Service Corps Loan Repayment Program.
For purposes of paragraph (2), a provider shall be treated as providing services in a health professional shortage area when such area ceases to be such an area if it was such an area when the provider commenced providing services in the area.
Mandatory Service Period.--For purposes of this section, the term `mandatory service period' means the period of 60 consecutive calendar months beginning with the first month the taxpayer is a qualified primary health services provider.
A taxpayer shall not have more than 1 mandatory service period.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Bureau.--The term `Bureau' means the Bureau of Primary Health Care, Health Resources and Services Administration of the United States Public Health Service.
Qualified practitioner.--The term `qualified practitioner' means a physician, a physician assistant, a nurse practitioner, or a certified nurse-midwife.
Physician.--The term `physician' has the meaning given to such term by section 1861(r) of the Social Security Act.
Physician assistant; nurse practitioner.--The terms `physician assistant' and `nurse practitioner' have the meanings given to such terms by section 1861(aa)(5) of the Social Security Act.
Certified nurse-midwife.--The term `certified nurse- midwife' has the meaning given to such term by section 1861(gg)(2) of the Social Security Act.
Primary health services.--The term `primary health services' has the meaning given such term by section 330(b)(1) of the Public Health Service Act.
Health professional shortage area.--The term `health professional shortage area' has the meaning given such term by section 332(a)(1)(A) of the Public Health Service Act.
Recapture of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--If there is a recapture event during any taxable year, then-- ``(A) no credit shall be allowed under subsection (a) for such taxable year and any succeeding taxable year, and ``(B) the tax of the taxpayer under this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to the product of-- ``(i) the applicable percentage, and ``(ii) the aggregate unrecaptured credits allowed to such taxpayer under this section for all prior taxable years.
Applicable recapture percentage.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the applicable recapture percentage shall be determined from the following table: ``If the recapture The applicable recap- event occurs during: ture percentage is: Months 1-24.............. 100 Months 25-36............. 75 Months 37-48............. 50 Months 49-60............. 25 Months 61 and thereafter.
Timing.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), month 1 shall begin on the first day of the mandatory service period.
Recapture event defined.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `recapture event' means the failure of the taxpayer to be a qualified primary health services provider for any month during the taxpayer's mandatory service period.
Cessation of designation.--The cessation of the designation of any area as a health professional shortage area after the beginning of the mandatory service period for any taxpayer shall not constitute a recapture event.
Secretarial waiver.--The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Health and Human Services, may waive any recapture event caused by extraordinary circumstances.
No credits against tax; minimum tax.--Any increase in tax under this subsection shall not be treated as a tax imposed by this chapter for purposes of determining the amount of any credit under subpart A, B, or D of this part or for purposes of section 55.''
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 22 the following new item: ``Sec.
Primary health services providers.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1995.