This Act may be cited as the ``Country-of-Origin Meat Labeling Act of 1999''.
COUNTRY-OF-ORIGIN LABELING OF MEAT AND MEAT FOOD PRODUCTS.
Labeling Required.--The Federal Meat Inspection Act is amended by inserting after section 7 (21 United States Code 607) the following new section: ``SEC.
REQUIREMENTS RELATED TO COUNTRY-OF-ORIGIN LABELING.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) Livestock.--The term `livestock' means cattle, sheep, swine, goats, horses, mules, or other equines.
Domestic meat.--The term `domestic meat' means a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product derived entirely from domestic livestock.
Domestic livestock.--The term `domestic livestock' means livestock that satisfy all of the following: ``(A) The animal is born in the United States.
The animal is raised throughout its entire life in the United States.
The animal is slaughtered and otherwise processed in the United States.
Imported meat.--The term `imported meat' means a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product that does not satisfy the definition of domestic meat.
Imported livestock.--The term `imported livestock' means livestock that does not satisfy the definition of domestic livestock.
Ultimate purchaser.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `ultimate purchaser', with regard to a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product, means-- ``(i) a person who buys the item for consumption; ``(ii) a public or private institution that serves the item for consumption; or ``(iii) a restaurant or other food service establishment that serves the item for consumption.
Exception.--Other than as provided in clauses (ii) and (iii) of subparagraph (A), the term does not include a person who buys a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product for resale.
Country-of-Origin Label Required.-- ``(1) Purpose.--Country-of-origin labels are required under this section so that the ultimate purchasers of meat and meat food products in the United States are accurately informed of the country of origin of the livestock from which meat and meat food products are derived.
Initial use of livestock.--A packer or processor that uses livestock to produce a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product that is offered for sale, sold, or resold within the United States, either in its original form or in a further processed form, shall affix a label to the carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product that identifies the country or countries in which the livestock were born, raised, and slaughtered from which the carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product was derived.
Use of domestic meat or imported meat.--A packer or processor that uses domestic meat or imported meat to produce a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product that is offered for sale, sold, or resold within the United States, either in its original form or in a further processed form, shall affix a label to the carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product that identifies the country or countries in which the livestock were born, raised, and slaughtered from which the domestic meat or imported meat was derived.
Maintenance of Label.-- ``(1) In general.--A packer or processor referred to in subsection (b), and each subsequent re-seller of the carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product, shall be responsible for ensuring that the country-of-origin label is maintained throughout the chain of distribution until the carcass, carcass part, meat, or meat food product is sold to the ultimate purchaser.
Exceptions.--Institutions that serve meat or meat food products for consumption and restaurants and other food service establishments shall neither be required to, nor restricted from, notifying their customers of the country of origin of the meat or meat food products they serve.
Restriction on Use of United States Meat Label.--A carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product may not bear a label identifying the carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product as United States meat unless it consists entirely of domestic meat.
Treatment of Imported Meat and Imported Livestock.--In the case of imported meat, the country-of-origin label required by this section shall also identify the country or countries from which the livestock, carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product (as the case may be) was imported into the United States.
In the case of live imported livestock imported into the United States for slaughter, whether fed for a time in the United States and slaughtered or imported only for slaughter, the country-of-origin label shall also identify the country or countries from which the livestock were imported into the United States.
Treatment of Blended Products.--In the case of a blended meat or meat food product, the country-of-origin label required by this section shall list the country or countries of origin of the livestock from which the blended meat or meat food product was derived, in descending order of predominance therein.
Label Description and Placement.--In the case of a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product offered for sale to an ultimate purchaser, the country-of-origin label shall be placed on the carcass, part of the carcass, meat, or meat food product, or its immediate package or container, in such a location that the label is clearly visible to the ultimate purchaser.
The country-of-origin lettering shall be of a size at least equal to other lettering contained on the carcass, meat, or meat food product, or its immediate package or container.
Relation to Inspection Stamp.--An inspection stamp required under section 7 shall not be a substitute for the country-of-origin label, and shall not be represented by anyone as proof or certification of the country of origin of the livestock from which a carcass, part of a carcass, meat, or meat food product is derived.''.
Inclusion of Country-of-Origin Requirements in Definition of Misbranded.--Section 1(n) of the Federal Meat Inspection Act (21 United States Code 601(n)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``or'' at the end of paragraph (11); (2) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``; or''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) if it fails to bear a country-of-origin label as required by section 7A.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect 60 days after the date of enactment of this Act.