This Act may be cited as the ``State Transportation Financing Improvement Act of 1993''.
STATE TRANSPORTATION INVESTMENT LOAN FUNDS.
Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
State transportation investment loan funds ``(a) Establishment.-- ``(1) In general.--Subject to the requirements of this section and notwithstanding any other provision of law, a State may establish a transportation revolving loan fund (referred to in this section as a `transportation investment loan fund') for making loans and providing other assistance to public or private entities constructing or proposing to construct projects or programs that are eligible to receive assistance under section 133(b) (referred to in this section as a `qualifying project').
Determination of deposit and spend-out rates.--For each fiscal year, not later than 90 days after the date of enactment of an appropriations Act that funds the majority of programs of the Department of Transportation for the fiscal year, the Secretary, in consultation with the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and the Director of the Congressional Budget Office, in accordance with recognized scorekeeping conventions, shall establish a schedule for deposits and payments made by or on behalf of a State with respect to a transportation investment loan fund established pursuant to paragraph (1) to meet the obligations of the State referred to in paragraph (3).
Obligations and deposits.--A State may obligate for deposit in a transportation investment loan fund, from funds apportioned or allocated to the State under sections 104(b)(3) and 157, an amount not to exceed the sum of-- ``(A) the discretionary 37.5 percent of the remaining 80 percent of the surface transportation program funds apportioned to the State under section 104(b)(3), as described in the matter following clause (ii) of section 133(d)(3)(A); and ``(B) the difference between the amount allocated to the State pursuant to section 157(a)(4) and the amount that is obligated to urbanized areas of the State pursuant to section 133(d)(3).
Treatment of deposits.--Any amounts deposited by a State pursuant to paragraph (3) shall be considered an expenditure by the State.
Applicability of cash management requirements.-- Sections 3335 and 6503 of title 31, United States Code, shall not apply to this section.
State Matching Requirement.-- ``(1) Additional deposit from non-federal sources.--At the same time as a State deposits funds under subsection (a) into a transportation investment loan fund, the State shall deposit into the transportation investment loan fund from non-Federal sources an additional amount of State matching funds equal to-- ``(A) the sum of-- ``(i) the amount deposited pursuant to subsection (a); and ``(ii) an amount equal to the proportional non-Federal share that the State would otherwise pay on the basis of the amount, determined in accordance with section 120(b); multiplied by ``(B) the percentage amount of the non-Federal share for the State for a project carried out by the State, determined in accordance with section 120(b).
Investment income.--All investment income earned on amounts deposited into the transportation investment loan fund shall be-- ``(A) credited to the transportation investment loan fund; and ``(B) available for use in providing loans and other assistance from the transportation investment loan fund.
Loans and Other Assistance.-- ``(1) General authority.--From the amounts deposited into a transportation investment loan fund established by a State under this section, a State may loan to a public or private entity an amount equal to all or part of the cost of constructing a qualifying project, or provide other assistance with respect to a qualifying project.
Compliance with the federal transit act, federal environmental laws, and other requirements.--As a condition of receiving a loan or other assistance under this section, the public or private entity that receives the loan or other assistance shall comply with the requirements of this title and any other applicable Federal law (including any applicable provision of the Federal Transit Act (49 United States Code App.
or a Federal environmental law).
Subordination of debt.--The amount of a loan or other assistance (if applicable) received for a qualifying project under this subsection may be subordinated to any other debt financing for the project or program, except that amount of the loan or other assistance may not be subordinated to any other loan made by a State or any other public entity to the entity that receives the loan or other assistance.
Repayment.--The repayment of a loan or other assistance (if applicable) made pursuant to this subsection shall commence not later than 5 years after the qualifying project that is the subject of the loan or other assistance has opened to traffic.
Term of loan.--The term of a loan made pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed 30 years from the date of obligation of the loan.
Interest.--A loan made pursuant to this subsection shall bear interest at a rate at or below market interest rates, as determined by the State to make the qualifying project that is the subject of the loan feasible.
Reuse of funds.--The repayment of a loan or other assistance (if applicable) provided pursuant to this subsection may be credited to the transportation investment loan fund or obligated for any purpose for which the funds were available.
Procedures and guidelines.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish procedures and guidelines for establishing, operating, and making loans and providing other assistance from a transportation investment loan fund.
Definition of Other Assistance.--As used in this section, the term `other assistance' includes any use of funds-- ``(1) to refinance outstanding debt used to finance a qualifying project if the State certifies that any savings that result from the refinancing shall be used to carry out the purposes of this title; ``(2) to guarantee or purchase insurance or other forms of enhancement for borrower debt in order to improve credit market access or to subsidize interest rates; and ``(3) to provide a loan guarantee for a loan made from the transportation investment loan fund.
Other Uses of the Transportation Investment Loan Fund.-- ``(1) Source of revenue or security for bonds.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of this section, a State may use funds from the transportation investment loan fund of the State as security for bonds and notes issued to provide capital in addition to the capital referred to in subsection (a)(2) for the transportation investment loan fund.
Administrative costs.--For each fiscal year, a State may use an amount not to exceed 2 percent of the Federal funds deposited by the State into the transportation investment loan fund of the State to provide for the reasonable costs of administering the transportation investment loan fund.''.
LOANS OF FEDERAL FUNDS FOR THE CONSTRUCTION OF NONTOLL FACILITIES.
Chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, as amended by section 2, is further amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Loans of Federal funds for the construction of nontoll facilities ``(a) In General.-- ``(1) Loans.--A State may loan an amount equal to all or part of the Federal share of a project or program to a public or private entity constructing or proposing to construct a nontoll facility if the repayment of the loan by the public or private entity will be made from a dedicated revenue source, including any excise tax, sales tax, motor vehicle use fees, tax on real property, tax increment financing, or other dedicated revenue sources.
Definition of qualifying project.--As used in this section, the term `qualifying project' means a project that meets the requirements of paragraph (1).
Compliance with the Federal Transit Act, Federal Environmental Laws, and Other Requirements.--As a condition of receiving a loan under this section, the public or private entity that receives the loan shall ensure that the qualifying project complies with the requirements of this title and any other applicable law (including any applicable provision of the Federal Transit Act (49 United States Code App.
1601 et sequentes) or a Federal environmental law).
Subordination of Debt.--The amount of a loan received for a project under this section may be subordinated to any other debt financing for the project, except that the amount of the loan may not be subordinated to the amount of any other loan made by the State or any other public entity to the entity constructing the project.
Obligation of Funds Loaned.--Funds loaned pursuant to this section may be obligated for qualifying projects.
Repayment.--The repayment of a loan made pursuant to this section shall commence not later than 5 years after the qualifying project that is the subject of the loan has opened to traffic.
Term of Loan.--The term of a loan made pursuant to this section shall not exceed 30 years from the date of obligation of the loan.
Interest.--A loan made pursuant to this section shall bear interest at a rate at or below market interest rates, as determined by the State to make the qualifying project that is the subject of the loan feasible.
Reuse of Funds.--Amounts repaid to a State from any loan made pursuant to this section may be obligated-- ``(1) for any purpose for which the loaned funds were available; and ``(2) for-- ``(A) the refinancing of outstanding debt used to finance a qualifying project; ``(B) the guarantee or purchase of insurance or other forms of enhancement for borrower debt in order to improve credit market access or to subsidize interest rates; or ``(C) the provision of a loan guarantee.
Guidelines.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of this section, the Secretary shall establish procedures and guidelines for making loans pursuant to this section.''.
Paragraph (7) of section 129(a) of title 23, United States Code, is amended to read as follows: ``(7) Loans.-- ``(A) In general.--A State may loan an amount equal to all or part of the Federal share of a toll project under this section to a public or private entity constructing or proposing to construct a toll project.
As used in this paragraph, the term `qualifying project' means a project referred to in the preceding sentence.
Compliance with the federal transit act, federal environmental laws, and other requirements.--As a condition to receiving a loan under this paragraph, the public or private entity that receives the loan shall ensure that the qualifying project complies with the requirements of this title and any other applicable law (including any applicable provision of the Federal Transit Act (49 United States Code App.
1601 et sequentes) or a Federal environmental law).
Subordination of debt.--The amount of a loan received for a qualifying project under this paragraph may be subordinated to any other debt financing for the project, except that the amount of the loan may not be subordinated to the amount of any other loan made by the State or any other public entity to the entity constructing the project.
Obligation of funds loaned.--Funds loaned pursuant to this paragraph may be obligated for qualifying projects.
Repayment.--The repayment of a loan made pursuant to this paragraph shall commence not later than 5 years after the facility that is the subject of the loan has opened to traffic.
Term of loan.--The term of a loan to a private or public entity shall not exceed 30 years from the time that the loan was obligated.
Interest.--A loan made pursuant to this paragraph shall bear interest at a rate at or below market interest rates, as determined by the State to make the qualifying project that is the subject of the loan feasible.
Reuse of funds.--Amounts repaid to a State from a loan made under this paragraph may be obligated-- ``(i) for any purpose for which the loaned funds were available; and ``(ii) for-- ``(I) the refinancing of outstanding debt used to finance a qualifying project; ``(II) the guarantee or purchase of insurance or other forms of enhancement for borrower debt in order to improve credit market access or to subsidized interest rates; or ``(III) the provision of a loan guarantee.
Guidelines.--Not later than 180 days after the date of enactment of the State Transportation Financing Improvement Act of 1993, the Secretary shall establish procedures and guidelines for making loans pursuant to this paragraph.''.
CONFORMING AMENDMENT TO TABLE OF CONTENTS.
The chapter analysis at the beginning of chapter 1 of title 23, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new items: ``161.
State transportation investment loan funds.
Loans of Federal funds for the construction of nontoll facilities.