This Act may be cited as the ``Animal Experimentation Right To Know Act''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Over 21,000,000 animals are used every year in laboratory experiments and tests conducted by research facilities subject to the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2131 et seq.
), and many of these experiments and tests are painful, distressful and cause permanent injury or death to the animals.
In addition to animal experimentation and testing conducted by private research facilities, the Federal Government spends over $5,000,000,000 annually on experiments and tests involving the use of animals.
The Federal Government must bear the responsibility for making information on animal experimentation complete, coherent, and readily accessible to the American public.
While the Department of Agriculture currently requires all registered research facilities conducting animal research to file an annual report, the compilation of these reports fails to provide comprehensive annual profiles of laboratory animal use in the United States.
The Department of Defense conducts almost $200,000,000 worth of animal testing every year and has not provided detailed information on its experimentation programs.
Military researchers receive Federal funding for tests involving animals without being subject to the same review process as other researchers in the scientific community.
RESEARCH FACILITIES ANNUAL REPORT REGARDING ANIMAL EXPERIMENTATION AND TESTING.
Additional Elements of Report.--Subsection (a)(7)(B) of section 13 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2143) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (ii); (2) by striking the period at the end of clause (iii) and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following new clauses: ``(iv) information regarding where animals used by such facility were obtained; ``(v) an accurate count of all animals of all species used in animal experimentation testing, including rats, mice, birds and other animals; and ``(vi) information regarding the general purposes of the animal experimentation program of such facility, including whether the animals were used in the fields of research, testing, or education.''.
Availability of Certain Report Information.--Subsection (a)(7) of such section is amended by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(C) The Secretary shall develop a system for releasing to the public information derived from subparagraph (B)(iv) regarding where animals used in research are obtained.''.
DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE ANIMAL EXPERIMENTATION PROGRAMS.
Special Requirements for Defense Research Facilities.--Section 14 of the Animal Welfare Act (7 United States Code 2144) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a) In General.--'' after ``Sec.
''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(b) Special Requirements for Department of Defense.--(1) The Secretary of Defense shall submit an annual report to Congress on the animal experimentation programs of the Department of Defense.
The report shall provide in-depth profiles of animal research (including testing, education and training) conducted at each Department research facility.
To the greatest extent possible, such report should be filed as an unclassified document.
The annual report shall include the following: ``(A) Initiatives to promote alternative research methods that would phase out and reduce the use of animals in research.
Procedures adopted to prevent unintended duplication of research.
The total cost of the animal-based research in comparison to other forms of biological research conducted by the research facilities, each military department, and the Department of Defense as a whole.
The Secretary of Defense shall establish programs to phase out and replace current uses of animals at research facilities of the Department of Defense, in accordance with the initiatives identified under paragraph (2)(A).
The Secretary of Defense shall appoint an ombudsman for animal issues at each research facility of the Department of Defense.
The purpose of this individual would be to field and act on any complaints and concerns about the facility's animal care and use program.
The Secretary of Defense shall submit an annual report to the Secretary of Agriculture in accordance with section 13(a)(7).
The Secretary of Defense may submit a waiver form in place of any information regarding animal tests that the Secretary of Defense determines cannot be publicly disclosed for reasons of national security.''.
Review of Defense Animal Experimentation Programs.--The President shall appoint an 11 member panel of biomedical experts and animal care experts to investigate the animal use and care programs of the Department of Defense.
At the direction of the President, the panel shall examine the ethics and regulation of the number and types of animal experiments conducted by the Department of Defense.