This Act may be cited as the ``A Better Chance to Learn Act of 1993''.
It is the purpose of this Act to encourage and assist local school districts and communities to develop, expand, or operate innovative home-based parent and early childhood education programs in an effort to-- (1) empower parents to be the primary educators of their children; (2) provide children with school-readiness skills; (3) develop positive attitudes toward education on the part of parents and children; and (4) enhance the role of parents in the transition of their children from preschool to kindergarten.
As used in this Act: (1) Community-based organizations.--The term ``community- based organizations'' means private nonprofit organizations that are located within a community and that are not affiliated with any specific religion.
Developmentally appropriate.--The term ``developmentally appropriate'' as applied to a home-based program implemented by parents means those activities for the general population of 3- to 5-year-old children that are meaningful to parents and that will result in successful parent-child interactions.
Home-based.--The term ``home-based'' means that the program provides parent and early childhood education services in the private residence of the child receiving such services.
Limited or unsuccessful formal schooling.--The term ``limited or unsuccessful formal schooling'' means the-- (A) completion of high school with low achievement during enrollment; (B) noncompletion of high school with low achievement during enrollment; or (C) lack of a general education degree.
Local educational agencies.--The term ``local educational agencies'' has the meaning given to the term ``local educational agency'' by section 1471(12) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2891).
Near poor families.--The term ``near poor families'' means families that have an income that is approximately 130 percent of the poverty line (as defined by the Office of Management and Budget, and revised annually in accordance with section 673(2) of the Community Services Block Grant Act (42 United States Code 9902(2)).
Parent education.--The term ``parent education'' includes parent support activities, the provision of resource materials on child development and parent and child learning activities, private and group educational guidance, individual and group learning experiences for the parent and child, and other activities that enable the parent to improve learning in the home.
Working poor families.--The term ``working poor families'' means families that-- (A) have family members-- (i) who are working; or (ii) who were looking for work during at least the last 6 months of the year prior to the year in which a grantee determines such families' eligibility for services under this Act; and (B) earn an income not in excess of 150 percent of the poverty line as described in paragraph (5).
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to award grants to local educational agencies and community-based organizations to pay the Federal share of the cost of the activities described in section 5.
Grant Allocations.--The Secretary shall award-- (1) 50 percent of the total grants awarded under this section to applicants that are establishing new home-based parent and early childhood education programs; and (2) 50 percent of the total grants awarded under this section to applicants that are operating or expanding existing home-based parent and early childhood education programs.
Priority.--In awarding grants under this section, the Secretary shall give priority to an applicant that describes in an application submitted under section 6 that such applicant's program targets-- (1) working poor families or near poor families that do not qualify for assistance under the early childhood programs under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes) or chapter 1 of title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 2701 et sequentes); (2) families that qualify for assistance under the Federal programs described in paragraph (1), but that are not served by such programs; or (3) parents who have limited or unsuccessful formal schooling.
A grantee may use funds received under this Act for establishing, operating or expanding home-based parent and early childhood education programs.
To be eligible for a grant under this Act, an entity, as described in section 4(a), shall prepare and submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such manner, and accompanied by such information as the Secretary may reasonably require.
A grantee under this Act shall conduct a home-based parent and early childhood education program that-- (1) enhances parents' awareness of their strengths and potential as the primary educators of their children; (2) provides support, training and developmentally appropriate educational materials that are necessary for parents to implement a school-readiness, home instruction program for their children; (3) conducts group meetings with parents to provide support activities related to parenting skills and other topics of interest to participating parents; and (4) to the maximum extent possible, provides opportunities for field trips to local sites of educational and cultural benefit.
In General.--To be eligible to participate in a parent and early childhood service program conducted under this Act, an individual shall be a parent with one or more children who are age 3, 4, or 5.
Special Rules.-- (1) Participation.--No school system or parents shall be required to participate in programs funded under this Act.
Program actions.--A program receiving grant funds under this Act may not take action that infringes on the right of parents to direct the education of their children.
PAYMENTS AND FEDERAL SHARE.
Federal Share.--The Federal share described in section 4(a) shall be 80 percent.
Non-Federal Share.-- (1) In general.--A grantee under this Act shall make available non-Federal contributions toward the cost of carrying out the program established, operated, or expanded with amounts received under the grant in an amount equal to at least 20 percent of the amount of funds provided under the grant.
In kind contributions.--The non-Federal contributions described in paragraph (1) may be in cash or in kind fairly evaluated, including planned equipment or services.
Funds appropriated pursuant to the authority of this Act shall be used to supplement and not supplant other local public funds expended to provide services for individuals eligible to participate in a program under this Act.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $20,000,000 for fiscal year 1994 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 1998.