This Act may be cited as the ``Information Technology Partnership Act''.
General Authority.-- (1) In general.-- (A) Grant program.--The Director of the National Science Foundation shall, subject to appropriations, carry out a demonstration project under which the Director awards grants in accordance with this Act to 5 eligible local educational agencies.
Uses of funds.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this Act may use such grant funds to develop an information technology program that builds or expands mathematics, science, and information technology curricula, to purchase equipment necessary to establish such program, and to provide teacher training in such fields.
Program requirements.--The program described in paragraph (1) shall-- (A) train teachers specifically in information technology, mathematics, and science; and (B) provide students with specialized training in mathematics, science, and information technology.
Eligible Local Educational Agency.--For purposes of this Act, a local educational agency is eligible to receive a grant under this Act if the agency-- (1) is located in one of the cities which has received an award from the National Science Foundation under the Urban Systemic Initiative program; (2) provides assurances that it has executed conditional agreements with representatives of the private sector to provide services and funds described in subsection (c); and (3) agrees to enter into an agreement with the Director to comply with the requirements of this Act.
Private Sector Participation.--The conditional agreement referred to in subsection (b)(2) shall describe participation by the private sector, including-- (1) the donation of computer hardware and software; (2) the establishment of internship and mentoring opportunities for students who participate in the information technology program; and (3) the donation of scholarship funds for eligible students who have participated in the information technology program.
Application.-- (1) In general.--Each eligible local educational agency desiring a grant under this section shall submit an application to the Director in accordance with guidelines established by the Director pursuant to paragraph (2).
Guidelines.-- (A) Requirements.--The guidelines referred to in paragraph (1) shall require, at a minimum, that the application include-- (i) a description of proposed activities consistent with the uses of funds and program requirements under subsection (a)(1)(B) and (a)(2); (ii) a description of the scholarship program, including criteria for selection, duration of scholarship, number of scholarships to be awarded each year, and funding levels for scholarships; and (iii) evidence of private sector participation and financial support to establish an internship, mentoring, and scholarship program.
Guideline publication.--The Director shall issue and publish such guidelines not later than 6 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Selection.--The Director shall select a local educational agency to receive an award under this Act in accordance with subsection (e) and on the basis of merit to be determined after conducting a comprehensive review.
Priority.--The Director shall give special priority in awarding grants under this Act to eligible local educational agencies that demonstrate the greatest ability to obtain commitments from representatives of the private sector to provide services and funds described under subsection (c).
Assessment.--The Director shall assess the effectiveness of activities carried out under this Act.
Such assessment shall be included as part of the assessment and reporting process used for the Urban Systemic Initiatives program.
Study.--The Director shall initiate a longitudinal study of eligible students selected for scholarships pursuant to this Act and shall report such findings to Congress not later than 4 years after the award of the first scholarship.
Such report shall include the number of students graduating from an institution of higher education with a major in mathematics, science, or information technology and the number of students who find employment in such fields.
Except as otherwise provided, for purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Director'' means the Director of the National Science Foundation; (2) the term ``eligible student'' means a student enrolled in the 12th grade who-- (A) would be a first-generation college student; (B) has participated in an information technology program established pursuant to this Act; (C) has demonstrated a commitment to pursue a career in information technology, mathematics, science, or engineering; and (D) has attained high academic standing and maintains a grade point average of not less than 3.0 on a 4.0 scale for the last 2 years of secondary school (11th and 12th grades); and (3) the term ``local educational agency'' has the same meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801); SEC.
In General.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the National Science Foundation to carry out this Act, $1,500,000.
Maximum Grant Award.--An award made to an eligible local educational agency under this Act may not exceed $300,000.