Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Access to Women's Health Care Act of 1997''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) Women's health historically has received little attention.
A majority of women view their obstetrician- gynecologist as their primary or sole physician.
An obstetrician-gynecologist improves the access to the health care of a woman by providing primary and preventive health care throughout the women's lifetime, encompassing care of the whole patient in addition to focusing on the processes of the female reproductive system.
60 percent of all office visits to obstetrician- gynecologists are for preventive care.
Obstetrician-gynecologists refer their patients to other physicians less frequently than other primary care providers, thus avoiding costly and time-consuming referrals.
Obstetrician-gynecologists manage the health of women beyond the reproductive system, and are uniquely qualified on the basis of education and experience to provide basic health care services to women.
While more than 20 States have acted to promote residents' access to obstetrician-gynecologists, patients in other States or in Federally-governed health plans are not protected from access restrictions or limitations.
ASSURING ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL SERVICES UNDER GROUP HEALTH PLANS AND GROUP AND INDIVIDUAL HEALTH INSURANCE COVERAGE.
Group Health Plans.-- (1) Public health service act amendments.--(A) Subpart 2 of part A of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 703(a) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARDS RELATING TO ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL SERVICES.
In General.--If a group health plan or health insurance issuer, in the provision of health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, requires or provides for an enrollee to designate a participating primary care provider-- ``(1) the plan or issuer shall permit a female enrollee to designate an obstetrician-gynecologist who has agreed to be designated as such, as the enrollee's primary care provider; and ``(2) if such an enrollee has not designated such a provider as a primary care provider, the plan or issuer-- ``(A) may not require prior authorization by the enrollee's primary care provider or otherwise for coverage of obstetric and gynecologic care provided by a participating obstetrician-gynecologist, or a participating health care professional practicing in collaboration with the obstetrician-gynecologist and in accordance with State law, to the extent such care is otherwise covered, and ``(B) shall treat the ordering of other gynecologic care by such a participating physician as the prior authorization of the primary care provider with respect to such care under the coverage.
Construction.--Nothing in subsection (a)(2)(B) shall waive any requirements of coverage relating to medical necessity or appropriateness with respect to coverage of gynecologic care so ordered.
Prohibitions.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, may not-- ``(1) deny to a woman eligibility, or continued eligibility, to enroll or to renew coverage under the terms of the plan, solely for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of this section; ``(2) provide monetary payments or rebates to women to encourage such women to accept less than the minimum protections available under this section; or ``(3) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of a provider because such provider provided care to an individual participant or beneficiary in accordance with this section.
Notice.--A group health plan under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 713(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements of this section as if such section applied to such plan.
Level and Type of Reimbursements.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage from negotiating the level and type of reimbursement with a provider for care provided in accordance with this section.
Non-Preemption of More Protective State Law With Respect to Health Insurance Issuers.--Notwithstanding section 2723(a)(1) but subject to section 2723(a)(2), this section shall not be construed to supersede any provision of State law which establishes, implements, or continues in effect any standard or requirement solely relating to health insurance issuers in connection with group health insurance coverage that provides greater protections to enrollees than the protections provided under this section.''.
Section 2723 of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-23) is amended-- (i) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and section 2706(f)'' after ``Subject to paragraph (2)'', and (ii) in subsection (c), as amended by section 604(b)(2) of Public Law 104-204, by striking ``section 2704'' and inserting ``sections 2704 and 2706''.
ERISA amendments.--(A) Subpart B of part 7 of subtitle B of title I of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, as amended by section 702(a) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARDS RELATING TO ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL SERVICES.
In General.--If a group health plan or health insurance issuer, in the provision of health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, requires or provides for an enrollee to designate a participating primary care provider-- ``(1) the plan or issuer shall permit a female enrollee to designate an obstetrician-gynecologist who has agreed to be designated as such, as the enrollee's primary care provider; and ``(2) if such an enrollee has not designated such a provider as a primary care provider, the plan or issuer-- ``(A) may not require prior authorization by the enrollee's primary care provider or otherwise for coverage of obstetric and gynecologic care provided by a participating obstetrician-gynecologist, or a participating health care professional practicing in collaboration with the obstetrician-gynecologist and in accordance with State law, to the extent such care is otherwise covered, and ``(B) shall treat the ordering of other gynecologic care by such a participating physician as the prior authorization of the primary care provider with respect to such care under the coverage.
Construction.--Nothing in subsection (a)(2)(B) shall waive any requirements of coverage relating to medical necessity or appropriateness with respect to coverage of gynecologic care so ordered.
Prohibitions.--A group health plan, and a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage in connection with a group health plan, may not-- ``(1) deny to a woman eligibility, or continued eligibility, to enroll or to renew coverage under the terms of the plan, solely for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of this section; ``(2) provide monetary payments or rebates to women to encourage such women to accept less than the minimum protections available under this section; or ``(3) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of a provider because such provider provided care to an individual participant or beneficiary in accordance with this section.
Notice.--The imposition of the requirements of this section shall be treated as a material modification in the terms of the plan described in section 102(a)(1), for purposes of assuring notice of such requirements under the plan; except that the summary description required to be provided under the last sentence of section 104(b)(1) with respect to such modification shall be provided by not later than 60 days after the first day of the first plan year in which such requirements apply.
Level and Type of Reimbursements.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a group health plan or a health insurance issuer offering group health insurance coverage from negotiating the level and type of reimbursement with a provider for care provided in accordance with this section.
Non-Preemption of More Protective State Law With Respect to Health Insurance Issuers.--Notwithstanding section 731(a)(1) but subject to section 731(a)(2), this section shall not be construed to supersede any provision of State law which establishes, implements, or continues in effect any standard or requirement solely relating to health insurance issuers in connection with group health insurance coverage that provides greater protections to enrollees than the protections provided under this section.''.
Section 731 of such Act (29 United States Code 1191) is amended-- (i) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and section 713(f)'' after ``subject to paragraph (2)'', and (ii) in subsection (c), by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 713''.
Section 732(a) of such Act (29 United States Code 1191a(a)), as amended by section 603(b)(2) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by striking ``section 711'' and inserting ``sections 711 and 713''.
The table of contents in section 1 of such Act is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 712 the following new item: ``Sec.
Standards relating to access to obstetrical and gynecological services.''.
Individual Health Insurance.--(1) Part B of title XXVII of the Public Health Service Act, as amended by section 605(a) of Public Law 104-204, is amended by inserting after section 2751 the following new section: ``SEC.
STANDARDS RELATING TO ACCESS TO OBSTETRICAL AND GYNECOLOGICAL SERVICES.
In General.--The provisions of section 2706 (other than subsection (d)) shall apply to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in the individual market in the same manner as it applies to health insurance coverage offered by a health insurance issuer in connection with a group health plan in the small or large group market.
Notice.--A health insurance issuer under this part shall comply with the notice requirement under section 713(d) of the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 with respect to the requirements referred to in subsection (a) as if such section applied to such issuer and such issuer were a group health plan.
Non-Preemption of More Protective State Law With Respect to Health Insurance Issuers.--Notwithstanding section 2762(a) but subject to section 2762(b)(1), this section shall not be construed to supersede any provision of State law which establishes, implements, or continues in effect any standard or requirement solely relating to health insurance issuers in connection with group health insurance coverage that provides greater protections to enrollees than the protections provided under this section.''.
Section 2762 of such Act (42 United States Code 300gg-62) is amended-- (A) in subsection (a), by inserting ``and section 2752(c)'' after ``Subject to subsection (b)'', and (B) in subsection (b)(2), as added by section 605(b)(3)(B) of Public Law 104-204, by striking ``section 2751'' and inserting ``sections 2751 and 2752''.
Effective Dates.--(1) Subject to paragraph (3), the amendments made by subsection (a) shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1998.
The amendment made by subsection (b) shall apply with respect to health insurance coverage offered, sold, issued, renewed, in effect, or operated in the individual market on or after such date.
In the case of a group health plan maintained pursuant to 1 or more collective bargaining agreements between employee representatives and 1 or more employers ratified before the date of enactment of this Act, the amendments made by subsection (a) shall not apply to plan years beginning before the later of-- (A) the date on which the last collective bargaining agreements relating to the plan terminates (determined without regard to any extension thereof agreed to after the date of enactment of this Act), or (B) January 1, 1998.
For purposes of subparagraph (A), any plan amendment made pursuant to a collective bargaining agreement relating to the plan which amends the plan solely to conform to any requirement added by subsection (a) shall not be treated as a termination of such collective bargaining agreement.