There is established a commission to be known as the Commission on Environment and Development (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) monitor the actions of the signatories to documents of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development that reflect compliance with or violation of the goals of-- (A) the Articles of Agenda 21 of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, (B) the Statement of Principles on the Maintenance, Conservation, and Development of All Forests, (C) the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, and (D) the Convention on Biological Diversity; (2) monitor and encourage the development of programs and activities by the United States Government and private organization with a view toward advancing the objectives of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development; and (3) review reports submitted by countries to the United Nations Commission on Sustainable Development, including those submitted by the United States.
Public Participation.--In carrying out its functions, the Commission shall consult with and draw upon the expertise of United States and foreign nongovernmental organizations, citizens' groups, and other public and private bodies concerned with international and national environmental and sustainable development issues.
In General.--The Commission shall be composed of 11 members as follows: (1) Four Members of the House of Representatives appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Two members shall be selected from the majority party and two shall be selected, after consultation with the minority leader of the House, from the principal minority party.
Four Members of the Senate appointed by the President of the Senate.
Two members shall be selected from the majority party and two shall be selected, after consultation with the minority leader of the Senate, from the minority party.
The Assistant Secretary of State for Oceans and International Environmental and Scientific Affairs.
The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency.
The Chairman of the Council on Environmental Quality.
Chair and Cochair.-- (1) In general.--There shall be a Chair and a Cochair of the Commission.
Appointment.--(A) At the beginning of each odd-numbered Congress, the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall designate one of the House Members as Chair of the Commission.
At the beginning of each even-numbered Congress, the President of the Senate, on the recommendation of the majority leader, shall designate one of the Senate Members as Chair of the Commission.
At the beginning of each odd-numbered Congress, the President of the Senate, on the recommendation of the majority leader, shall designate one of the Senate Members as Cochair of the Commission.
At the beginning of each even-numbered Congress, the Speaker of the House of Representatives shall designate one of the House Members as Cochair of the Commission.
REPORTS TO AND BY THE COMMISSION.
Reports to the Commission.--In order to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties, the President shall submit to the Commission semiannual reports which shall include-- (1) a detailed survey of actions by signatories of documents of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development that reflect compliance with or violation of the goals of those documents; and (2) a listing and description of present or planned programs and activities of the appropriate agencies of the executive branch advancing the objectives of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development.
Reports by the Commission.--The Commission shall report to the House of Representatives and the Senate on a periodic basis with respect to the matters described in section 2(a), and shall provide information to Members of the House of Representatives and Senate as requested.
INVESTIGATIVE POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
In carrying out this Act, the Commission may require, by subpoena or otherwise, the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, correspondence, memorandums, papers, and documents as it deems necessary.
Subpoenas may be issued over the signature of the Chair of the Commission or such other member of the Commission as the Chair may designate.
The Chair of the Commission, or any member designated by the Chair, may administer oaths to any witness.
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
The Commission may employ individuals for its staff, who shall be considered to be congressional employees (as defined in section 2107 of title 5, United States Code) for purposes of pay and other employment benefits, rights, and privileges and for all other purposes.
To carry out this Act, there is authorized to be appropriated to the Commission for each fiscal year such sums as may be necessary, which are authorized to remain available until expended.