This Act may be cited as the ``Newborns' and Mothers' Health Protection and Mental Health Parity Implementation Amendments of 1996''.
AMENDMENTS TO THE INTERNAL REVENUE CODE OF 1986 TO IMPLEMENT THE NEWBORNS' AND MOTHERS' HEALTH PROTECTION ACT OF 1996 AND THE MENTAL HEALTH PARITY ACT OF 1996.
In General.--Subtitle K of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as added by section 401(a) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) is amended-- (1) by striking all that precedes section 9801 and inserting the following: ``Subtitle K--Group Health Plan Requirements ``Chapter 100.
Group health plan requirements.
``CHAPTER 100--GROUP HEALTH PLAN REQUIREMENTS ``Subchapter A.
Requirements relating to portability, access, and renewability.
``Subchapter C. General provisions.
``Subchapter A--Requirements Relating to Portability, Access, and Renewability ``Sec.
Increased portability through limitation on preexisting condition exclusions.
Prohibiting discrimination against individual participants and beneficiaries based on health status.
Guaranteed renewability in multiemployer plans and certain multiple employer welfare arrangements.
'', (2) by redesignating sections 9804, 9805, and 9806 as sections 9831, 9832, and 9833, respectively, (3) by inserting before section 9831 (as so redesignated) the following: ``Subchapter C--General Provisions ``Sec.
'', and (4) by inserting after section 9803 the following: ``Subchapter B--Other Requirements ``Sec.
Standards relating to benefits for mothers and newborns.
Parity in the application of certain limits to mental health benefits.
STANDARDS RELATING TO BENEFITS FOR MOTHERS AND NEWBORNS.
Requirements for Minimum Hospital Stay Following Birth.-- ``(1) In general.--A group health plan may not-- ``(A) except as provided in paragraph (2)-- ``(i) restrict benefits for any hospital length of stay in connection with childbirth for the mother or newborn child, following a normal vaginal delivery, to less than 48 hours, or ``(ii) restrict benefits for any hospital length of stay in connection with childbirth for the mother or newborn child, following a cesarean section, to less than 96 hours; or ``(B) require that a provider obtain authorization from the plan or the issuer for prescribing any length of stay required under subparagraph (A) (without regard to paragraph (2)).
Exception.--Paragraph (1)(A) shall not apply in connection with any group health plan in any case in which the decision to discharge the mother or her newborn child prior to the expiration of the minimum length of stay otherwise required under paragraph (1)(A) is made by an attending provider in consultation with the mother.
Prohibitions.--A group health plan may not-- ``(1) deny to the mother or her newborn child eligibility, or continued eligibility, to enroll or to renew coverage under the terms of the plan, solely for the purpose of avoiding the requirements of this section; ``(2) provide monetary payments or rebates to mothers to encourage such mothers to accept less than the minimum protections available under this section; ``(3) penalize or otherwise reduce or limit the reimbursement of an attending provider because such provider provided care to an individual participant or beneficiary in accordance with this section; ``(4) provide incentives (monetary or otherwise) to an attending provider to induce such provider to provide care to an individual participant or beneficiary in a manner inconsistent with this section; or ``(5) subject to subsection (c)(3), restrict benefits for any portion of a period within a hospital length of stay required under subsection (a) in a manner which is less favorable than the benefits provided for any preceding portion of such stay.
Rules of Construction.-- ``(1) Nothing in this section shall be construed to require a mother who is a participant or beneficiary-- ``(A) to give birth in a hospital; or ``(B) to stay in the hospital for a fixed period of time following the birth of her child.
This section shall not apply with respect to any group health plan which does not provide benefits for hospital lengths of stay in connection with childbirth for a mother or her newborn child.
Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a group health plan from imposing deductibles, coinsurance, or other cost-sharing in relation to benefits for hospital lengths of stay in connection with childbirth for a mother or newborn child under the plan, except that such coinsurance or other cost-sharing for any portion of a period within a hospital length of stay required under subsection (a) may not be greater than such coinsurance or cost-sharing for any preceding portion of such stay.
Level and Type of Reimbursements.--Nothing in this section shall be construed to prevent a group health plan from negotiating the level and type of reimbursement with a provider for care provided in accordance with this section.
Preemption; Exception for Health Insurance Coverage in Certain States.--The requirements of this section shall not apply with respect to health insurance coverage if there is a State law (including a decision, rule, regulation, or other State action having the effect of law) for a State that regulates such coverage that is described in any of the following paragraphs: ``(1) Such State law requires such coverage to provide for at least a 48-hour hospital length of stay following a normal vaginal delivery and at least a 96-hour hospital length of stay following a cesarean section.
Such State law requires such coverage to provide for maternity and pediatric care in accordance with guidelines established by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists, the American Academy of Pediatrics, or other established professional medical associations.
Such State law requires, in connection with such coverage for maternity care, that the hospital length of stay for such care is left to the decision of (or required to be made by) the attending provider in consultation with the mother.
PARITY IN THE APPLICATION OF CERTAIN LIMITS TO MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS.
In General.-- ``(1) Aggregate lifetime limits.--In the case of a group health plan that provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental health benefits-- ``(A) No lifetime limit.--If the plan does not include an aggregate lifetime limit on substantially all medical and surgical benefits, the plan or coverage may not impose any aggregate lifetime limit on mental health benefits.
Lifetime limit.--If the plan includes an aggregate lifetime limit on substantially all medical and surgical benefits (in this paragraph referred to as the `applicable lifetime limit'), the plan shall either-- ``(i) apply the applicable lifetime limit both to the medical and surgical benefits to which it otherwise would apply and to mental health benefits and not distinguish in the application of such limit between such medical and surgical benefits and mental health benefits; or ``(ii) not include any aggregate lifetime limit on mental health benefits that is less than the applicable lifetime limit.
Rule in case of different limits.--In the case of a plan that is not described in subparagraph (A) or (B) and that includes no or different aggregate lifetime limits on different categories of medical and surgical benefits, the Secretary shall establish rules under which subparagraph (B) is applied to such plan with respect to mental health benefits by substituting for the applicable lifetime limit an average aggregate lifetime limit that is computed taking into account the weighted average of the aggregate lifetime limits applicable to such categories.
Annual limits.--In the case of a group health plan that provides both medical and surgical benefits and mental health benefits-- ``(A) No annual limit.--If the plan does not include an annual limit on substantially all medical and surgical benefits, the plan or coverage may not impose any annual limit on mental health benefits.
Annual limit.--If the plan includes an annual limit on substantially all medical and surgical benefits (in this paragraph referred to as the `applicable annual limit'), the plan shall either-- ``(i) apply the applicable annual limit both to medical and surgical benefits to which it otherwise would apply and to mental health benefits and not distinguish in the application of such limit between such medical and surgical benefits and mental health benefits; or ``(ii) not include any annual limit on mental health benefits that is less than the applicable annual limit.
Rule in case of different limits.--In the case of a plan that is not described in subparagraph (A) or (B) and that includes no or different annual limits on different categories of medical and surgical benefits, the Secretary shall establish rules under which subparagraph (B) is applied to such plan with respect to mental health benefits by substituting for the applicable annual limit an average annual limit that is computed taking into account the weighted average of the annual limits applicable to such categories.
Construction.--Nothing in this section shall be construed-- ``(1) as requiring a group health plan to provide any mental health benefits; or ``(2) in the case of a group health plan that provides mental health benefits, as affecting the terms and conditions (including cost sharing, limits on numbers of visits or days of coverage, and requirements relating to medical necessity) relating to the amount, duration, or scope of mental health benefits under the plan, except as specifically provided in subsection (a) (in regard to parity in the imposition of aggregate lifetime limits and annual limits for mental health benefits).
Exemptions.-- ``(1) Small employer exemption.--This section shall not apply to any group health plan for any plan year of a small employer (as defined in section 4980D(d)(2)).
Increased cost exemption.--This section shall not apply with respect to a group health plan if the application of this section to such plan results in an increase in the cost under the plan of at least 1 percent.
Separate Application to Each Option Offered.--In the case of a group health plan that offers a participant or beneficiary two or more benefit package options under the plan, the requirements of this section shall be applied separately with respect to each such option.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) Aggregate lifetime limit.--The term `aggregate lifetime limit' means, with respect to benefits under a group health plan, a dollar limitation on the total amount that may be paid with respect to such benefits under the plan with respect to an individual or other coverage unit.
Annual limit.--The term `annual limit' means, with respect to benefits under a group health plan, a dollar limitation on the total amount of benefits that may be paid with respect to such benefits in a 12-month period under the plan with respect to an individual or other coverage unit.
Medical or surgical benefits.--The term `medical or surgical benefits' means benefits with respect to medical or surgical services, as defined under the terms of the plan, but does not include mental health benefits.
Mental health benefits.--The term `mental health benefits' means benefits with respect to mental health services, as defined under the terms of the plan, but does not include benefits with respect to treatment of substance abuse or chemical dependency.
Sunset.--This section shall not apply to benefits for services furnished on or after September 30, 2001.''
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Chapter 100 of such Code (as added by section 401 of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996 and as previously amended by this section) is further amended-- (A) in the last sentence of section 9801(c)(1), by striking ``section 9805(c)'' and inserting ``section 9832(c)''; (B) in section 9831(b), by striking ``9805(c)(1)'' and inserting ``9832(c)(1)''; (C) in section 9831(c)(1), by striking ``9805(c)(2)'' and inserting ``9832(c)(2)''; (D) in section 9831(c)(2), by striking ``9805(c)(3)'' and inserting ``9832(c)(3)''; and (E) in section 9831(c)(3), by striking ``9805(c)(4)'' and inserting ``9832(c)(4)''.
Section 4980D of such Code (as added by section 402 of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) is amended-- (A) in subsection (c)(3)(B)(i)(I), by striking ``9805(d)(3)'' and inserting ``9832(d)(3)''; (B) in subsection (d)(1), by inserting ``(other than a failure attributable to section 9811)'' after ``on any failure''; (C) in subsection (d)(3), by striking ``9805'' and inserting ``9832''; (D) in subsection (f)(1), by striking ``9805(a)'' and inserting ``9832(a)''.
The table of subtitles for such Code is amended by striking the item relating to subtitle K (as added by section 401(b) of the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996) and inserting the following new item: ``Subtitle K. Group health plan requirements.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply with respect to group health plans for plan years beginning on or after January 1, 1998.