This Act may be cited as the ``Centennial of Flight Commemoration Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) December 17, 2003, is the 100th anniversary of the 1st successful manned, controlled, heavier-than-air, powered flight; (2) the First Flight by Orville and Wilbur Wright represents the fulfillment of the age-old dream of flying; (3) the airplane has dramatically changed the course of transportation, commerce, communication, and warfare throughout the world; (4) the achievement by the Wright brothers was a triumph of American ingenuity, inventiveness, and diligence in developing new technologies, and remains an inspiration for all Americans; (5) it is appropriate to remember and renew the legacy of the Wright brothers at a time when the values of creativity and daring represented by the Wright brothers are critical to the future of the Nation; and (6) as the Nation approaches the 100th anniversary of the First Flight, it is appropriate to celebrate and commemorate the anniversary through local, national, and international observances and activities.
There is established a commission to be known as the Centennial of Flight Commission.
Number and Appointment.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall be composed of 25 members, as follows: (A) The Librarian of Congress, or a designee.
The Archivist of the United States, or a designee.
The Secretary of the Interior, or a designee.
The Director of the National Air and Space Museum, or a designee.
The Secretary of Education, or a designee.
The Secretary of Defense, or a designee.
The Secretary of Transportation, or a designee.
The Governor of the State of North Carolina, or a designee.
The Governor of the State of Ohio, or a designee.
The Executive Director of the 2003 Committee, or a designee.
The President of the First Flight Society, or a designee.
The Mayor of Kill Devil Hills, North Carolina.
The Mayor of Dayton, Ohio.
12 citizens of the United States, appointed by the President, who are not officers or employees of any government, except to the extent that they are considered to be such officers or employees by virtue of their membership on the Commission.
Appointments by president.--Of the individuals referred to in paragraph (1)(N)-- (1) 2 shall be chosen from among persons recommended by the majority leader of the Senate in consultation with the minority leader of the Senate; (2) 2 shall be chosen from among persons recommended by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the minority leader of the House of Representatives; and (3) 8 shall be chosen based on qualifications or experience in the field of history, aerospace science or industry, or any other profession that would enhance the work of the Commission and assist in commemorating the accomplishments of the Wright brothers.
Time of Appointment.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Terms.--Each member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Prohibition of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission may receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.--13 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Chairperson.--The President shall designate 1 of the individuals appointed under subsection (a)(1)(N) as the chairperson of the Commission.
Meetings.--The Commission shall meet at the call of its chairperson or a majority of its members.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) plan and develop, in coordination with the First Flight Society, the 2003 Committee, the First Flight Centennial Commission of North Carolina, and the Ohio Wright-Dunbar State Heritage Commission, programs and activities that are appropriate to commemorate the 100th anniversary of the First Flight; (2) maintain a calendar or register of programs and projects concerning, and provide a central clearinghouse for information and coordination regarding, dates, events, places, documents, artifacts, and personalities of historical and commemorative significance regarding aviation history in general and the First Flight in particular; (3) coordinate activities with other countries regarding aviation history in general and the First Flight in particular, and promote participation by the United States in such activities; (4) encourage participation in commemoration of the First Flight by persons and entities including-- (A) aerospace manufacturing companies; (B) aerospace-related military organizations; (C) workers employed in aerospace-related industries; (D) commercial aviation companies; (E) general aviation owners and pilots; (F) aerospace researchers, instructors, and enthusiasts; (G) elementary, secondary, and higher educational institutions; (H) civil, patriotic, educational, sporting, arts, cultural, and historical organizations and technical societies; (I) aerospace-related museums; and (J) State and local governments; (5) assist in conducting educational, civic, and commemorative activities relating to the First Flight throughout the United States, especially activities that occur in the States of North Carolina and Ohio and that highlight the activities of the Wright brothers in such States; and (6) develop and coordinate any other activities that the Commission determines to be appropriate relating to the anniversary of the First Flight, which may include the preparation, distribution, dissemination, exhibition, or sale of historical, commemorative, or informative materials or objects, produced by the Commission, that will contribute to public awareness of and interest in the centennial of the First Flight.
Nonduplication of Activities.--The Commission shall attempt to plan and conduct its activities in such a manner that activities conducted pursuant to this Act enhance, but do not duplicate, traditional and established activities of the 2003 Committee, the First Flight Society, the First Flight Centennial Commission of North Carolina, and the Ohio Wright-Dunbar State Heritage Commission.
Advisory Committees.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may appoint any advisory committee that it determines to be necessary to carry out this Act.
Prohibition of pay other than travel expenses.--Members of an advisory committee authorized by paragraph (1) may receive pay and travel expenses to the same extent that members of the Commission may receive pay and travel expenses under section (4)(e).
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action that the Commission is authorized to take under this Act.
Authority To Procure and To Make Legal Agreements.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may procure supplies, services, and property, and make or enter into leases and other legal agreements, in order to carry out this Act.
Restriction.--A contract, lease, or other legal agreement made or entered into by the Commission may not extend beyond the date of the termination of the Commission.
Supplies and property possessed by commission at termination.--Any supplies and property, except historically significant items, that are acquired by the Commission under this Act and remain in the possession of the Commission on the date of the termination of the Commission shall become the property of the General Services Administration upon the date of the termination.
Requests for Official Information.--The Commission may request from any Federal department or agency information necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this Act.
The head of the Federal department or agency shall furnish the information to the Commission unless the release of the information by the department or agency to the public is prohibited by law.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as any other Federal agency.
STAFF AND SUPPORT SERVICES.
Executive Director.--The chairperson of the Commission, with the advice of the Commission, shall appoint an executive director of the Commission.
The executive director may be paid at a rate not to exceed the maximum rate of basic pay payable for the Senior Executive Service.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of any additional personnel that it considers appropriate, except that an individual appointed under this subsection may not receive pay in excess of the maximum rate of basic pay payable for GS-14 of the General Schedule.
Inapplicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The executive director and staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of such title, relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates, except as provided in subsections (a) and (b) of this section.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request by the chairperson of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a nonreimbursable basis, any of the personnel of the department or agency to the Commission to assist the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Experts and Consultants.--The chairperson of the Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code, at a rate that does not exceed the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay payable under Level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of such title.
Administrative Support Services.--The Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, any administrative support services that are necessary to enable the Commission to carry out this Act.
Donations.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may accept donations of money, personal services, and real or personal property, including books, manuscripts, memorabilia, relics, objects, and other materials that are related to the Wright brothers or the history of aviation.
Donated funds.--Any funds donated to the Commission may be used by the Commission to carry out this Act.
Funds donated to and accepted by the Commission pursuant to this section shall not be considered to be appropriated funds and shall not be subject to any requirements or restrictions applicable to appropriated funds.
Volunteer Services.--Notwithstanding section 1342 of title 31, United States Code, the Commission may accept and use voluntary and uncompensated services as the Commission determines necessary.
Remaining Funds.--Any donated funds remaining to the Commission on the date of the termination of the Commission may be used to ensure the proper disposition, as specified in the final report required by section 10(b), of historically significant property donated to or acquired by the Commission.
Any such donated funds remaining after such disposition shall be transferred to the Secretary of the Treasury for deposit into the general fund of the Treasury of the United States.
EXCLUSIVE RIGHT TO NAME, LOGOS, EMBLEMS, SEALS, AND MARKS.
In General.--The Commission may devise any logo, emblem, seal, or descriptive or designating mark that is required to carry out its duties or that it determines is appropriate for use in connection with the commemoration of the First Flight.
The Commission shall have the sole and exclusive right to use, or to allow or refuse the use of, the name ``Centennial of Flight Commission'' or any logo, emblem, seal, or descriptive or designating mark that the Commission lawfully adopts.
Effect on Other Rights.--No provision of this section may be construed to conflict or interfere with established or vested rights.
Annual Report.--In each fiscal year in which the Commission is in existence, the Commission shall prepare and submit to the Congress a report describing the activities of the Commission during the fiscal year.
Each annual report shall also include-- (1) recommendations regarding appropriate activities to commemorate the centennial of the First Flight, including-- (A) the production, publication, and distribution of books, pamphlets, films, and other educational materials; (B) bibliographical and documentary projects and publications; (C) conferences, convocations, lectures, seminars, and other similar programs; (D) the development of exhibits for libraries, museums, and other appropriate institutions; (E) ceremonies and celebrations commemorating specific events that relate to the history of aviation; (F) programs focusing on the history of aviation and its benefits to the United States and humankind; and (G) competitions, commissions, and awards regarding historical, scholarly, artistic, literary, musical, and other works, programs, and projects related to the centennial of the First Flight; (2) recommendations to appropriate agencies or advisory bodies regarding the issuance of commemorative coins, medals, and stamps by the United States relating to aviation or the First Flight; (3) recommendations for any legislation or administrative action that the Commission determines to be appropriate regarding the commemoration of the First Flight; and (4) an accounting of funds received and expended by the Commission in the fiscal year that the report concerns, including a detailed description of the source and amount of any funds donated to the Commission in the fiscal year.
Final Report.--Not later than June 30, 2004, the Commission shall submit to the President and the Congress a final report.
The final report shall contain-- (1) a summary of the activities of the Commission; (2) a final accounting of funds received and expended by the Commission; (3) any findings and conclusions of the Commission; and (4) specific recommendations concerning the final disposition of any historically significant items acquired by the Commission, including items donated to the Commission under section 8(a)(1).
AUDIT OF FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
In General.--The Inspector General of the General Services Administration shall audit the financial transactions of the Commission, including financial transactions involving donated funds, in accordance with generally accepted auditing standards.
In conducting an audit pursuant to this section, the Inspector General shall have access to all books, accounts, financial records, reports, files, and other papers, items, or property in use by the Commission, as necessary to facilitate the audit, and shall be afforded full facilities for verifying the financial transactions of the Commission, including access to any financial records or securities held for the Commission by depositories, fiscal agents, or custodians.
Report.--Not later than September 31, 2004, the Inspector General of the General Services Administration shall submit to the President and to the Congress a report detailing the results of any audit of the financial transactions of the Commission conducted by the Inspector General.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``Commission'' means the Centennial of Flight Commission.
The term ``First Flight'' means the 1st successful manned, controlled, heavier-than-air, powered flight, which was accomplished by Orville and Wilbur Wright on December 17, 1903.
The Commission shall terminate not later than 60 days after the submission of the final report required by section 10(b).
There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $500,000 for each of the fiscal years 1995 through 2004.