This Act may be cited as the ``Emergency Agricultural Disaster Assistance Act of 2003''.
Assistance Available.--Notwithstanding section 508(b)(7) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1508(b)(7)), the Secretary of Agriculture shall use such sums as are necessary of funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make emergency financial assistance available to producers on a farm that have incurred qualifying crop losses for the 2002 crop due to damaging weather or related condition, as determined by the Secretary.
Administration.--The Secretary shall make assistance available under this section in the same manner as provided under section 815 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 2001 (as enacted into law by Public Law 106-387; 114 United States Statutes at Large 1549A-55), including using the same loss thresholds for the quantity and quality losses as were used in administering that section.
ASSISTANCE FOR LIVESTOCK PRODUCERS.
Assistance Available.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall use such sums as are necessary of funds of the Commodity Credit Corporation to make and administer payments to livestock producers for losses in a county that received a primary disaster designation by the Secretary in calendar year 2001 or 2002.
Administration.--The Secretary shall make assistance available under this section using the criteria established to carry out the 2002 Livestock Compensation Program.
Application.--During the 30-day period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, livestock producers in a county described in subsection (a) may submit an application for assistance under this section or renew an application previously submitted under the 2002 Livestock Compensation Program.
Choice of Payments.-- (1) Multiyear designation.--If a producer is on a farm located in a county that received an emergency designation described in subsection (a) in each of calendar years 2001 and 2002, the producer may receive payments under this section for losses associated with the declaration in either calendar year 2001 or calendar year 2002, but not both.
Prior payments.--A producer may not receive a payment under this section and under the 2002 Livestock Compensation Program.
Definitions.--In this section: (1) Additional coverage.--The term ``additional coverage'' has the meaning given the term in section 502(b)(1) of the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1502(b)(1)).
Insurable commodity.--The term ``insurable commodity'' means an agricultural commodity (excluding livestock) for which the producers on a farm are eligible to obtain a policy or plan of insurance under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes).
Noninsurable commodity.--The term ``noninsurable commodity'' means an eligible crop for which the producers on a farm are eligible to obtain assistance under section 196 of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 United States Code 7333).
Ineligibility.--Except as provided in subsection (c), the producers on a farm shall not be eligible for a payment under section 2 with respect to 2002 losses to an insurable commodity or noninsurable commodity if the producers on the farm-- (1) in the case of an insurable commodity, did not obtain a policy or plan of insurance for the insurable commodity for the crop under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et seq.
); and (2) in the case of a noninsurable commodity, did not file the required paperwork, and pay the administrative fee by the applicable State filing deadline, for the noninsurable commodity under section 196 of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 United States Code 7333).
Waivers.--The Secretary of Agriculture may waive the application of subsection (b) to the producers on a farm if-- (1) in the case of an insurable commodity, the producers on the farm enter into a contract with the Secretary under which the producers on the farm agree-- (A) to obtain additional coverage for the insurable commodity for each of the next three crops under the Federal Crop Insurance Act (7 United States Code 1501 et sequentes); and (B) on violation of the contract, to forfeit the right to receive any payment, loan, or benefit under title I of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 7901 et sequentes) for each of such crops; and (2) in the case of a noninsurable commodity, the producers on the farm enter into a contract with the Secretary under which the producers on the farm agree-- (A) to file the required paperwork, and pay the administrative fee by the applicable State filing deadline, for the noninsurable commodity for each of the next three crops under section 196 of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 United States Code 7333); and (B) on violation of the contract, to forfeit the right to receive any payment, loan, or benefit under title I of the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002 (7 United States Code 7901 et sequentes) for each of such crops.
The Secretary of Agriculture shall use the funds, facilities, and authorities of the Commodity Credit Corporation to carry out this Act.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture may promulgate such regulations as are necessary to implement this Act.
Procedure.--The promulgation of the regulations and administration of this Act shall be made without regard to-- (1) the notice and comment provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code; (2) the Statement of Policy of the Secretary of Agriculture effective July 24, 1971 (36 Fed.
13804), relating to notices of proposed rulemaking and public participation in rulemaking; and (3) chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act'').
Congressional Review of Agency Rulemaking.--In carrying out this section, the Secretary shall use the authority provided under section 808 of title 5, United States Code.
In General.--The entire amount made available under this Act shall be available only to the extent that the President submits to Congress an official budget request for a specific dollar amount that includes designation of the entire amount of the request as an emergency requirement for the purposes of the Balanced Budget and Emergency Deficit Control Act of 1985 (2 United States Code 900 et sequentes).
Designation.--The entire amount made available under this section is designated by Congress as an emergency requirement under sections 251(b)(2)(A) and 252(e) of that Act (2 United States Code 901(b)(2)(A), 902(e)).