This Act may be cited as the ``White Sands Fair Compensation Act of 1995''.
Congress makes the following findings: (1) The White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, is an installation that is vital to the national security interests of the United States.
The United States established the Range during World War II, and, in doing so, temporarily displacing ranchers and miners who owned land within the boundaries of the Range or whose livelihood depended on such land.
These ranchers and miners made a significant contribution to the effort of the United States to win World War II and to the post-war national defense program by vacating land within the Range at the request of the United States Government.
In 1975, all land within the Range was permanently taken by the United States Government.
The United States Government has never fully compensated ranchers and miners who owned land within the boundaries of the Range or whose livelihood depended on such land for the value of the land and claims taken by the Government.
The method utilized by the United States Government to compensate such ranchers differs from the method utilized by the Government to compensate ranchers during the taking of land in the area in New Mexico that became the McGregor Range and Extension Area of the Fort Bliss Military Reservation, Texas.
Ranchers owning property in that were fully compensated for their ranches as operating units, including the carrying capacity of public domain lands associated with such ranches.
Though the Legacy Fellowship Program in Natural and Cultural Resource Management established by section 328 of Public Law 102-484, the Department of Defense is sponsoring a 5-year research project on the historical significance of ranching in the area that is now the White Sands Missile Range.
The United States Government has an obligation to pay full compensation to ranchers and miners who owned land within the boundaries of the Range or whose livelihood depended on such land for the value of the land and claims that were taken by the Government.
Establishment.--There is established in the Department of Defense a commission to be known as the White Sands Fair Compensation Commission (hereafter in this section referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.-- (1) Number and appointment.--The Commission shall be composed of nine members appointed by the Secretary of Defense as follows-- (A) one shall be an employee of the Department of Defense; (B) one shall be an employee of the Department of the Interior who shall be appointed from among individuals recommended by the Secretary of the Interior; (C) five shall be individuals appointed from among individuals recommended by the Senators and Representatives from the State of New Mexico, with one individual appointed from among the recommendations of each such Senator and Representative; and (D) two shall be individuals appointed from among individuals recommended by the Governor of New Mexico.
Expertise.--The Secretary shall, to maximum extent practicable, make appointments under this subsection from among individuals recommended to the Secretary who are present or former residents of the State of New Mexico and who have an expertise in matters of agricultural economics or the history of the establishment of the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico.
Terms and Vacancies.--Members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Any vacancy in the Commission shall not affect its powers but shall be filled in the same manner as the original appointment.
Compensation.-- (1) In general.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members of the Commission shall serve without pay or compensation.
Travel expenses.--Each member of the Commission shall be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, at rates authorized for employees of agencies under subchapter I of chapter 57 of title 5, United States Code, while away from their homes or regular places of business in the performance of services for the Commission.
Officers.--The members of the Commission shall elect the chairman of the Commission and any other officers that may be required for the Commission.
The term of office of an officer of the Commission shall be established by the members of the Commission.
Quorum.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Bylaws.--The Commission may make such bylaws, rules, and regulations as it considers necessary to carry out its functions.
Administrative Support.--The Secretary shall provide the Commission with such professional and technical support, clerical staff and services, and administrative support as the Secretary determines necessary for the Commission to carry out its responsibilities under this Act.
Amounts required by the Secretary to carry out this subsection shall be paid from funds appropriated under section 5(a).
Termination.--The Commission shall terminate on the date that is 14 months after the completion of the evaluations by the Commission of the claims submitted to the Commission under section 4.
EVALUATION AND PAYMENT OF CLAIMS FOR COMPENSATION FOR TAKINGS RELATING TO WHITE SANDS MISSILE RANGE.
In General.--Claims for compensation for takings of property associated with the establishment of the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico, shall be evaluated, and payments of such compensation made, in accordance with this section.
Submittal of Claims.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (3), any individual described in paragraph (2) may submit to the White Sands Fair Compensation Commission a claim for full compensation for the taking of such individual's property as a result of the establishment of the White Sands Missile Range.
Eligible individuals.--The following individuals may submit claims under this subsection: (A) Individuals-- (i) who-- (I) owned real property that was taken by the United States for the purpose of establishing the area now known as the White Sands Missile Range, New Mexico; and (II) engaged in ranching activities on the real property at the time of the taking; and (ii) who claim that the amount paid by the United States in 1975 in compensation for the taking was not full compensation for the value of the property at the time of the taking.
Individuals who-- (i) possessed a mining claim in real property that was so taken; and (ii) claim that the amount paid by the United States in 1975 in compensation for the taking was not full compensation for value of the mining claim at the time of the taking.
Heirs or assigns of the individuals described in subparagraphs (A) and (B).
Deadline for claims.--A claim shall be submitted under this subsection not later than the end of the 14-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act.
Evaluation of Claims.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall evaluate each claim submitted under this section.
In evaluating a claim, the Commission shall-- (A) determine whether or not the individual submitting the claim is eligible to submit the claim; (B) if the individual is so eligible, determine whether or not the amount paid by the United States to the individual in 1975 for the real property or mining claim of the individual, as the case may be, was full compensation for the value of the real property or mining claim at the time of the taking; (C) if the amount so paid is determined not to have been such full compensation, determine the amount that would constitute such full compensation; and (D) notify the individual and the Secretary of Defense of the determinations.
Rules for valuation of real property.--In determining the value of real property under paragraph (1)(B), the Commission-- (A) shall utilize established precedents for the valuation of real property in New Mexico that is similar to the real property subject to valuation; (B) shall take into account the value, if any, added to the real property by Federal grazing permits associated with the real property; and (C) may not take into account any lease payments paid by the United States Government with respect to the real property between 1942 and 1975.
Priority of evaluation.--The Commission shall give priority in the order of evaluating claims under this subsection to claims submitted by individuals who owned the real property subject to the claims continuously from 1941 until the taking of the real property in 1975.
Appeal.-- (1) In general.--An individual submitting a claim under this section may appeal a determination of the Commission under subparagraph (B) or (C) of subsection (c)(1) by submitting a notice of appeal of the determination to the Secretary of Defense.
An individual shall submit the appeal not later than 30 days after receiving notice of the determination under subparagraph (D) of such subsection.
Review.--The Secretary shall review each appeal submitted to the Secretary under this subsection.
The Secretary shall complete the review not later than 60 days after the date of receiving the appeal.
Relief.--Subject to paragraph (4), upon completion of the review of an appeal under this subsection, the Secretary shall-- (A) uphold the determination of the Commission; or (B) establish an amount that is appropriate to provide full compensation to the individual submitting the appeal for the value of the real property or mining claim, as the case may be, of the individual that was taken by the United States Government.
Limitation on adjustment of compensation.--The amount of compensation established by the Secretary for a claim on appeal under paragraph (3)(B) may not be less than the amount of compensation determined by the Commission for the claim under subsection (c)(1).
Notification.--The Secretary shall notify each individual submitting an appeal under this subsection of the decision of the Secretary under paragraph (3).
Finality of decision.--The decision of the Secretary under paragraph (3) shall not be subject to judicial review.
Payment of Compensation.-- (1) Payment.--Subject to paragraph (2), upon upholding the determination of the Commission with respect to a claim under paragraph (3)(A) of subsection (d) or establishing an appropriate amount of compensation with respect to the claim under paragraph (3)(B) of that subsection, the Secretary of Defense shall pay to the individual submitting the claim the amount, if any, that is so upheld or established, as the case may be.
Payment subject to availability of appropriations.--The Secretary may make payments under this subsection in a fiscal year only to the extent that funds are appropriated for such purpose in advance in an appropriations Act.
Authorization for Activities of Commission.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary for the payment of the cost of the activities of the White Sands Fair Compensation Commission under this Act.
Such sums shall be available for expenditure until the termination of the Commission under section 3(i).
Authorization for Payment of Claims.--There is authorized to be appropriated $20,300,000 for the purposes of payment of claims under section 4.
Such amount shall remain available until expended.