In this Act: (1) Indian tribe.--The term ``Indian tribe'' means an Indian tribe, band, nation, pueblo, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional corporation (as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act (43 United States Code 1601 et sequentes)), that is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
TRANSFER OF BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT LAND.
Required Offer.-- (1) In general.--Subject to valid existing rights and except as otherwise provided in this Act, the Secretary shall offer to transfer all right, title, and interest of the United States in and to all land and interests in land administered by the Bureau of Land Management to the State in which the land and interests are located.
Land and interests included.--The land and interests in land referred to in paragraph (1) include-- (A) the fee simple interest, if the United States owns both the surface and mineral rights; (B) the mineral rights, if the surface estate is owned by a non-Federal person, including a State or political subdivision of a State; and (C) water rights related to the land or interest in land.
Exclusion of mineral interests underlying indian reservations.--Paragraph (1) does not apply with respect to the mineral interests underlying a surface estate held by the United States in trust for an Indian tribe.
Offer Within 2 Years.--The offer required by subsection (a) to be made to a State shall be made to the Governor of the State not later than 2 years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Acceptance of Offer.-- (1) All or nothing.--A State may accept an offer under subsection (a) in its entirety but may not accept the offer in part.
reject the offer in its entirety.
Acceptance by the governor.--Acceptance by a State of an offer under subsection (a) may be made only by the Governor of the State, in writing, to the Secretary.
Effective Date of Transfer.--Any transfer of land under this Act shall be effective with respect to a State on the date that is 10 years after the date on which the offer to the State is accepted.
Surveys.--The Secretary is not required to conduct a survey of any land prior to transferring the land under this Act.
Retention of Ownership by the State.-- (1) Restrictive covenant.-- (A) In general.--An instrument by which land or an interest in land is transferred under this Act shall contain a restrictive covenant stating that the State shall not convey any ownership interest in the land or interest in land to any person (including a political subdivision of the State) unless the Governor of the State submits to the Secretary, at least 90 days before the date of conveyance, a certification that-- (i) the land or interest in land will be conveyed in connection with a transaction or series of transactions in which there will be conveyed to the State land or an interest in land that is of at least equal value to the State; and (ii) the ownership of that land or interest in land by the State will be subject to the same restrictive covenant.
Breach.--Not later than 90 days after the date on which the Secretary receives a certification under paragraph (1), the Attorney General, at the request of the Secretary, may bring an action in the United States district court for the district in which the land is located to enjoin a conveyance in breach of the restrictive covenant.
LEASES, PERMITS, AND UNPATENTED MINING CLAIMS.
Valid Leases and Permits.--A State to which land is transferred under this Act shall honor valid existing leases and permits on the land for the term of the lease or permit and shall manage the leases and permits in accordance with the other terms and conditions of the leases and permits.
Mining Claims.-- (1) In general.--Except for mining claims for which the holder is entitled to a patent as provided in paragraph (2), after the date on which land subject to a mining claim is transferred to a State under this Act, the validity and continued existence of the mining claim shall be determined under the law of the State to which the land was transferred and shall be administered in accordance with the law of that State.
Issuance of patent.--The holder of a mining claim is entitled to the issuance of a patent in the case of a mining claim on land transferred to a State under this Act in the same manner and degree to which the holder would have been entitled to prior to the date of the transfer if, as of the date of the transfer-- (A) a patent application was filed with the Secretary; and (B) the holder fully complied with-- (i) all requirements under sections 2325 and 2326 of the Revised Statutes (30 United States Code 29 and 30) for vein or lode claims; (ii) all requirements under sections 2329, 2330, 2331, and 2333 of the Revised Statutes (30 United States Code 35, 36, 37) for placer claims; and (C) all requirements applicable to the patent application for mill site claims.
Rights-of-Way.--A State to which land is transferred under this Act shall respect a right-of-way granted by the United States on the land in accordance with the terms and conditions of the right-of-way.
MANAGEMENT OF LAND TRANSFERRED UNDER THIS ACT.
Wilderness.--Land transferred under this Act that has been designated by an Act of Congress as wilderness shall be managed by the State as wilderness in accordance with the requirements of the Wilderness Act (16 United States Code 1131 et sequentes), the law that designated the land as wilderness, and any other Federal law that specifically provides for the management of the land, except that the State shall be substituted for the Secretary as the person with authority and responsibility to manage the land.
Military Uses.-- (1) Continued use.--Land transferred under this Act that on the date of transfer is subject to use for military purposes shall continue to be subject to the same military uses.
Land subject to withdrawal.-- (A) In general.--In the case of land transferred to a State under this Act that is subject to a withdrawal from public use for military purposes, the State shall respect the withdrawal and military use for the term of the withdrawal and may not impose any fee or other charge on the United States with respect to the military purpose.
Negotiation at end of term of withdrawal.--At the end of the term of withdrawal, the Secretary of the military department concerned, or the Secretary of Defense, may negotiate with the Governor of the State for the continued use of the land.
Decontamination.--Land for which there is not a continued military use shall be decontaminated by the appropriate Secretary in accordance with the Act of Congress that withdrew the land for military purposes or the withdrawal order, if any.
Records.-- (1) Holding by the secretary.--The Secretary shall continue to hold all land records of the Secretary with respect to the land transferred to a State under this Act.
Copies to the state.--The Secretary shall provide to the State full copies of all applicable land records relating to land transferred under this Act.
Availability to the public.--The Secretary shall make such records available for public use as the Secretary determines to be appropriate for public disclosure.
Indian Land.--The mineral interests described in section 2(a)(3) shall be transferred from the administrative jurisdiction of the Bureau of Land Management and shall be held in trust for the Indian tribe for which the overlying surface estate is held in trust.
Continued Public Access.--A State to which land or an interest in land is transferred under this Act shall ensure that the public continues to have access to the land for the purposes of hunting, fishing, and other appropriate recreational activities, in accordance with applicable Federal and State laws and the principles of multiple use, to substantially the same extent as on the date of transfer.
In General.--The Secretary shall transfer to a State to which land is transferred under this Act all water rights of the United States associated with the land.
Certain Rights Not Affected.--A transfer of water rights under subsection (a) shall not be construed as-- (1) affecting, impairing, diminishing, subordinating, or enlarging-- (A) the rights of the United States or any State to water under any international treaty, interstate compact, or existing judicial decree; (B) any obligation of the United States to Indians or Indian tribes or any claim or right owned or held by or for Indians or Indian tribes, including with respect to any Indian water compact; (C) any right to any quantity of water reserved or used for governmental purposes or programs of the United States at any time prior to the date of enactment of this Act; or (D) any license or permit issued before the date of enactment of this Act; or (2) as a recognition, disclaimer, relinquishment, or reduction of any water right of the United States reserved or appropriated before the date of enactment of this Act.
REDUCTION IN BUDGET AUTHORITY FOR THE BUREAU OF LAND MANAGEMENT.
Cap on Obligations and Expenditures.--Beginning with the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted, not more than $800,000,000 may be obligated or expended in any fiscal year by the Bureau of Land Management in carrying out its duties, functions, and responsibilities under any provision of law.
Priority for Use of Fiscal Resources.--The Secretary shall give priority to expending amounts available to the Bureau of Land Management to land management activities and to carrying out this Act.