Congress makes the following findings: (1) The Selected Reserve of the Ready Reserve of the Armed Forces is the element of the Armed Forces of the United States that has the capability quickly to augment the active duty forces of the Armed Forces successfully in times of crisis.
The Selected Reserve has been assigned increasingly critical levels of responsibility for carrying out the worldwide military missions of the Armed Forces since the end of the Cold War.
Members of the Selected Reserve have served proudly as mobilized forces in numerous theaters from Europe to the Pacific and South America, indeed, around the world.
The active duty forces of the Armed Forces cannot successfully perform all of the national security missions of the Armed Forces without augmentation by the Selected Reserve.
The high and increasing tempo of activity of the Selected Reserve causes turbulence in the relationships of members of the Selected Reserve with their families, employers, and reserve units.
The turbulence often results from lengthy, sometimes year-long, absences of the members of the Selected Reserve from their families and their civilian jobs in the performance of military duties necessary for the execution of essential missions.
Family turbulence includes the difficulties associated with vacillation between coverage of members' families for health care under civilian health benefits plans and coverage under the military health benefits options.
Up to 200,000 members of the Selected Reserve, including, in particular, self-employed members, do not have adequate health benefits.
PARTICIPATION BY MEMBERS OF THE SELECTED RESERVE AND THEIR DEPENDENTS IN THE TRICARE PROGRAM.
In General.--Chapter 55 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1076a the following new section: ``Sec.
TRICARE program: participation by members of the Selected Reserve and their dependents ``(a) In General.--(1) A member of the Selected Reserve shall be eligible to receive health care under TRICARE Standard.
Such a member shall be required to pay 40 percent of the premiums associated with participation in TRICARE Standard, and the Government shall be required to pay 60 percent of such premiums.
Participation of a member of the Selected Reserve in TRICARE Standard shall not effect the enrollment of such member in TRICARE Prime if such member is called to active duty.
Dependents.--(1) A dependent of a member of the Selected Reserve shall be eligible to receive health care under TRICARE Standard.
Such a member shall be required to pay 40 percent of the premiums associated with participation by the dependent in TRICARE Standard, and the Government shall be required to pay 60 percent of such premiums.
Participation of a dependent of a member of the Selected Reserve in TRICARE Standard shall not effect the enrollment of such dependent in TRICARE Prime if such member is called to active duty.
Period for Election To Participate.--Each year the Secretary of Defense shall specify a period for election to participate in TRICARE Standard under subsections (a) and (b).
The duration of the annual period may be any period of 90 or more days specified by the Secretary.
Termination of Participation.--(1) If the status of a person as a member of the Selected Reserve terminates, the participation of that person, or a dependent of such person, in TRICARE Standard by reason of eligibility under this section terminates on the effective date of that termination of status.
No portion of a premium paid for participation in TRICARE Standard under subsection (a) or (b) shall be refunded to a person whose participation in TRICARE Standard is terminated under paragraph (1).
Future Applicability of Premiums Already Paid.--Premiums paid for participation in TRICARE Standard under this section for a period during which a member or dependent is enrolled in TRICARE Prime as a result of the member being called to active duty shall be applied to a period during which the member or dependent is no longer enrolled in TRICARE Prime.
Selected Reserve.--In this section, the term `Selected Reserve' has the meaning of that term as used in section 10143 of this title.''.
Conforming Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1076a the following new item: ``1076b.
TRICARE program: participation by members of the Selected Reserve and their dependents.