This Act may be cited as the ``Infant Crib Safety Act''.
Findings.--Congress makes the following findings: (1) The disability and death of infants resulting from injuries sustained in crib incidents are a serious threat to the public health, welfare, and safety of people of this country.
The design and construction of a baby crib must ensure that it is safe to leave an infant unattended for extended periods of time.
A parent or caregiver has a right to believe that the crib in use is a safe place to leave an infant.
Each year more than 12,000 children ages 2 and under are injured in cribs seriously enough to require hospital treatment.
Each year at least 50 children ages 2 and under die from injuries sustained in cribs.
The United States Consumer Product Safety Commission estimates that the cost to society resulting from deaths due to cribs is at least $225,000,000 per year.
Secondhand, hand-me-down, and heirloom cribs pose a special problem.
There are nearly 4 million infants born in this country each year, but only one million new cribs sold.
As many as 2 out of 4 infants are placed in secondhand, hand-me- down, or heirloom cribs.
Most crib deaths occur in secondhand, hand-me-down, or heirloom cribs.
Existing State and Federal legislation is inadequate to deal with the hazard presented by secondhand, hand-me-down, or heirloom cribs.
Prohibiting the contracting to sell, resell, lease, sublease of unsafe cribs that are not new, or otherwise place in the stream of commerce unsafe secondhand, hand-me-down, or heirloom cribs, will prevent injuries and deaths caused by cribs.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to prevent the occurrence of injuries and deaths to infants as a result of unsafe cribs by making it illegal-- (1) to manufacture, sell, or contract to sell any crib that is unsafe for any infant using it; or (2) to resell, lease, sublet, or otherwise place in the stream of commerce, after the effective date of this Act, any unsafe crib, particularly any unsafe secondhand, hand-me-down, or heirloom crib.
As used in this Act: (1) Commercial user.--The term ``commercial user'' means any person-- (A) who manufactures, sells, or contracts to sell full-size cribs or nonfull-size cribs; or (B) who-- (i) deals in full-size or nonfull-size cribs that are not new or who otherwise by one's occupation holds oneself out as having knowledge or skill peculiar to full-size cribs or nonfull-size cribs, including child care facilities and family child care homes; or (ii) is in the business of contracting to sell or resell, lease, sublet, or otherwise placing in the stream of commerce full-size cribs or nonfull-size cribs that are not new.
Crib.--The term ``crib'' means a full-size crib or nonfull-size crib.
Full-size crib.--The term ``full-size crib'' means a full-size baby crib as defined in section 1508.1 of title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Infant.--The term ``infant'' means any person less than 35 inches tall or less than 2 years of age.
Nonfull-size crib.--The term ``nonfull-size crib'' means a nonfull-size baby crib as defined in section 1509.2(b) of title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations (including a portable crib and a crib-pen described in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of that section).
In General.--It shall be unlawful for any commercial user-- (1) to manufacture, sell, or contract to sell, any full- size crib or nonfull-size crib that is unsafe for any infant using it; or (2) to sell, contract to sell or resell, lease, sublet, or otherwise place in the stream of commerce, any full-size or nonfull-size crib that is not new and that is unsafe for any infant using the crib.
Lodgings.--It shall be unlawful for any hotel, motel, or similar transient lodging facility to offer or provide for use or otherwise place in the stream of commerce, on or after the effective date of this Act, any full-size crib or nonfull-size crib that is unsafe for any infant using it.
A crib shall be presumed to be unsafe under this Act if it does not conform to all of the following: (1) Part 1508 (commencing with section 1508.1) of title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Part 1509 (commencing with section 1509.1) of title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Part 1303 (commencing with section 1303.1) of title 16 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
American Society for Testing Materials Voluntary Standard F.406.
American Society for Testing Materials Voluntary Standards F966.
American Society for Testing Materials Voluntary Standards F1169.
American Society for Testing Materials Voluntary Standards F1822.
Any regulations or standards that are adopted in order to amend or supplement the regulations described in paragraphs (1) through (7).
This Act shall not apply to a full-size crib or nonfull-size crib that is not intended for use by an infant, including a toy or display item, if at the time it is manufactured, made subject to a contract to sell or resell, leased, subletted, or otherwise placed in the stream of commerce, as applicable, it is accompanied by a notice to be furnished by each commercial user declaring that the crib is not intended to be used for an infant and is dangerous to use for an infant.
Civil Penalty.--Any commercial user, hotel, motel, or similar transient lodging facility that knowingly violates section 4 is subject to a civil penalty not exceeding $1,000.
Injunction.--Any person may bring an action in a district court of the United States against any commercial user, hotel, motel, or similar transient lodging facility to enjoin any act or omission that violates section 4, and for reasonable attorneys fees and costs incurred in bringing the action.
Penalties or other remedies available under this Act are in addition to any other fines, penalties, remedies, or procedures under any other provision of law.
This Act shall become effective 90 days after the date of its enactment.