This Act may be cited as the ``Universal College Credit Act''.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by inserting after section 25D the following new section: ``SEC.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual for whom an election is in effect under this section for a taxable year, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for the taxable year an amount equal to the qualified tuition and related expenses paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year.
Dollar Limitation.--The amount allowed as a credit under subsection (a) with respect to each individual for whom qualified tuition and related expenses are paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year shall not exceed $5,000.
Credit Allowed Only for 4 Years of Undergraduate Education and 6 Years of Graduate Education.--An election to have this section apply with respect to any individual for whom qualified tuition and related expenses are paid by the taxpayer during the taxable year may not be made for any taxable year if such an election (by the taxpayer or any other individual) is in effect with respect to-- ``(1) the undergraduate education expenses of such individual for any 4 prior taxable years, or ``(2) the graduate education expenses of such individual for any 6 prior taxable years.
Denial of Double Benefit.--No credit shall be allowed under this section with respect to the qualified tuition and related expenses of any individual if a credit or deduction is allowed under any other provision of this chapter with respect to such expenses.
Definitions and Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Qualified tuition and related expenses.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `qualified tuition and related expenses' means tuition and fees required for the enrollment or attendance of-- ``(i) the taxpayer, ``(ii) the taxpayer's spouse, or ``(iii) any dependent of the taxpayer with respect to whom the taxpayer is allowed a deduction under section 151, at an eligible educational institution for courses of instruction of such individual at such institution.
Exception for education involving sports, etc.--Such term does not include expenses with respect to any course or other education involving sports, games, or hobbies, unless such course or other education is part of the individual's degree program.
Exception for nonacademic fees.--Such term does not include student activity fees, athletic fees, insurance expenses, or other expenses unrelated to an individual's academic course of instruction.
Adjustment for scholarships and section 529 distributions.--The amount of qualified tuition and related expenses otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to an individual for the taxable year shall be reduced-- ``(i) as provided in section 25A(g)(2), and ``(ii) by the amount of such expenses which are taken into account in determining the exclusions under sections 529(c)(3)(B) and 530(d)(2).
Eligible educational institution.--The term `eligible educational institution' means an institution-- ``(A) which is described in section 102 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 1001, 1002), as in effect on the date of the enactment of this section, and ``(B) which is eligible to participate in a program under title IV of such Act.
Undergraduate education expenses.--The term `undergraduate education expenses' means the qualified tuition and related expenses paid by the taxpayer during a taxable year for an individual enrolled in an undergraduate course of study during such taxable year.
Graduate education expenses.--The term `graduate education expenses' means the qualified tuition and related expenses paid by the taxpayer during a taxable year for an individual enrolled in a graduate or professional course of study during such taxable year.
Adjustment for certain scholarships, etc.--The amount of qualified tuition and related expenses otherwise taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to an individual for an academic period shall be reduced by the sum of any amounts paid for the benefit of such individual which are allocable to such period as-- ``(A) a qualified scholarship which is excludable from gross income under section 117, ``(B) an educational assistance allowance under chapter 30, 31, 32, 34, or 35 of title 38, United States Code, or under chapter 1606 of title 10, United States Code, and ``(C) a payment (other than a gift, bequest, devise, or inheritance within the meaning of section 102(a)) for such individual's educational expenses, or attributable to such individual's enrollment at an eligible educational institution, which is excludable from gross income under any law of the United States.
Election Not To Have Section Apply.--A taxpayer may elect to have this section not apply with respect to an individual for any taxable year.''.
Coordination With Exclusion for Income From United States Savings Bonds Used To Pay Higher Education Tuition and Fees.-- Subparagraph (A) of section 135(d)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or 25E'' after ``section 25A''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25D the following new item: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.