This Act may be cited as the ``Voting Equipment Modernization Act of 2001''.
DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT FUND.
In General.--Subchapter A of chapter 61 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to information and returns) is amended by adding at the end the following new part: ``PART IX--DESIGNATION OF INCOME TAX PAYMENTS TO ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT FUND ``Sec.
Designation to Election Administration Improvement Fund.
DESIGNATION TO ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT FUND.
In General.--Every individual (other than a nonresident alien) whose adjusted income tax liability for the taxable year is $1 or more may designate that $1 shall be paid over to the Election Administration Improvement Fund in accordance with the provisions of section 9511.
In the case of a joint return of husband and wife having an adjusted income tax liability of $2 or more, each spouse may designate that $1 shall be paid to the fund.
Adjusted Income Tax Liability.--For purposes of subsection (a), the term `adjusted income tax liability' means, for any individual for any taxable year, the excess (if any) of-- ``(1) the income tax liability (as defined in section 6096(b)) of the individual for the taxable year, over ``(2) any amount designated by the individual (and, in the case of a joint return, any amount designated by the individual's spouse) under section 6096(a) for such taxable year.
Manner and Time of Designation.--A designation under subsection (a) may be made with respect to any taxable year-- ``(1) at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, or ``(2) at any other time (after the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year) specified in regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Such designation shall be made in such manner as the Secretary prescribes by regulations except that, if such designation is made at the time of filing the return of the tax imposed by chapter 1 for such taxable year, such designation shall be made either on the first page of the return or on the page bearing the taxpayer's signature.
Termination.--Designations may be made under this section for taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001, and ending before January 1, 2004.''
Election Administration Improvement Fund.--Subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code (relating to establishment of trust funds) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
ELECTION ADMINISTRATION IMPROVEMENT FUND.
Creation of Trust Fund.--There is established in the Treasury of the United States a trust fund to be known as the `Election Administration Improvement Fund', consisting of such amounts as may be appropriated or credited to such fund as provided in this section or section 9602(b).
Transfers to Trust Fund.--There are hereby appropriated to the Election Administration Improvement Fund amounts equivalent to the amounts designated under section 6098.
Expenditures.--Amounts in the Election Administration Improvement Fund shall be available, as provided in appropriation Acts, for purposes of making payments to States under subsection (d), to the extent that such amounts exceed the aggregate of all Federal administrative costs attributable to the implementation of section 6098, subsections (a) and (b) of this section, and (with respect to such fund) section 9602.
Payments to States.-- ``(1) In general.--From the amounts available pursuant to subsection (c) for a fiscal year, the Federal Election Commission shall make a payment to each State for carrying out activities to improve the administration of elections for Federal office, including the purchase and maintenance of improved voting equipment and technology, in accordance with such criteria as the Commission may establish by regulation.
Amount of payment.--The amount of the payment made to a State for a fiscal year under this subsection shall be equal to the product of-- ``(A) the total amount available for payments under this subsection for the fiscal year; and ``(B) the amount (expressed as a percentage) equal to the population of the State divided by the total population of all States.
State defined.--In this subsection, the term `State' means each of the several States and the District of Columbia.''
Clerical Amendments.-- (1) The table of parts for subchapter A of chapter 61 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Part IX.
Designation of income tax payments to Election Administration Improvement Fund.''
The table of sections for subchapter A of chapter 98 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Election Administration Improvement Fund.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 2001.