This Act may be cited as the ``Freedom From Nicotine Addiction Act of 1995''.
The Congress finds the following: (1) Tobacco use remains the largest preventable cause of illness and premature death in the United States, responsible for the unnecessary deaths of more than 419,000 Americans each year.
Tobacco is a uniquely harmful product in that it kills if used as intended.
The United States health care system expenditures due directly to smoking totals $50 billion a year.
The United States economy loses $47 billion a year in productivity due to smoking.
The 1988 report of the United States Surgeon General concluded that cigarettes and other forms of tobacco are addicting, that nicotine is the drug in tobacco that causes addiction, and that the pharmacologic and behavioral processes that determine tobacco addiction are similar to those that determine addiction to heroin and cocaine.
The 1994 report by the United States Surgeon General concluded that the nicotine in tobacco products is responsible for the rapid addiction of up to half of all children who experiment with tobacco.
Among adults in the United States who have ever smoked daily, 91 percent tried their first cigarette and 77 percent became daily smokers before they were 20 years old.
Nicotine addicts over 3,000 children each day into an activity which eventually will kill approximately \1/2\ of them.
The current Commissioner of Food and Drugs has labeled tobacco a pediatric disease.
A senior research scientist for one of the largest cigarette manufacturers in the United States has observed: ``The primary incentive to cigarette smoking is the immediate salutary effect of inhaled smoke upon body function .
The physiological effect serves as the primary incentive; all other incentives are secondary .
Think of the cigarette pack as a storage container for a day's supply of nicotine .
Think of the cigarette as a dispenser for a dose unit of nicotine .
Think of a puff of smoke as the vehicle of nicotine.''.
The use of tobacco products continues to be widespread, in spite of increased awareness of their lethal nature, because nicotine which is the single, removable substance in tobacco that causes addiction in children and reinforces that addiction in adults.
Tobacco manufacturers have the capability to remove all or virtually all of the nicotine from their tobacco products using technology already in existence.
Nicotine destroys the freedom of millions of children and adults in the United States to choose whether or not to continue using tobacco products.
Definition.--Section 201 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 321) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(gg) The term `tobacco product' means any cigarette, cigar, little cigar, pipe tobacco, fine cut tobacco, or any smokeless tobacco product.
The term `nicotine' includes any substance that has pharmacologic activity similar to nicotine.''.
Reduction in Nicotine.--Chapter V of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act is amended-- (1) in the title by adding at the end ``AND TOBACCO PRODUCTS'', and (2) by adding after subchapter C the following: ``Subchapter D--Tobacco Products ``regulation of tobacco products ``Sec.
It shall be unlawful to introduce or deliver for introduction into interstate commerce any tobacco product that is adulterated.
A tobacco product shall be considered adulterated if it contains nicotine in a quantity per cigarette exceeding the following: ``As of January 1, 1997, 10.00 mg. nicotine.
``As of January 1, 1998, 8.00 mg. nicotine.
``As of January 1, 1999, 6.00 mg. nicotine.
``As of January 1, 2000, 4.00 mg. nicotine.
``As of January 1, 2001, 2.00 mg. nicotine.
``As of January 1, 2002, .05 mg. nicotine.
The Secretary shall prescribe a reduction in the nicotine in tobacco products other than cigarettes which is comparable to the reduction required by subsection (b).
Such reduction shall be published in the Federal Register.
Such a tobacco product shall be considered adulterated if it contains nicotine in a quantity exceeding the quantity prescribed by the Secretary.''.
Enforcement.--Section 301 of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 U.S.C 331) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(v) The introduction or delivery for introduction into interstate commerce of an adulterated tobacco product.