This Act may be cited as the ``Illegal Transshipments Enforcement Act of 2002''.
Findings.--Congress finds the following: (1) The United States textile and apparel sector, which employs approximately 1,000,000 workers, is being seriously hurt by smuggling and transshipment of textile and apparel products.
Tens of thousands of United States textile workers have lost their jobs because of these illegal activities.
According to industry and government estimates, illegal textile and apparel smuggling and transshipment totals billions of dollars per year.
China and other major Asian exporting countries have a decades-long history of illegally shipping textile and apparel goods to the United States.
A new avenue of illegal trade which involves the evasion of duties using countries that have free trade agreements with the United States has developed and is particularly harmful to the United States textile and apparel industry.
This new avenue of trade takes advantage of lax regulatory and enforcement administration of the in-transit or in bond programs administered by the Customs Service.
The 1999 Report of the Interagency Commission on Crime and Security in United States Reports Seaports found that-- (A) these goods ``pose the largest risk'' and that ``federal officials do not receive sufficient information to make admissibility decisions on this cargo''; (B) ``in-bond procedures of the United States Customs Service deny the federal government detailed information on cargo that is transiting the United States''; (C) ``existing statutes, regulations and sentencing guidelines do not provide sufficient cause to deter criminal or civil violations related to the import and export of goods and contraband''; (D) ``existing criminal sanctions (for illegal fraud schemes) provide no deterrent value'' and that ``violators view the sentences as minor roadblocks and a cost of doing business''; (E) ``criminals can bypass the federal clearance and inspection process through underreporting, mis- reporting, or not reporting at all''; (F) ``the number of inspectors and criminal investigations has simply not kept pace with the trade volume''; (G) ``the lack of effective cargo control .
has significant negative economic consequences, ranging from lost duty and tax revenues to the United States, to failure to enforce international trade agreements and restrictions on import or export cargo''; and (H) ``due to short staffing and limited technology, inspectors look at only about one percent of containers.''
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act, and the amendments made by this Act, is to establish new administrative and regulatory guidelines which will enable the Customs Service to effectively deter commercial fraud in the United States, particularly concerning textile and apparel products.
CUSTOMS ENFORCEMENT FOR IN-TRANSIT GOODS AND CARGO THEFT.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary of the Treasury shall require that the following actions are taken: (1) Not less than 1 out of every 10 containers imported into the United States, including containers to be sent to bonded warehouses and foreign-trade zones, shall be inspected, including through the use of electronic and x-ray screening equipment.
Prearrival electronic filing of documentation equivalent to the current entry package not later than 72 hours prior to arrival shall be required as a condition for release from the custody of the Customs Service for goods that are in- transit or in bond.
Technology for screening of goods that are entered into the United States for consumption shall be applied to all in- transit goods.
All information in documents filed for exportation of in-transit goods, including documents from bonded warehouses and foreign-trade zones, are physically verified.
The Commissioner of the Customs Service shall establish procedures to physically verify that in-transit goods that are declared to be exiting the United States are in fact actually exported from the United States.
In addition, the Commissioner shall coordinate systems with other foreign Customs Services, particularly those in Mexico and Canada, to assist in verifying the exportation of goods referred to in the preceding sentence and to assist those countries in ensuring that such goods, upon importation, are not declared to be products of the United States.
Random inspections of at least 1 out of every 10 containers carried on rail cars, barges, pipelines and trucks after importation shall be required, including importation into bonded warehouses and foreign-trade zones, and before exportation of in-transit goods.
Security and background investigations of all employees of all freight forwarders, booking handlers, and bonded carriers, including bonded warehousemen and operators of foreign-trade zones, involved in the import or export of in- transit goods shall be undertaken.
Ensure that penalties imposed for any violation of any law or regulation arising from transactions involving in- transit and in-bond textile and clothing goods and declarations regarding textile and apparel products made on vessel manifests are not mitigated.
Establish that a mis-description of a textile or apparel product, either regarding the quantity or the nature of the product, on an entry document, a manifest or in-bond or in- transit documentation is considered a purposeful and intentional act and constitutes fraud.
The penalty, which shall not be mitigated by the port director or Customs Headquarters, for such an act is the domestic value of the goods in question.
Increase the total number of field agents, import specialists, and inspectors dedicated to fraud and cargo enforcement to equal 25 percent of total number of employees of the Customs Service.
Establish cargo enforcement teams consisting of agents, inspectors, and import specialists whose sole function is the detection of cargo thefts, frauds, and diversions, including those thefts, frauds, and diversions occurring in bonded warehouses and foreign-trade zones.
Establish a cargo fraud enforcement unit in the headquarters of the Customs Service that is composed of special agents, inspectors, and import specialists whose sole function is to manage, direct, and provide oversight of the program and which includes goods destined for bonded warehouses and foreign-trade zones.
Conduct all inspections at ports and eliminate centralized inspection stations outside of ports.
Establish rail inspection facilities within proximity of the border at all rail entry points.
Ensure that container rail traffic is inspected to the same extent as container port traffic.
PUNISHMENT OF CARGO THEFT.
In General.--Section 659 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by striking ``with intent to convert to his own use'' each place that term appears; (2) in the first undesignated paragraph-- (A) by inserting ``trailer,'' after ``motortruck,''; (B) by inserting ``air cargo container,'' after ``aircraft,''; and (C) by inserting ``, or from any intermodal container, trailer, container freight station, warehouse, or freight consolidation facility,'' after ``air navigation facility''; (3) in the fifth undesignated paragraph, by striking ``one year'' and inserting ``3 years''; (4) in the penultimate undesignated paragraph, by inserting after the first sentence the following: ``For purposes of this section, goods and chattel shall be construed to be moving as an interstate or foreign shipment at all points between the point of origin and the final destination (as evidenced by the waybill or other shipping document of the shipment), regardless of any temporary stop while awaiting transshipment or otherwise.
'; and (5) by adding at the end the following: ``It shall be an affirmative defense (on which the defendant bears the burden of persuasion by a preponderance of the evidence) to an offense under this section that the defendant bought, received, or possessed the goods, chattels, money, or baggage at issue with the sole intent to report the matter to an appropriate law enforcement officer or to the owner of the goods, chattels, money, or baggage.''.
Federal Sentencing Guidelines.--Pursuant to section 994 of title 28, United States Code, the United States Sentencing Commission shall review the Federal sentencing guidelines under section 659 of title 18, United States Code, as amended by this section and, upon completion of the review, promulgate amendments to the Federal Sentencing Guidelines to provide appropriate enhancement of the applicable guidelines.