This Act may be cited as the ``Bandelier National Monument Administrative Improvement and Watershed Protection Act of 1998''.
Findings.--Congress finds that: (1) Bandelier National Monument (hereinafter, the Monument) was established by Presidential proclamation on February 11, 1916, to preserve the archeological resources of a ``vanished people, with as much land as may be necessary for the proper protection thereof .
1322; 39 United States Statutes at Large 1746).
At various times since its establishment, the Congress and the President have adjusted the Monument's boundaries and purpose to further preservation of archeological and natural resources within the Monument.
On February 25, 1932, the Otowi Section of the Santa Fe National Forest (some 4,699 acres of land) was transferred to the Monument from the Santa Fe National Forest (Presidential Proclamation No.
1191; 17 United States Statutes at Large 2503).
In December of 1959, 3,600 acres of Frijoles Mesa were transferred to the National Park Service from the Atomic Energy Committee (hereinafter, AEC) and subsequently added to the Monument on January 9, 1991, because of ``pueblo-type archeological ruins germane to those in the monument'' (Presidential Proclamation No.
On May 27, 1963, Upper Canyon, 2,882 acres of land previously administered by the AEC, was added to the Monument to preserve ``their unusual scenic character together with geologic and topographic features, the preservation of which would implement the purposes'' of the Monument (Presidential Proclamation No.
In 1976, concerned about upstream land management activities that could result in flooding and erosion in the Monument, Congress included the headwaters of the Rito de los Frijoles and the Canada de Cochiti Grant (a total of 7,310 acres) within the Monument's boundaries (Public Law 94-578; 90 United States Statutes at Large 2732).
In 1976, Congress created the Bandelier Wilderness, a 23,267 acres area that covers over 70 percent of the Monument.
The Monument still has potential threats from flooding, erosion, and water quality deterioration because of the mixed ownership of the upper watersheds, along its western border, particularly in Alamo Canyon.
Purpose.--The purpose of this Act is to modify the boundary of the Monument to allow for acquisition and enhanced protection of the lands within the Monument's upper watershed.
Effective on the date of enactment of this Act, the boundaries of the Monument shall be modified to include approximately 935 acres of land comprised of the Elk Meadows subdivision, the Gardner parcel, the Clark parcel, and the Baca Land & Cattle Co. lands within the Upper Alamo watershed as depicted on the National Park Service map entitled ``Proposed Boundary Expansion Map Bandelier National Monument'' dated July, 1997.
Such map shall be on file and available for public inspection in the offices of the Director of the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
In General.--Except as provided in subsections (b) and (c), the Secretary of the Interior is authorized to acquire lands and interests therein within the boundaries of the area added to the Monument by this Act by donation, purchase with donated or appropriated funds, transfer with another Federal agency, or exchange: Provided, That no lands or interests therein may be acquired except with the consent of the owner thereof.
State and local lands.--Lands or interests therein owned by the State of New Mexico or a political subdivision thereof may only be acquired by donation or exchange.
Acquisition of less than Fee interests in Land.--The Secretary may acquire less than fee interests in land only if the Secretary determines that such less than fee acquisition will adequately protect the Monument from flooding, erosion, and degradation of its drainage waters.
The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall manage the national Monument, including lands added to the Monument by this Act, in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916, an Act to establish a National Park Service (39 United States Statutes at Large 535; 16 United States Code 1 et sequentes), and such specific legislation as heretofore has been enacted regarding the Monument.
There is authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purpose of this Act.
Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Vice President of the United States and President of the Senate.