This Act may be cited as the ``Independent Bipartisan Commission on Campaign Finance Reform Act of 1997''.
ESTABLISHMENT AND DUTIES OF COMMISSION.
Establishment.--There is established a commission to be known as the ``Independent Bipartisan Commission on Campaign Finance Reform'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
Duties.--The duties of the Commission are to study the law relating to elections for Federal office and to report and recommend legislation to reform that law.
Composition.-- (1) Number.--The Commission shall be composed of 12 members appointed by the President not later than the date that is 15 days after the date of enactment of this Act.
Requirements.--The members shall be appointed from among individuals who-- (A) are not incumbent Members of Congress; and (B) are specially qualified to serve on the Commission by reason of education, training, or experience.
Appointment.-- (1) In general.--Members shall be appointed as follows: (A) 3 members (one of whom is a political independent (as defined in paragraph (3))) shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
3 members (one of whom is a political independent) shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the Majority Leader of the Senate.
3 members (one of whom is a political independent) shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the Minority Leader of the House of Representatives.
3 members (one of whom is a political independent) shall be appointed from among a list of nominees submitted by the Minority Leader of the Senate.
Failure to submit list of nominees.--If an official described in subparagraph (A), (B), (C), or (D) of paragraph (1) fails to submit a list of nominees to the President during the 15-day period that begins on the date of enactment of this Act-- (A) the applicable subparagraph shall no longer apply; and (B) the President shall appoint 3 members (one of whom is a political independent) who meet the requirements described in subsection (a) and such other criteria as the President may determine to apply.
Political independent.--In this subsection, the term ``political independent'' means an individual who at no time on or after January 1, 1992-- (A) has held elective office as a member of the Democratic or Republican party; (B) has received any compensation from the Democratic or Republican party or from a Democratic or Republican party officeholder or candidate; or (C) has provided substantial volunteer services or made any substantial contribution to the Democratic or Republican party or to a Democratic or Republican party officeholder or candidate.
Chairperson.--At the time of the appointment, the President shall designate 1 member of the Commission as the chairperson of the Commission.
Period of Appointment.--A member of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancy.--A vacancy in the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Political Affiliation.--Not more than 4 members of the Commission may be of the same political party (as defined in section 301 of the Federal Election Campaign Act of 1971 (2 United States Code 431)).
Hearings.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at such times and places, take such testimony, and receive such evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
Open meetings.--In carrying out the preceding paragraph, the Commission shall ensure that a substantial number of its meetings are open meetings, with significant opportunities for testimony from members of the general public.
Quorum.--7 members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Voting.--The approval of at least 9 members of the Commission is required when approving all or a portion of the recommended legislation.
Power of Member.--A member of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take an action that the Commission is authorized to take under this section.
Pay and Travel Expenses of Members.-- (1) Pay rate.--Each member of the Commission shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the annual rate of basic pay prescribed for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Members of the Commission shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff Director.--The Commission shall, without regard to section 5311(b) of title 5, United States Code, appoint a staff director, who shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Commission; Services.-- (1) In general.--With the approval of the Commission, the staff director of the Commission may appoint additional personnel, without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may fix the pay of additional personnel, without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Maximum rate of pay.--An an individual appointed under paragraph (1) may not receive pay in excess of the maximum annual rate of basic pay payable for grade GS-15 of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Experts and consultants.--The Commission may procure by contract the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
REPORT AND RECOMMENDED LEGISLATION.
Report.--Not later than July 1, 1998, or the date that is 240 days after the date on which the last of the members of the Commission is appointed under section 3 (whichever occurs earlier), the Commission shall submit to the President, the Speaker and Minority Leader of the House of Representatives, and the Majority and Minority Leaders of the Senate a report of the activities of the Commission.
Recommendations; Draft of Legislation.--The report under subsection (a) shall include-- (1) any recommendations for changes in the law (including regulations) relating to elections for Federal office (including any changes in the rules of the Senate or the House of Representatives) to which 9 or more members of the Commission agree; and (2) at least 1 bill (including technical and conforming provisions) approved by the members of the Commission to implement the recommendations.
Goals of Recommendations and Legislation.--In making recommendations and preparing legislation under this section, the Commission shall consider the following primary goals: (1) Encouraging fair and open Federal elections that provide voters with meaningful information about candidates and issues.
Eliminating the disproportionate influence of special interest financing of Federal elections.
Creating a more equitable electoral system for challenger and incumbent candidates.
EXPEDITED CONGRESSIONAL CONSIDERATION OF LEGISLATION.
In General.--Each bill submitted under section 6(b) shall-- (1) not later than 3 days after the Commission submits the bill under section 6(a), be introduced (by request) in the House of Representatives by the Majority Leader of the House and shall be introduced (by request) in the Senate by the Majority Leader of the Senate; and (2) be given expedited consideration under the same provisions and in the same way, subject to subsection (b), as a joint resolution under section 2908 of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (10 United States Code 2678 note).
Special Rules.--For purposes of applying subsection (a) with respect to such provisions, the following rules shall apply: (1) Section 2908(a) of the Defense Base Closure and Realignment Act of 1990 (10 United States Code 2678 note) shall not apply.
Any reference to the resolution described in subsection (a) shall be deemed to be a reference to the bill submitted under section 6(b) of this Act.
Any reference to the Committee on National Security of the House of Representatives shall be deemed to be a reference to the Committee on House Oversight of the House of Representatives and any reference to the Committee on Armed Services of the Senate shall be deemed to be a reference to the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate.
Any reference to the date on which the President transmits a report shall be deemed to be a reference to the date on which the recommendation of the Commission is submitted under section 6(b).
Notwithstanding section 2908(d)(2) of the Act-- (A) debate on the bill in the House of Representatives, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection with the bill, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill; (B) debate on the bill in the Senate, and on all debatable motions and appeals in connection with the bill, shall be limited to not more than 10 hours, divided equally between those favoring and those opposing the bill; and (C) debate in the Senate on any single debatable motion and appeal in connection with the bill shall be limited to not more than 1 hour, divided equally between the proponent of the motion and the manager of the bill, except that if the manager of the bill is in favor of the motion or appeal, the time in opposition to the motion or appeal shall be controlled by the Minority Leader or the Leader's designee, and the Majority and Minority Leader may each allot additional time from time under such Leader's control to any Senator during the consideration of any debatable motion or appeal.
The Commission shall cease to exist on the date that is 90 days after the date of the submission of its report under section 6.
There are authorized to be appropriated to the Commission such sums as are necessary to carry out its duties under this Act.