This Act may be cited as the ``National Defense Oil Equity Act of 2003''.
The Congress finds as follows: (1) Iraq has 112 billion barrels of proven oil reserves along with roughly 220 billion barrels of probable resources.
Only Saudi Arabia's oil reserves are larger.
By far, the majority of petroleum reserves (67%) are found in the Middle East.
The United States has 21 billion barrels of proven oil reserves, twelfth highest in the world.
United States proven oil reserves have declined by almost 20% since 1990.
The United States consumes 25% of the world's oil supply, the largest share; yet it holds only 2.2 percent of the world's proven oil reserves.
Numerous foreign oil companies have preliminary contracts to spend billions of dollars developing Iraqi oil fields.
These companies originate from Algeria, Australia, Britain, Canada, China, France, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, Malaysia, Netherlands, Russia, Spain, Turkey, and Vietnam.
According to several news accounts, the Administration is conferring with energy experts, industry executives, and Iraqi opposition leaders on how to revive and expand Iraq's oil fields after an invasion.
United States Special Forces have been on the ground inside Iraq since September of 2002 to monitor the oil fields and rigs.
During the first war in Iraq, oil prices rose to $41 per barrel, gasoline prices hit record levels, and oil companies made record profits.
According to Goldman Sachs, crude oil prices could reach $45 per barrel as a result of a war in Iraq.
The price of oil has already increased $12 per barrel in the last year to $33 per barrel.
In General.--Subtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to alcohol, tobacco, and certain other excise taxes) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new chapter: ``CHAPTER 55--WINDFALL PROFIT ON CRUDE OIL AND PRODUCTS THEREOF ``Sec.
In General.--In addition to any other tax imposed under this title, there is hereby imposed an excise tax on the sale in the United States of any crude oil or other taxable product a tax equal to the applicable percentage of the windfall profit on such sale.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Taxable product.--The term `taxable product' means any fuel which is a product of crude oil.
Windfall profit.--The term `windfall profit' means, with respect to any sale, so much of the profit on such sale as exceeds a reasonable profit.
Applicable percentage.--The term `applicable percentage' means-- ``(A) 50 percent to the extent that the profit on the sale exceeds 100 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale but does not exceed 102 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale, ``(B) 75 percent to the extent that the profit on the sale exceeds 102 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale but does not exceed 105 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale, and ``(C) 100 percent to the extent that the profit on the sale exceeds 105 percent of the reasonable profit on the sale.
Reasonable profit.--The term `reasonable profit' means the amount determined by the Reasonable Profits Board to be a reasonable profit on the sale.
Liability for Payment of Tax.--The taxes imposed by subsection (a) shall be paid by the seller.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply during the period beginning on the date of the enactment of this section and ending on the date that the President certifies to the Congress than no members of the Armed Forces of the United States are in Iraq.''
Reasonable Profits Board.-- (1) Establishment.--There is established an independent board to be known as the ``Reasonable Profits Board'' (hereafter in this subsection referred to as the ``Board'').
Duties.--The Board shall make reasonable profit determinations for purposes of applying section 5886 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to windfall profit on crude oil, natural gas, and products thereof).
Advisory committee.--The Board shall be considered an advisory committee within the meaning of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.).
Appointment.-- (A) Members.--The Board shall be composed of 3 members appointed by the President of the United States.
Term.--Members of the Board shall be appointed for a term of 3 years.
Background.--The members shall have no financial interests in any of the businesses for which reasonable profits are determined by the Board.
Pay and travel expenses.-- (A) Pay.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), members of the Board shall be paid at a rate equal to the daily equivalent of the minimum annual rate of basic pay for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code, for each day (including travel time) during which the member is engaged in the actual performance of duties vested in the Board.
Travel expenses.--Members shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with section 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Director of staff.-- (A) Qualifications.--The Board shall appoint a Director who has no financial interests in any of the businesses for which reasonable profits are determined by the Board.
Pay.--Notwithstanding section 7 of the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 United States Code App.
), the Director shall be paid at the rate of basic pay payable for level IV of the Executive Schedule under section 5315 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (A) Additional personnel.--The Director, with the approval of the Board, may appoint and fix the pay of additional personnel.
Appointments.--The Director may make such appointments without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and any personnel so appointed may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Detailees.--Upon the request of the Director, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Board to assist the Board in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Board.
Assistance.--The Comptroller General of the United States may provide assistance, including the detailing of employees, to the Board in accordance with an agreement entered into with the Board.
Other authority.-- (A) Experts and consultants.--The Board may procure by contract, to the extent funds are available, the temporary or intermittent services of experts or consultants pursuant to section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
Leasing.--The Board may lease space and acquire personal property to the extent that funds are available.
Funding.--There are authorized to be appropriated such funds as are necessary to carry out this subsection.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of chapters for subtitle E of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Chapter 55.
Windfall profit on crude oil and refined petroleum products.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.