AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH NONPROFIT CORPORATIONS.
Chapter 17 of title 38, United States Code, is amended by inserting after section 1718 the following new section: ``Sec.
Nonprofit corporations ``(a) The Secretary may authorize the establishment at any Veterans Health Administration facility of a nonprofit corporation (1) to arrange for therapeutic work for patients of such facility or patients of other such Department facilities pursuant to section 1718(b) of this title, and (2) to provide a flexible funding mechanism to achieve the purposes of section 1718 of this title.
The Secretary shall provide for the appointment of a board of directors for any corporation established under this section and shall determine the number of directors and the composition of the board of directors.
The board of directors shall include-- ``(1) the director of the facility and other officials or employees of the facility; and ``(2) members appointed from among individuals who are not officers or employees of the Department of Veterans Affairs.
Each such corporation shall have an executive director who shall be appointed by the board of directors with concurrence of the Under Secretary for Health of the Department.
The executive director of a corporation shall be responsible for the operations of the corporation and shall have such specific duties and responsibilities as the board may prescribe.
A corporation established under this section may-- ``(1) arrange with the Department of Veterans Affairs under section 1718(b)(2) of this title to provide for therapeutic work for patients; ``(2) accept gifts and grants from, and enter into contracts with, individuals and public and private entities solely to carry out the purposes of this section; and ``(3) employ such employees as it considers necessary for such purposes and fix the compensation of such employees.
(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), any funds received by a corporation established under this section through arrangements authorized under subsection (d)(1) in excess of amounts reasonably required to carry out obligations of the corporation authorized under subsection (d)(3) shall be deposited in or credited to the Special Therapeutic and Rehabilitation Activities Fund established under section 1718(c) of this title.
The Secretary, in accordance with guidelines which the Secretary shall prescribe, may authorize a corporation established under this section to retain funds derived from arrangements authorized under subsection (d)(1).
Any funds received by a corporation established under this section through arrangements authorized under subsection (d)(2) may be transferred to the Special Therapeutics and Rehabilitation Activities Fund.
A corporation established under this section shall be established in accordance with the nonprofit corporation laws of the State in which the applicable medical facility is located and shall, to the extent not inconsistent with Federal law, be subject to the laws of such State.
(1)(A) The records of a corporation established under this section shall be available to the Secretary.
For the purposes of sections 4(a)(1) and 6(a)(1) of the Inspector General Act of 1978, the programs and operations of such a corporation shall be considered to be programs and operations of the Department with respect to which the Inspector General of the Department has responsibilities under such Act.
Such a corporation shall be considered an agency for the purposes of section 716 of title 31 (relating to availability of information and inspection of records by the Comptroller General).
Each such corporation shall submit to the Secretary an annual report providing a detailed statement of its operations, activities, and accomplishments during that year.
The corporation shall obtain a report of independent auditors concerning the receipts and expenditures of funds by the corporation during that year and shall include that report in the corporation's report to the Secretary for that year.
Each member of the board of directors of a corporation established under this section, each employee of such corporation, and each employee of the Department who is involved in the functions of the corporation during any year shall-- ``(A) be subject to Federal laws and regulations applicable to Federal employees with respect to conflicts of interest in the performance of official functions; and ``(B) submit to the Secretary an annual statement signed by the director or employee certifying that the director or employee is aware of, and has complied with, such laws and regulations in the same manner as Federal employees are required to.
The Secretary shall submit to the Committees on Veterans' Affairs of the Senate and House of Representatives an annual report on the number and location of corporations established and the amount of the contributions made to each such corporation.
No corporation may be established under this section after September 30, 1999.
If by the end of the four-year period beginning on the date of the establishment of a corporation under this section the corporation is not recognized as an entity the income of which is exempt from taxation under the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, the Secretary shall dissolve the corporation.''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 1718 the following new item: ``1718A.
EXTENSION OF DEMONSTRATION PROGRAM.
Section 7 of Public Law 102-54 (105 United States Statutes at Large 269; 38 United States Code 618 note) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a), by striking out ``1994'' and inserting in lieu thereof ``1997''; (2) in subsection (c)-- (A) by striking out ``no more than 50''; and (B) by striking out ``of this subsection.''
and inserting in lieu thereof ``of this subsection-- ``(1) at no more than 55 sites during fiscal year 1994; ``(2) at no more than 60 sites during fiscal year 1995; ``(3) at no more than 65 sites during fiscal year 1996; and ``(4) at no more than 70 sites during fiscal year 1997.
''; and (3) in subsection (k), by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``During the period covering fiscal years 1994 through 1997, the Secretary shall manage the costs of acquisition, management, maintenance, and disposition of real property acquired for such program after October 1, 1994, in such manner as to assure that in any fiscal year the total amount of such expenditures do not exceed $500,000.