This Act may be referred to as the ``Gallatin Range Consolidation and Protection Act of 1993''.
The Congress finds that: (1) It has been the clear policy of the Federal Government since 1925 to consolidate the checkerboard lands along the Gallatin Range north of Yellowstone National Park.
These lands north of Yellowstone possess outstanding natural characteristics and wildlife habitat which give them high value as lands added to the National Forest System.
Although these lands have remained pristine up till now failure to consolidate at this time will in the near future lead to fragmentation and development.
The Federal Government has already invested a great deal in keeping the lands along the Gallatin Range protected from excess development.
PLUM CREEK LAND EXCHANGE--GALLATIN AREA.
In General.--The Secretary of Agriculture, hereinafter called the Secretary, shall, subject to the provisions of section 4(b) and section 5(b) and, notwithstanding any other law, acquire by exchange and cash equalization in the amount of $3,400,000, certain lands and interests in land of the Plum Creek Timber, L.P. (referred to in this section as the ``company'') in and adjacent to the Hyalite-Porcupine- Buffalo Horn Wilderness Study Area, the Scapegoat Wilderness Area, and other land in the Gallatin National Forest in accordance with this section.
(1) Description of Lands.--If the company offers to the United States the fee title, including mineral interests, to approximately 37,752 and \15/100\ acres of land owned by the company which is available for exchange to the United States as depicted on a map entitled ``Plum Creek Timber and Forest Service Proposed Gallatin Land Exchange'', dated May 20, 1988, the Secretary shall accept a warranty deed to such land and, in exchange therefor, and subject to valid existing rights, recommend that the Secretary of the Interior convey, subject to valid existing rights, by patent the fee title to approximately 12,414 and \6/100\ acres of National Forest system lands available for exchange to the company as depicted on such map, subject to-- (A) the reservation of ditches and canals required by the Act entitled ``An Act making appropriations for sundry civil expenses of the Government for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, eighteen hundred and ninety-one, and for other purposes'', approved August 30, 1890 (26 United States Statutes at Large 391; 43 United States Code 945); (B) the reservation of rights under Federal Oil and Gas Lease numbers 49739, 55610, 40389, 53670, 40215, 33385, 53736, and 38684; and (C) such other terms, conditions, reservations and exceptions as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the company.
On termination or relinquishment of the leases referred to in paragraph (1), all the rights and interests in land granted therein shall immediately vest in the company, its successors and assigns, and the Secretary shall give notice of that event by a document suitable for recording in the county wherein the leased lands are situated.
Easements.--At closing on the conveyances authorized by this section-- (1) in consideration of the easements conveyed by the company as provided in paragraph 2 of this subsection, the Secretary of Agriculture shall, under authority of the National Forest Roads and Trails Act of October 13, 1964, or the Federal Land Policy and Management Act of 1976, execute and deliver to the company such easements and authorizations over federally owned lands included in this exchange as may be agreed to by the Secretary and the company in the exchange agreement.
In consideration of the easements conveyed by the United States as provided in paragraph (1), the company shall execute and deliver to the United States such easements and authorizations across company-owned lands included in this exchange as may be agreed to by the Secretary and the company in the exchange agreement.
Maps.--The maps referred to in subsection (b) are subject to such minor corrections as may be agreed upon by the Secretary and the company.
The Secretary shall notify the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the United States Senate and the Committee on Natural Resources to the United States House of Representatives of any corrections made pursuant to the subsection.
Timing of Transaction.--It is the intent of Congress that the conveyances authorized by this section be completed within ninety days after the date of enactment of an Act making the appropriation authorized by subsection (g).
Forest Lands.--All lands conveyed to the United States pursuant to this section shall become national forest system lands to be administered by the Secretary in accordance with applicable law.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There is authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section the sum $3,400,000, which amount the Secretary shall, when appropriated, pay to the company to equalize the value of the exchange of land authorized by this section.
Quality of Title.--Title to the properties referenced in this section to be offered to the United States by Big Sky Lumber Company, its assignees or successors in interest, shall be inclusive of the entire surface and subsurface estates without reservation or exception.
The owner shall be required to reacquire any outstanding interest in mineral or mineral rights, timber or timber rights, water or water rights, or any other outstanding interest in the property, except reservations by the United States or the State of Montana by patent, in order to assure that title to the property is transferred as described in this section and sections 4, 5, and 6.
Title standards for acquisition shall otherwise be in compliance with Forest Service policies and procedures.
References.--The reference and authorities of this section referring to Plum Creek Timber Company, L.P., shall also refer to its successors.
LAND CONSOLIDATION; PORCUPINE AREA.
In General.--The exchange described in section 3 of this Act shall not be consummated by the Secretary until the conditions of this section are met.
Conditions.--The Secretary or a qualified section 501(c)(3) conservation entity, acting on its behalf for later disposition to the United States, shall have acquired, by purchase or option to acquire, or exchange, all of the Porcupine property for its fair market value, determined at the time of acquisition in accordance with appraisal standards acceptable to the Secretary by an appraiser acceptable to the Secretary and the owner.
Any appraisal for exchange purposes shall be conducted by the same parties, utilizing the same standards noted above; ``And further that, if said acquisition or option to acquire has been consummated by a qualified section 501(c)(3) conservation entity, said entity shall have notified the Secretary that the quality of title in fact secured meets applicable Forest Service standards with respect to surface and subsurface estates or is otherwise acceptable to the Forest Service''.
Description of Lands.--The Secretary is authorized and directed to acquire by purchase or exchange the lands and interests therein as depicted on a map entitled ``Porcupine Area'', dated September, 1992.
Land Acquisition Authorities.--Acquisitions pursuant to this section shall be under existing authorities available to the Secretary.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
Funds necessary for land acquisition are authorized to be appropriated from the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
Equal Value.--Any exchange of lands between Big Sky Lumber Company and the United States shall be for equal value.
References.--The reference and authorities of this section referring to the Big Sky Lumber Company, shall also refer to its successors.
LAND CONSOLIDATION--TAYLOR FORK AREA.
In General.--The exchange described in section 3 of this Act shall not be consummated by the Secretary until the conditions of this section are met.
Conditions.--The Secretary or a qualified section 501(c)(3) conservation entity, acting on its behalf for later disposition to the United States, shall have acquired, by purchase or option to acquire, or exchange, all of the Taylor Fork property for its fair market value, determined at the time of acquisition in accordance with appraisal standards acceptable to the Secretary by an appraiser acceptable to the Secretary and owner.
Any appraisal for exchange purposes shall be conducted by the same parties, utilizing the same standards noted above; and further that, if said acquisition or option to acquire has been consummated by a qualified section 501(c)(3) conservation entity, said entity shall have notified the Secretary that the quality of title in fact secured meets applicable Forest Service standards with respect to surface and subsurface estates or is otherwise acceptable to the Forest Service.
Direction.--The Secretary is directed to provide Congress, within two years, recommendations designed to acquire by purchase or exchange Taylor Fork Area lands owned by Big Sky Timber Company: Provided, That such recommendations are agreed to by Big Sky Lumber Company: Provided further, That nothing in this section limits the Secretary's authority to acquire or purchase said lands.
Description of Lands.--The Secretary is authorized and directed to acquire by purchase or exchange the lands and interests therein as depicted on a map entitled ``Taylor Fork Area'', dated September, 1992.
Land Acquisition Authorities.--Acquisition pursuant to this section shall be under existing authorities available to the Secretary: Provided, That notwithstanding any other law, exchanges authorized in this section shall not be restricted within the same State.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
Funds necessary for land acquisition are authorized to be appropriated from the Land and Water Conservation Funds.
Equal Value.--Any exchange of lands between Big Sky Lumber Company and the United States shall be for equal value.
References.--The reference and authorities of this section referring to the Big Sky Lumber Company, shall also refer to its successors.
Reports to Congress.--For a period of two years from the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report annually to the Committee on Interior and Insular Affairs of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, on the status of the negotiations with the company or its successors in interest to effect the land consolidation authorized by this section.
In General.--The Secretary shall work diligently to assure all lands within what is generally known as the Gallatin Range owned by Big Sky Lumber Company, its assignee or successors in interest, not acquired, purchased or exchanged pursuant to sections 3 and 4 of this Act are acquired by the United States through exchange or purchase.
Direction.--The Secretary is directed to provide Congress, within three years, recommendations designed to acquire by purchase or exchange Gallatin Area lands owned by Big Sky Lumber Company: Provided, That such recommendations are agreed to by Big Sky Lumber Company: Provided further, That nothing in this section limits the Secretary's authority to acquire or purchase said lands.
Description of Lands.--The Secretary is authorized and directed to acquire by purchase or exchange the lands and interests therein as depicted on a map entitled ``Gallatin Area'', dated September, 1992.
Land Acquisition Authorities.--Acquisitions pursuant to this section shall be under existing authorities available to the Secretary: Provided, That notwithstanding any other law, exchanges authorized in this section shall not be restricted within the same State.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to carry out the purposes of this section.
Funds necessary for land acquisition are authorized to be appropriated from the Land and Water Conservation Fund.
Equal Value.--Any exchange of lands between Big Sky Lumber Company and the United States shall be for equal value.
Quality of Title.--The quality of title to the properties referenced in this section in fact secured shall meet applicable Forest Service standards with respect to surface and subsurface estates or shall otherwise be acceptable to the Forest Service.
References.--The reference and authorities of this section referring to the Big Sky Lumber Company, shall also refer to its successors.
Reports to Congress.--For a period of three years from the date of enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall report annually to the Committee on Natural Resources of the House of Representatives and the Committee on Energy and Natural Resources of the Senate, on the status of the negotiations with the company or its successors in interest to effect the land consolidation authorized by this section.
Findings.--The Congress finds that-- (1) underlying certain areas in Montana described in subsection (b) are mineral rights owned by subsidiaries of Burlington Resources, Incorporated (hereinafter collectively referred to in this section as the ``company''); (2) there are federally owned minerals underlying privately owned lands lying outside those areas; (3) the company has agreed in principle with the Department of Agriculture to an exchange of mineral rights to consolidate Federal surface and subsurface ownerships and to avoid potential conflicts with the surface management of such areas; and (4) it is desirable that an exchange be completed within two years after the date of enactment of this Act.
Description of Mineral Interests.--(1) Pursuant to an exchange agreement between the Secretary and the company, the Secretary may acquire mineral interests owned by the company underlying surface lands owned by the United States located in the areas depicted on the maps entitled ``Severed Minerals Exchange, Clearwater-Monture Area'', dated September 1988 and ``Severed Minerals Exchanges, Gallatin Area'', dated September 1988, or in fractional sections adjacent to those areas.
In exchange for the mineral interests conveyed to the Secretary pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Interior shall convey, subject to valid existing rights, such federally owned mineral interests as the Secretary and the company may agree upon.
Equal Value.--(1) The value of mineral interests exchanged pursuant to this section shall be approximately equal based on available information.
To ensure that the wilderness or other natural values of the areas are not affected, a formal appraisal based upon drilling or other surface disturbing activities shall not be required for any mineral interest proposed for exchange, but the Secretary and the company shall fully share all available information on the quality and quantity of mineral interests proposed for exchange.
In the absence of adequate information regarding values of minerals proposed for exchange, the Secretary and the company may agree to an exchange on the basis of mineral interests of similar development potential, geologic character, and similar factors.
Identification of Federally Owned Mineral Interests.--(1) Subject to paragraph (2), mineral interests conveyed by the United States pursuant to this section shall underlie lands the surface of which were owned by the company or its predecessor on September 16, 1987.
If there are not sufficient federally owned mineral interests of approximately equal value underlying the lands identified in paragraph (1), the Secretary and the Secretary of the Interior may identify for exchange any other federally owned mineral interest in land in the State of Montana of which the surface estate is in private ownership.
Consultation With the Department of the Interior.--(1) The Secretary shall consult with the Secretary of the Interior in the negotiation of the exchange agreement authorized by subsection (b), particularly with respect to the inclusion in such an agreement of a provision calling for the exchange of federally owned mineral interests lying outside the boundaries of units of the National Forest System.
Notwithstanding any other law, the Secretary of the Interior shall convey the federally owned mineral interests identified in a final exchange agreement between the Secretary of Agriculture and the company.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``mineral interests'' includes all locatable and leasable minerals, including oil and gas, geothermal resources, and all other subsurface rights.
Environmental Law.--The execution and performance of an exchange agreement and the taking of other actions pursuant to this section shall not be deemed a major Federal action significantly affecting the quality of the environment within the meaning of section 102 of the National Environmental Policy Act (42 United States Code 4332), nor shall they require the preparation of an environmental assessment under this Act.