SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Adams National Historical Park Act of 1998''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
Adams National Historical Park.
Congress finds the following: (1) In 1946, the Secretary of the Interior, by means of the authority provided to the Secretary under section 2 of the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 462; commonly known as the Historic Sites, Buildings, and Antiquities Act), established the Adams Mansion National Historic Site in Quincy, Massachusetts.
In 1952, again using the authority provided under the Act of August 21, 1935, the Secretary enlarged the historic site and renamed it the Adams National Historic Site.
In 1972, title III of Public Law 92-272 (86 United States Statutes at Large 121) authorized the Secretary to expand the boundaries of the Adams National Historic Site to include an additional 3.68 acres and to acquire lands and interests in lands within the expanded boundaries.
Section 312 of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (Public Law 95-625; 92 United States Statutes at Large 3479) authorized the Secretary to accept the conveyance of the birthplaces in Quincy, Massachusetts, of John Adams, second President of the United States, and John Quincy Adams, sixth President of the United States, and to administer the birthplaces as part of the Adams National Historic Site.
In 1980, Public Law 96-435 (94 United States Statutes at Large 1861) authorized the Secretary to accept the conveyance of the United First Parish Church in Quincy, Massachusetts, the burial site of John Adams and his wife, Abigail Adams, and John Quincy Adams and his wife, Louisa Adams, and to administer the burial site as part of the Adams National Historic Site.
The actions described in the preceding paragraphs to preserve for the benefit, education, and inspiration of present and future generations of Americans the home, property, birthplaces, and burial site of John Adams, Abigail Adams, John Quincy Adams, and Louisa Adams, have resulted in a multi-site unit of the National Park System with no overarching enabling or authorizing legislation.
The sites and resources associated with John Adams and his wife, Abigail Adams, and John Quincy Adams and his wife, Louisa Adams, deserve recognition as a national historical park in the National Park System.
As used in this Act: (1) Historical park.--The term ``historical park'' means the Adams National Historical Park established in section 4.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
ADAMS NATIONAL HISTORICAL PARK.
Establishment.--In order to preserve for the benefit, education, and inspiration of the people of the United States certain properties in Quincy, Massachusetts, associated with John Adams, second President of the United States, his wife, Abigail Adams, John Quincy Adams, sixth President of the United States, and his wife, Louisa Adams, there is established the Adams National Historical Park as a unit of the National Park System.
Boundaries.--The historical park shall be comprised of-- (1) all property owned by the National Park Service in the Adams National Historic Site as of the date of the enactment of this Act, as well as all property previously authorized to be acquired by the Secretary for inclusion in the Adams National Historic Site, as generally depicted on the map entitled ``Adams National Historical Park'', numbered NARO 386/92001, and dated July 22, 1992; and (2) all property authorized to be acquired for inclusion in the historical park by this Act or other law enacted after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Visitor and Administrative Sites.--To preserve the historical character and landscape of the main features of the historical park, the Secretary may acquire up to 10 acres for the development of visitor, administrative, museum, curatorial, and maintenance facilities adjacent to or in the general proximity of the property depicted on the map identified in subsection (b)(1).
Map.--The map of the historical park shall be on file and available for public inspection in the appropriate offices of the National Park Service.
In General.--The park shall be administered by the Secretary in accordance with this Act and the provisions of law generally applicable to units of the National Park System, including the Act of August 25, 1916 (16 United States Code 1 et sequentes; commonly known as the National Park Service Organic Act), and the Act of August 21, 1935 (16 United States Code 461 et sequentes; commonly known as the Historic Sites, Buildings, and Antiquities Act).
Cooperative Agreements.-- (1) Agreements authorized.--The Secretary may consult and enter into cooperative agreements with interested entities and individuals to provide for the preservation, development, interpretation, and use of the historical park.
Condition.--Any payments made by the Secretary pursuant to a cooperative agreement under this subsection shall be subject to the condition that conversion, use, or disposal of the project for which the payments are made for purposes contrary to the purposes for which the historical park is established, as determined by the Secretary, will result in a right of the United States to reimbursement in an amount equal to the greater of-- (A) all payments made by the Secretary in connection with the project; or (B) the proportion of the increased value of the project attributable to the payments, as determined at the time of such conversion, use, or disposal.
Acquisition of Real Property.--To advance the purposes for which the historical park is established, the Secretary may acquire real property within the boundaries of the historical park by any of the following methods: (1) Purchase using funds appropriated or donated to the Secretary.
Acceptance of a donation of the real property.
Use of a land exchange.
Repeal of Superseded Administrative Authorities.--(1) Section 312 of the National Parks and Recreation Act of 1978 (Public Law 95- 625; 92 United States Statutes at Large 3479) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(a)'' after ``Sec.
''; and (B) by striking subsection (b).
The first section of Public Law 96-435 (94 United States Statutes at Large 1861) is amended-- (A) by striking ``(a)'' after ``That''; and (B) by striking subsection (b).
References to Historic Site.--Any reference in any law (other than this Act), regulation, document, record, map, or other paper of the United States to the Adams National Historic Site shall be considered to be a reference to the historical park.
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out the purposes for which the historical park is established, for annual operations and maintenance of the historical park, and for acquisition of property and development of facilities necessary to operate and maintain the historical park, as may be outlined in an approved general management plan for the historical park.