This Act may be cited as the ``Section 8 Housing Improvement Act''.
LIMITATION ON USE OF ASSISTANCE BY AREA.
Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437f) is amended by inserting after subsection (k) the following new subsection: ``(l) Limitation on Use of Assistance By Area.-- ``(1) Authority.--A public housing agency that makes assistance available under subsection (b) or (o) of this section may define an area or areas within the jurisdiction of the agency and, subject to the provisions of paragraph (2), limit the number of families that may use such assistance to rent a dwelling unit within any such area.
Such an area may consist of the entire geographical jurisdiction of the agency or an area that is smaller than such jurisdiction.
Required finding.--A public housing agency may limit the number of families that may use assistance under subsection (b) or (o) to rent a dwelling unit within an area defined under paragraph (1) only if the agency determines, and certifies to the Secretary, that the limitation is necessary-- ``(A) to preserve the value of property in such area; ``(B) to preserve the right of existing residents of such area to safety and to the quiet enjoyment of their property; or ``(C) to preserve the unique character and nature of the area.''.
Any limitation under this subsection for an area may not restrict the number of families using assistance in such area by more families than is necessary to accomplish the purpose under subparagraph (A), (B), or (C) for which the limitation is established or for any other reason than such purpose.''.
In General.--Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437f) is amended by inserting after subsection (l), as added by section 2 of this Act, the following new subsection: ``(m) Neighborhood Review Committees.-- ``(1) Establishment.--Each public housing agency that administers tenant-based assistance under subsection (b) or (o) of this section shall establish and maintain a neighborhood review committee (in this subsection referred to as the `committee').
The committee shall consist of not less than 3 and not more than 6 individuals, who shall be appointed by the public housing agency and shall include not less than 3 individuals who are not, directly or indirectly, recipients of housing assistance under this section or any other housing assistance provided by the Federal Government or any State or local government (not including single family mortgage insurance provided under title II of the National Housing Act).
The members of the committee shall be residents of the jurisdiction served by the agency.
Members of the committee shall serve for terms of not more than 2 years and there shall be no limit to the number of terms that any member may serve.
Functions.--The committee shall obtain and review information referred to in paragraphs (3) and (4) for the purpose of advising the public housing agency regarding enforcement of laws and regulations governing assistance provided under the tenant-based rental assistance programs under this section and assisting the agency to enforce such laws and regulations.
Availability of records regarding assisted families.--Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal or State law (including any law regarding confidentiality of such information), the committee for a public housing agency may obtain any of the following records and information relating to any member of a household on whose behalf tenant-based assistance under subsection (b) or (o) of this section is provided and who resides within the jurisdiction of the agency: ``(A) Criminal conviction, arrest, and activity records from any law enforcement agency.
Juvenile arrest and punishment records.
References and reports of past or present lessors.
Records of civil actions filed against the member and any related judgments, settlements, or other dispositions.
Any other information reasonably related to the procurement of information described in this paragraph.
This paragraph shall apply with respect to any member of any household on whose behalf such tenant-based assistance is provided after the date of the effectiveness of the regulations implementing this subsection.
A public housing agency shall provide written notice to each applicant for tenant-based assistance from the agency of the effect of the provisions of this paragraph on the applicant's rights to confidentiality of information described in this paragraph.
Availability of records regarding landlords.-- Notwithstanding any other provision of Federal or State law (including any law regarding confidentiality of such information), the committee for a public housing agency may obtain any of the following records and information relating to any owner of a dwelling unit located within the jurisdiction of the agency for which assistance payments are made under subsection (b) or (o) of this section: ``(A) Criminal conviction, arrest, and activity records from any law enforcement agency.
Citations, convictions, fines, or judgments for violations of any laws, regulations, standards, or codes relating to housing quality or habitability.
Complaints, grievances, or actions filed by any current or former tenants, and any records of any related judgments, settlements, or other dispositions.
Any other information reasonably related to the procurement of information described in this paragraph.
This paragraph shall apply with respect to any owner of an assisted dwelling unit for which assistance payments are made after the date of the effectiveness of the regulations implementing this subsection.
Penalty.--Any person who obtains or uses information under this subsection for purposes other than those described in paragraph (2), or discloses such information in any manner to any individual not authorized under law to receive such information, shall be imprisoned not more than one year and fined not more than $10,000 (and such offense is hereby exempted from the applicability of the fine provided under section 3571 of title 18, United States Code), or both.''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue any regulations necessary to carry out the amendment made by subsection (a) not later than the expiration of the 12-month period beginning on the date of the enactment of this Act, which shall take effect not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning upon such issuance.
ENFORCEMENT OF HOUSING QUALITY STANDARDS.
In General.--Section 8 of the United States Housing Act of 1937 (42 United States Code 1437f) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(cc) Enforcement of Housing Quality Standards.--Each contract providing for housing assistance payments for tenant-based assistance under subsection (b) or (o) shall provide that if a public housing agency determines that a dwelling unit for which tenant-based assistance is provided under subsection (b) or (o) fails to comply with the standards for housing quality for units so assisted or with any applicable State or local law, regulation, standard, or code relating to housing quality or habitability, the following action shall be taken: ``(1) Notification.--The public housing agency shall notify the Secretary, tenant, and owner of the unit of the noncompliance and shall notify the tenant and owner of the action required under this subsection.
Withholding of assistance.--During the period of the noncompliance, the agency shall withhold all of the assistance amounts under this section with respect to the unit and the Secretary shall withhold any other assistance amounts provided with respect to the unit under any program administered by the Secretary.
The agency and the Secretary shall promptly release any withheld amounts to the owner after the owner corrects the noncompliance.
An owner may not terminate the tenancy of any tenant or refuse to renew a lease for such unit because of the withholding of assistance pursuant to this paragraph.
Termination of lease or assistance payments contract.--If assistance amounts under this section for a dwelling unit are withheld pursuant to paragraph (2) and the owner does not correct the noncompliance before the expiration of the lease for the dwelling unit and such lease is not renewed, the Secretary shall recapture any such amounts from the public housing agency.
Applicability.--This subsection shall apply to any dwelling unit for which a housing assistance payments contract is entered into or renewed after the date of the effectiveness of the regulations implementing this subsection.''.
Regulations.--The Secretary of Housing and Urban Development shall issue any regulations necessary to carry out the amendment made by subsection (a) not later than the expiration of the 12-month period beginning upon the date of the enactment of this Act, which shall take effect not later than the expiration of the 90-day period beginning upon such issuance.