This Act may be cited as the ``Workforce Readiness Act of 1993''.
For purposes of this Act: (1) The term ``career guidance counselor'' means an individual who is certified in career guidance and who assists students with evaluating career options, opportunities, planning, and decisionmaking and in seeking and obtaining employment.
The term ``generic skills'' means cross-industry, cross-occupation skills which are necessary for all individuals to have to be effective participants in the workforce.
The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
The term ``school-to-work transition'' means the process by which students acquire academic and occupational skills and work experience to assist in the transition from school to employment.
TITLE I--NATIONAL BOARD ON WORKFORCE SKILLS SEC.
There is established a National Board on Workforce Skills for the 21st Century (in this title referred to as the ``National Board'').
It is the purpose of this title to oversee the development of voluntary national standards that will identify the generic workplace readiness skills which employers agree all students should have upon completion of high school in order to be effective participants in the workforce.
The National Board shall-- (1) work with employers and educators to establish, through a broad public process, voluntary national standards that will identify the generic workplace readiness skills which employers agree that students should have upon completion of high school; (2) in developing such standards, take into consideration current work in this area undertaken under other auspices, including activities carried out under title II; (3) consult with industry-specific occupational boards formulate work-ready skills standards; (4) conduct research and evaluation activities necessary to determine the relationship between possession of skills and increased work performance; (5) update such skills as the skill requirements of the economy change; (6) conduct research and demonstration activities which include the development and testing of models for integrating skills into the school-based learning in the K-12 grades, giving priority to models which integrate academic and workplace instruction beginning in elementary school grades; (7) release draft standards for broad review and comment, and ensure the input of a broad range of employers including small businesses; (8) once the final standards have been approved by the National Board, work with consortia of employers, labor, and education representatives to incorporate the standards into State and local systemic education reform efforts; and (9) recommend procedures for the dissemination of information and the provision of technical assistance to consortia of business, labor, and education.
The National Board shall be composed of 23 members appointed in accordance with section 105, representing business and industry, labor, education, and local government.
The National Board shall reflect a broad range of businesses, including representatives from the manufacturing, financial, and service sectors.
Members of the National Board shall be appointed as follows: (1) 7 members, of which at least 3 shall be Baldrige Award winners, shall be appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives, upon recommendations of the majority and minority leaders of the House, respectively.
7 members, of which at least 3 shall be Baldrige Award winners, shall be appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate, upon recommendations of the majority and minority leaders of the Senate, respectively.
7 members, of which at least 3 shall be Baldrige Award winners, shall be appointed by the President of the United States.
The Secretary of education and the Secretary of Labor shall serve as ex officio members of the National Board.
Initial Appointments.--The members of the National Board appointed under paragraph 1 of section 105 shall be appointed for a term of 3 years, the members appointed under paragraph 2 of section 105 shall be appointed for a term of 4 years, and the members appointed under paragraph 3 of section 105 shall be appointed for a term of 5 years.
Subsequent Terms.--After the terms under subsection (a) are served, each member appointed subsequently shall be appointed for a 3- year term.
The National Board shall annually elect a Chairperson from among its members who shall serve for a term of 1 year.
Compensation.--Members of the National Board shall serve without compensation.
Expenses.--While away from their homes or regular places of business on the business of the National Board, members of the Board may be allowed travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, as is authorized under section 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.--The National Board shall appoint an Executive Director who shall be compensated at a rate determined by the National Board not to exceed level 15 of the General Schedule under title 5, United States Code, and who may appoint such staff as is necessary.
TITLE II--SCHOOL-TO-WORK TRANSITION PROGRAMS SEC.
It is the purpose of this title to develop school-to-work transition programs which provide students with the education and skills necessary to enter the workplace ready to perform and able to attain a satisfactory standard of living.
In General.--The Secretary is authorized to make grants to local educational agencies to develop, implement, or expand programs which integrate workplace skills into the regular school curriculum in order to facilitate the transition from school to work.
Equitable Distribution of Assistance.--In approving grants under this title, the Secretary shall assure an equitable distribution of assistance among the States and among urban and rural areas of the States.
In General.--A local educational agency that desires to receive a grant under this title shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time, in such form, and containing such information that the Secretary may reasonably require.
Contents of Application.--Such application shall include-- (1) the composition of the business/industry/labor partnership with which the local education agency will work to develop and implement an effective school-to-work transition program; (2) a description of how funds will be used; (3) a description of how the program will be coordinated with K-12 vocational educational programs; and (4) an assurance that the applicant shall maintain data and information regarding the program, including the number of students served.
Requirements.--Grants made available under this title shall be used by local educational agencies working to develop and implement comprehensive school-to-work transition which shall include processes and procedures for-- (1) enabling students to gain a better understanding of skill necessary for the workplace through work site visits, demonstrating and using of business technologies in the classroom, and bringing representatives of business and organized labor into the classroom; (2) developing or adopting curricula and instructional materials which incorporate generic workplace skills; (3) expanding opportunities for students to enter career preparation programs that integrate academic instruction with workplace instruction; (4) providing career guidance counselors to assist students seeking job placement or further occupational specific education; and (5) professional development strategies for teachers, principals, counselors, and other school personnel to further the purposes of this title.
Optional Activities.--A local educational agency may-- (1) initiate a flexible school schedule to enable students to spend adequate time in the classroom and at the workplace; and (2) design programs which enhance opportunities for students to enter into programs leading to an associate degree in an occupational field or program authorized under part E, title III of the Carl Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Education Act.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of a grant under this title may not exceed-- (1) 90 percent of the total cost of a project for the first year for which the project receives assistance under this title, and (2) 75 percent of such cost for the second such year and each subsequent year.
Other Sources.--The share of payments from sources other than funds appropriated under this title may be in cash or in-kind fairly evaluated.
Reports to Secretary.--A local educational agency that receives a grant under this title shall submit a report to the Secretary each year.
Report to the Congress.--The Secretary shall submit to the Congress a biannual report.
In General.--There is authorized to be appropriated $100,000,000 for fiscal year 1993 and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1994, 1995, 1996, and 1997 for grants to local educational agencies for the development and implementation of programs under this title to assist students to make the transition from school to work.
Funds for National Board.--Of the funds authorized under subsection (a), 5 percent shall be reserved for activities authorized under title I of this Act.