Congress makes the following findings: (1) Numerous studies by the Office of the Inspector General of the Department of the Interior, the General Accounting Office, and independent auditors have criticized the absence of independent oversight or other forms of internal control over the Department's management of Indian trust assets and trust funds.
Indian and tribal account holders have indicated that they will have little or no confidence in the reform of the trust management system if the reform is carried out by the same entities that are responsible for the management of the system on the date of enactment of this Act.
It would constitute an inherent conflict of interest or at least the appearance of a conflict of interest if the entity establishing internal controls for a trust management system were to be appointed, supervised, and subject to removal by the entity that such internal controls are written for.
Account holder confidence will be improved if the same official is not simultaneously responsible for the immediate supervision of the fiduciary and financial reporting activities of both the trust fund accounting system and the trust asset and accounting management system.
To the extent practicable, the reform of activities and creation of internal controls as described in the Department of the Interior's Trust Management Improvement Project, High Level Implementation Plan dated July 1998, and any amendments or modifications to that plan, should be carried out by private contractors.
SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR DATA CLEANUP AND INTERNAL CONTROL.
The American Indian Trust Fund Management Reform Act of 1994 (25 United States Code 4001 et sequentes) is amended-- (1) by redesignating title IV as title V; (2) by redesignating section 401 as section 501; and (3) by inserting after title III, the following: ``TITLE IV--MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ``SEC.
SPECIAL TRUSTEE FOR DATA CLEANUP AND INTERNAL CONTROL.
Establishment.--There is hereby established within the Department of Interior the Office of Special Trustee for Data Cleanup and Internal Control.
The Office shall be headed by the Special Trustee for Data Cleanup and Internal Control (referred to in this section as the `Special Trustee') who shall report directly to the Secretary.
Special Trustee.-- ``(1) Appointment.--The Special Trustee shall be appointed by the Inspector General of the Department of the Interior from among individuals who possess demonstrated ability in the-- ``(A) development and implementation of internal controls; ``(B) development and implementation of trust management procedures; and ``(C) conversion or rehabilitation of trust management systems.
Compensation.--The Special Trustee shall be paid at a rate determined by the Secretary to be appropriate for the position, but not less than the basic pay payable at Level III of the Executive Schedule under Section 5313 of Title 5.
Term of office.--The Special Trustee shall serve for a term of 2 years and may only be removed for good cause by the Secretary.
Duties.-- ``(1) In general.--Notwithstanding title III, the Special Trustee shall oversee the following subprojects as identified in the Draft Trust Management Improvement Project Subproject Task Updates, dated April 1999: ``(A) Subproject #1, OST Data Cleanup.
Subproject #5, Trust Funds Accounting System.
Subproject #9, Policies and Procedures.
Subproject #11, Internal Controls.
Oversight.--The Special Trustee shall oversee the expenditure of funds appropriated by Congress for each of the subprojects described in paragraph (1), including the approval or modification of contracts, and make employment decisions for each of the positions funded for each of such projects.
Contracting.--To the maximum extent practicable, the Special Trustee shall ensure that activities are carried out under this subsection through contracts entered into with private entities or through the retention of the temporary services of trust management specialists.
Modification of Implementation Plan.--To the extent that the activities to be carried out under subsection (c) are altered or amended as a result of any modification made after the date of enactment of this Act to the Department of the Interior's Trust Management Improvement Project, High Level Implementation Plan (dated July 1998), the Special Trustee shall continue to be responsible for overseeing such activities.