This Act may be cited as the ``Protection from Sexual Predators Act of 1994''.
Findings.--Congress finds that.-- (1) rape and sexual assaults continue to be serious threats to the safety of communities across America; (2) sexual offenders are much more likely than any other category of criminals to repeat their crimes again and again, even after serving time in prison; and (3) the average rape sentence is just 10\1/2\ years, and the average time served is half of that, approximately 5 years.
Sense of Congress.--It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) States should more seriously consider the relatively high recidivism rate of sexual offenders when deciding whether to plea bargain with a first-time sexual offender and whether to grant parole to sexual offenders; and (2) States should review their treatment and parole supervision programs for sexual offenders to assure that these programs are fulfilling their goals, and, if they are not, these programs should be immediately replaced or abandoned.
FEDERAL JURISDICTION OVER RAPE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT CASES.
Section 2241 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(e) Punishment for Sexual Predators.--(1) Whoever, in a circumstance described in paragraph (2) of this subsection-- ``(A) violates this section; or ``(B) engages in conduct, in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, that would be a violation of subsection (a), (b), or (c) of this section, if the offense had occurred in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States; shall be imprisoned for life.
The circumstance referred to in paragraph (1) of this subsection is that the defendant has previously been convicted of another State or Federal offense for conduct which-- ``(A) is an offense under this section or section 2242 of this title; or ``(B) would have been an offense under either of such sections if the offense had occurred in the special maritime or territorial jurisdiction of the United States.''.
In General.-- (1) State guidelines.-- (A) Generally.--The Attorney General shall establish guidelines for State programs requiring-- (i) any person who is convicted of a sex offense to register and keep up to date a current address with a designated State law enforcement agency for 10 years after release from prison, or being placed on parole, supervised release, or probation; and (ii) each State to provide information obtained about the registered person to the Attorney General on a prompt and regular basis and in a uniform format.
Required content of guidelines.--Such guidelines shall require the inclusion of such data about-- (i) the registered person, including fingerprints and photographs; and (ii) that person's offenses and modus operandi; as the Attorney General deems useful for assisting law enforcement investigations by Federal, State, and other law enforcement authorities.
Definition.--For purposes of this subsection, the term ``sex offense'' means any State or Federal offense that-- (A) is an offense under section 2241 or 2242 of title 18, United States Code; or (B) would have been an offense under either of such sections if the offense had occurred in the special maritime and territorial jurisdiction of the United States.
Availability of Information.--The Attorney General shall maintain on-line availability of information obtained under this section for use by authorized law enforcement agencies in carrying out their functions.
The Attorney General shall by rule provide for the privacy of the information so maintained.
Compliance.-- (1) Compliance date.--Each State shall have 3 years from the date of the enactment of this Act in which to implement this section.
Ineligibility for funds.--The allocation of funds under title I of the Omnibus Crime Control and Safe Streets Act of 1968 received by a State not complying with the guidelines issued under this section 3 years after the date of enactment of this Act may be reduced by 10 percent and the unallocated funds shall be reallocated to the States in compliance with this section.
STUDY OF PERSISTENT SEXUAL PREDATORS.
The National Institute of Justice, either directly or through grant, shall carry out a study of persistent sexual predators.
Not later than one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, such Institute shall report to Congress and the President the results of such study.
Such report shall include-- (1) a synthesis of current research in psychology, sociology, law, criminal justice, and other fields regarding persistent sexual offenders, including-- (A) common characteristics of such offenders; (B) recidivism rates for such offenders; (C) treatment techniques and their effectiveness; (D) responses of offenders to treatment and deterrence; and (E) the possibility of early intervention to prevent people from becoming sexual predators; and (2) an agenda for future research in this area.