This Act may be cited as the ``Green Technology Promotion Act of 1993''.
Findings.--The Congress finds the following: (1) The national policy of the United States declares that pollution should be prevented or reduced at the source whenever feasible, prior to environmentally sound recycling, treatment, or landfilling.
There are significant opportunities for industry to reduce or prevent pollution at the source through cost- effective changes in production, operation, and raw materials use.
Such changes offer industry substantial savings in reduced raw material, pollution control, and liability costs, and help to protect the environment and reduce risks to worker health and safety.
Federal Government estimates indicate that businesses can reduce their waste generation 33 percent to 50 percent by implementing source reduction techniques, and private sector studies suggest that some industry sectors can reduce their waste by up to 80 percent through the use of such techniques.
In most cases, source reduction and energy efficiency techniques do not require the purchase of new equipment, but merely a better understanding of how to use equipment currently available.
In fact, one recent study indicated that 25 percent of all source reduction activities require no capital investment for implementation and, of those that require capital, 50 percent of the capital expenditures were recouped in savings in, on average, less than 18 months.
The private sector must take the lead in reducing the production of waste by manufacturing companies and, in fact, many large companies have contracted with consultants or performed internal audits to find methods for reducing pollution in their own processes.
Source reduction is fundamentally different from, and more desirable than, waste management and pollution control and should be promoted by Federal agencies, particularly the Department of Commerce in its role in assisting businesses.
The Federal Government can assist small- and medium- sized companies that often are unaware of the techniques available for pollution prevention and the possible savings from employing them, and such Government assistance will help meet the dual goals of modernizing manufacturing and improving the environment.
The Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy can provide the Manufacturing Technology Centers with technical expertise in this area.
The Environmental Protection Agency has conducted over 200 source reduction assessments for manufacturers and the Department of Energy has conducted over 4,100 energy audits which have saved companies $419 million and 77 trillion Btu's of energy.
Assisting small- and medium-sized companies to reduce the waste products created during the manufacturing process will reduce the companies' costs, and thus improve the competitiveness of such companies, by-- (A) reducing their costs of disposal; (B) reducing their costs of complying with environmental regulations; (C) reducing their raw material costs; (D) reducing liability costs associated with transport and disposal; and (E) assisting these companies in identifying areas where their production processes are inefficient.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this Act to incorporate environmental concerns into technology programs established in the National Institute of Standards and Technology.
DISSEMINATION OF SOURCE REDUCTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY TECHNOLOGIES.
The Stevenson-Wydler Technology Innovation Act of 1980 (15 United States Code 3701 et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
DISSEMINATION OF SOURCE REDUCTION AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY TECHNOLOGIES.
In General.--Each Regional Center for the Transfer of Manufacturing Technology established in section 25 of the National Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 United States Code 278k) shall conduct or assist in the conducting of energy efficiency and source reduction assessments of client companies of the Regional Centers and the Manufacturing Outreach Centers established under subsection (c).
These assessments shall assist such client companies in identifying opportunities for energy efficiency conservation and source reduction through improvements in manufacturing processes or the purchase of new equipment.
Training and Other Assistance.--In order to facilitate these energy efficiency and source reduction assessments-- ``(1) at least one employee of each Regional Center (who shall be designated by such Regional Center) shall receive training from the Department of Energy and the Environmental Protection Agency concerning the conducting of energy efficiency and source reduction assessments; and ``(2) not later than 12 months after the date of enactment of this section, the National Institute of Standards and Technology, in consultation with the Environmental Protection Agency and the Department of Energy, shall make available a software assessment package to the Regional Centers and the Manufacturing Outreach Centers for the purpose of assisting client companies in identifying opportunities for improved energy efficiency and source reduction.
Manufacturing Outreach Centers.--(1) Eligible government and private sector organizations that are engaged in technology or manufacturing extension activities may apply to the Secretary for designation as Manufacturing Outreach Centers, in such form and manner as the Secretary may prescribe.
Eligible organizations include Federal, State, and local government agencies, extension programs, universities, and laboratories; small business development centers; and professional societies, worker organizations, industrial organizations, nonprofit organizations, community development organizations, community colleges, and technical schools and colleges.
The Secretary shall establish standards for designation of existing technology or manufacturing extension programs and for qualification of start-up programs as Manufacturing Outreach Centers.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term `source reduction' has the same meaning as in section 6603 of the Pollution Prevention Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 13102).