This Act may be cited as the ``Postreproductive Health Care Act''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF PROGRAM FOR POSTREPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE.
Part D of title III of the Public Health Service Act (42 United States Code 254b et sequentes) is amended by adding at the end the following new subpart: ``Subpart IX--Postreproductive Health Care ``postreproductive health care ``Sec.
In General.--The Secretary shall make grants for the purpose of providing the services described in subsection (b) to women who are of menopausal age or older.
Such grants may be made only to public or nonprofit private entities that provide health services to a significant number of low-income women.
Authorized Services.--The services referred to in subsection (a) are as follows: ``(1) The prevention and outpatient treatment of health conditions-- ``(A) unique to, more serious, or more prevalent for eligible women; or ``(B) for which, in the case of such women, the factors of medical risk or types of medical intervention are different.
Counseling on the conditions described in paragraph (1).
The education and training of health professionals (including allied health professionals) on the prevention and treatment of such conditions and on the provision of such counseling.
Priority in Provision of Services.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees that, in expending the grant to provide authorized services to eligible women, the applicant will give priority to providing the services for menopausal health conditions.
Outreach.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees-- ``(1) to conduct outreach services to inform women in the community involved of the fact that authorized services are available from the applicant; and ``(2) to give priority to providing the outreach services to low-income women.
Limitation on Imposition of Fees for Services.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees that, if a charge is imposed for the provision of services or activities under the grant, such charge-- ``(1) will be made according to a schedule of charges that is made available to the public; ``(2) will be adjusted to reflect the income of the woman involved; and ``(3) will not be imposed on any woman with an income equal to or less than 100 percent of the official poverty line, as established by the Director of the Office of Management and Budget and revised by the Secretary in accordance with section 673(2) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1981.
Reports to Secretary.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved agrees to submit to the Secretary, for each fiscal year for which such a grant is made to the applicant, a report describing the purposes for which the grant has been expended.
Requirement of Application.--The Secretary may make a grant under subsection (a) only if the applicant involved makes an agreement that the grant will not be expended for any purpose other than the purpose described in such subsection and for compliance with any other agreements required in this section.
Such a grant may be made only if an application for the grant is submitted to the Secretary containing such agreements, and the application is in such form, is made in such manner, and contains such other agreements, and such assurances and information, as the Secretary determines to be necessary to carry out this section.
Definitions.--For purposes of this section: ``(1) The term `authorized services' means the services described in subsection (b).
The term `eligible women' means women described in subsection (a).
The term `health conditions' includes diseases and disorders.
The term `health' includes mental health.
The term `menopausal age', with respect to a woman, includes the age at which the woman is nearing menopause and includes any age at which the woman experiences menopausal health conditions.
The term `menopausal health conditions' means conditions arising from the diminished or complete cessation of the functioning of the ovaries, whether occurring naturally or otherwise.
Authorization of Appropriations.--For the purpose of carrying out this section, there are authorized to be appropriated $25,000,000 for fiscal year 1997, and such sums as may be necessary for each of the fiscal years 1998 and 1999.