TITLE I--ASSAULT WEAPONS SECTION 101.
This title may be cited as the ``Antidrug Assault Weapons Limitation Act of 1993''.
In General.--Section 921(a) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``(29) The term `assault weapon' means any of the firearms known as-- ``(A) Norinco, Mitchell, and Poly Technologies Avtomat Kalashnikovs (all models); ``(B) Action Arms Israeli Military Industries UZI and Galil; ``(C) Beretta AR-70 (SC-70); ``(D) Colt AR-15 and CAR-15; ``(E) Fabrique Nationale FN/FAL, FN/LAR, and FNC; ``(F) MAC 10 and MAC 11; ``(G) Steyr AUG; ``(H) INTRATEC TEC-9; and ``(I) Street Sweeper and Striker 12.
The term `form 4473' means the form prescribed by the Secretary in section 178.124 of the Code of Regulations as of the date of enactment of this paragraph, as that form or paragraph may be amended, or a successor form or regulation, or the equivalent of such a form.''.
Recommendations of the Secretary.-- Chapter 44 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Additional assault weapons ``The Secretary, in consultation with the Attorney General, may recommend to the Congress the addition or deletion of firearms designated as assault weapons under section 921(29).
''; and (2) in the chapter analysis by adding at the end the following new item: ``931.
Section 922 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(s)(1) Except as provided in paragraph (2), it shall be unlawful for a person to transfer, import, transport, ship, receive, or possess an assault weapon.
This subsection does not apply with respect to-- ``(A) the transfer, importation, transportation, shipping, and receipt to or by, or possession by or under, authority of the United States or any department or agency thereof or of any State or any department, agency, or political subdivision thereof, of an assault weapon; or ``(B) a lawful transfer, transportation, shipping, receipt, or possession of an assault weapon that was lawfully possessed before the effective date of this subsection.
(1) It shall be unlawful for a person to sell, ship, or deliver an assault weapon to a person who does not fill out a form 4473 in connection with the purchase of the assault weapon.
It shall be unlawful for a person to purchase, possess, or accept delivery of an assault weapon unless the person has filled out a form 4473 in connection with the purchase of the assault weapon.
If a person purchases an assault weapon from anyone other than a licensed dealer, both the purchaser and the seller shall maintain a record of the sale on the seller's original copy of form 4473.
An owner of an assault weapon on the effective date of this subsection who requires retention of form 4473 under this subsection shall, within 90 days after publication of regulations by the Secretary under paragraph (5), request a copy of form 4473 from a licensed dealer in accordance with those regulations.
The Secretary shall, within 90 days after the date of enactment of this subsection, prescribe regulations for the request and delivery of form 4473 under paragraph (4).''.
Section 924 of title 18, United States Code, is amended-- (1) in subsection (c) by inserting ``and if the firearm is an assault weapon, to imprisonment for 10 years,'' after ``sentenced to imprisonment for five years,''; and (2) by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(i) A person who knowingly violates section 922(t) shall be fined not more than $1,000 (in accordance with section 3571(e)), imprisoned not more than 6 months, or both.''.
Section 922(g)(1) of title 18, United States Code, is amended by inserting ``or a violation of section 922(t)'' before the semicolon at the end.
STUDY BY THE ATTORNEY GENERAL.
Study.--The Attorney General shall investigate and study the effect of this Act and the amendments made by this Act and in particular shall determine their impact, if any, on violent and drug trafficking crime.
The study shall be conducted over a period of 18 months, commencing 12 months after the date of enactment of this Act.
Report.--Not later than 30 months after the date of enactment of this Act, the Attorney General shall prepare and submit to Congress a report setting forth in detail the findings and determinations made in the study under subsection (a).
This title and the amendments made by this title-- (1) shall become effective on the date that is 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act; and (2) are repealed effective as of the date that is 3 years after the effective date.
TITLE II--INDISCRIMINATE USE OF WEAPONS TO FURTHER DRUG CONSPIRACIES SEC.
This title may be cited as the ``Drive-By Shooting Prevention Act of 1993''.
In General.--Chapter 2 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Drive-by shooting ``(a) Offense and Penalties.-- ``(1) Whoever, in furtherance or to escape detection of a major drug offense listed in subsection (b) and, with the intent to intimidate, harass, injure, or maim, fires a weapon into a group of two or more persons and who, in the course of such conduct, causes grave risk to any human life shall be punished by a term of no more than 25 years, or by fine as provided under this title, or both.
Whoever, in furtherance or to escape detection of a major drug offense listed in subsection (b) and, with the intent to intimidate, harass, injure, or maim, fires a weapon into a group of two or more persons and who, in the course of such conduct, kills any person shall, if the killing-- ``(A) is a first degree murder as defined in section 1111(a) of this title, be punished by death or imprisonment for any term of years or for life, fined under this title, or both: or ``(B) is a murder other than a first degree murder as defined in section 1111(a) of this title, be fined under this title, imprisoned for any term of years or for life, or both.
Major Drug Offense Defined.--A major drug offense within the meaning of subsection (a) is one of the following: ``(1) a continuing criminal enterprise, punishable under section 403(c) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 848(c)); ``(2) a conspiracy to distribute controlled substances punishable under section 406 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 846) or punishable under section 1013 of the Controlled Substances Import and Export Control Act (21 United States Code 963); or ``(3) an offense involving major quantities of drugs and punishable under section 401(b)(1)(A) of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 841(b)(1)(A)) or section 1010(b)(1) of the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act (21 United States Code 960(b)(1)).''.
Technical Amendment.--The chapter analysis for chapter 2 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``36.
TITLE III--MISCELLANEOUS FIREARMS OFFENSES SEC.
STEALING AND SMUGGLING OF FIREARMS.
Section 924 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsections: ``(i) A person who steals a firearm that is moving as, is a part of, or has moved in interstate or foreign commerce shall be imprisoned not less than 2 nor more than 10 years and may be fined under this title.
A person who, with the intent to engage in or to promote conduct that-- ``(1) is punishable under the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 801 et sequentes), the Controlled Substances Import and Export Act (212 United States Code 951 et sequentes), or the Maritime Drug Law Enforcement Act (46 United States Code App.
1901 et sequentes); ``(2) violates a State law relating to a controlled substance (as defined in section 102 of the Controlled Substances Act (21 United States Code 802)); or ``(3) constitutes a crime of violence (as defined in subsection (c)(3)); smuggles or knowingly brings into the United States a firearm, or attempts to do so, shall be imprisoned not more than 10 years, fined under this title, or both.''.
MANDATORY REVOCATION OF SUPERVISED RELEASE FOR POSSESSION OF A FIREARM.
Section 3583 of title 18, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(h) Mandatory Revocation of Supervised Release for Possession of a Firearm.--If the court has provided, as a condition of supervised release, that the defendant refrain from possessing a firearm (as defined in section 921), and if the defendant is in actual possession of such a firearm at any time prior to the expiration or termination of a term of supervised release, the court, after a hearing pursuant to the provisions of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure that are applicable to probation revocation, shall-- ``(1) revoke the term of supervised release; and ``(2) subject to subsection (e)(3), require the defendant to serve in prison all or part of the term of supervised release without credit for time previously served on postrelease supervision.