TAX CREDIT FOR HIRING LONG-TERM UNEMPLOYED DEFENSE AND SHIPBUILDING INDUSTRY WORKERS.
Allowance of Credit.--Paragraph (1) of section 51(d) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (defining members of targeted groups) is amended by striking ``or'' at the end of subparagraph (I), by striking the period at the end of subparagraph (J) and inserting ``, or'', and by adding at the end the following new subparagraph: ``(K) a long-term unemployed defense or shipbuilding industry worker.''
Long-Term Unemployed Defense or Shipbuilding Industry Worker.-- Section 51(d) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(17) Long-term unemployed defense or shipbuilding industry worker.-- ``(A) In general.--The term `long-term unemployed defense or shipbuilding industry worker' means an individual certified by the designated local agency as having been employed in the defense or shipbuilding industry and-- ``(i) who has been receiving unemployment compensation at all times during the 6-month period ending with the last day of the month preceding the hiring date, or ``(ii) who-- ``(I) was receiving unemployment compensation but exhausted all rights to such compensation, and ``(II) has remained unemployed during the period beginning on the date such rights were exhausted and ending on the day before the hiring date.
Employment in defense or shipbuilding industry.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), an individual shall be treated as employed-- ``(i) in the defense industry if such individual's services were performed pursuant to any defense contract (as defined in section 48(c)(4)), and ``(ii) in the shipbuilding industry if such individual's services were performed pursuant to any contract for the construction or reconstruction of any ship or any subcontract in connection with such construction or reconstruction.
Unemployment compensation.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `unemployment compensation' has the meaning given such term by section 85(b).''
Certain Individuals Not Eligible.--Section 51(i) of such Code (relating to certain individuals ineligible) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Special rules for long-term unemployed defense and shipbuilding industry workers.--No wages shall be taken into account under subsection (a) with respect to any long-term unemployed defense or shipbuilding industry worker (as defined in subsection (d)(17)) unless-- ``(A) notwithstanding paragraph (3), the individual is employed by the employer at least 120 days, and ``(B) the employer certifies on the return of tax for the taxable year for which credit is claimed that-- ``(i) the individual was hired after the employer took reasonable actions to specifically recruit long-term unemployed defense or shipbuilding industry workers, and ``(ii) the individual was not hired to replace an employee who was involuntarily separated from employment by the employer without cause.''
Credit for Hiring Long-Term Unemployed Defense or Shipbuilding Industry Workers Made Permanent.--Paragraph (4) of section 51(c) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new sentence: ``The preceding sentence shall not apply to wages paid or incurred to any long-term unemployed defense or shipbuilding industry worker (as defined in subsection (d)(17)).''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to individuals hired on and after the date of the enactment of this Act.
TECHNOLOGY TRANSFER TAX CREDIT.
Allowance of Credit.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to amount of investment credit) is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (3) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(4) in the case of an eligible taxpayer (as defined in section 48(c)), the nondefense production and manufacturing equipment credit.''
Amount of Credit.--Section 48 of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(c) Nondefense Production and Manufacturing Equipment Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of section 46, in the case of an eligible taxpayer, the nondefense production and manufacturing equipment credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to 10 percent of the qualified investment for such taxable year.
Qualified investment.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the qualified investment for any taxable year is the aggregate of-- ``(i) the applicable percentage of the basis of each new qualified nondefense production and manufacturing equipment property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year, plus ``(ii) the applicable percentage of the cost of each used qualified nondefense production and manufacturing equipment property placed in service by the taxpayer during such taxable year.
Applicable percentage.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the applicable percentage for any property shall be determined under paragraphs (2) and (7) of section 46(c) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).
Certain rules made applicable.--The provisions of subsections (b) and (c) of section 48 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this paragraph.
Qualified nondefense production and manufacturing equipment property.--For purposes of this subsection, the term `qualified nondefense production and manufacturing equipment property' means any property-- ``(A) which is used as an integral part of the manufacture or production of nondefense tangible personal property, ``(B) which is tangible property to which section 168 applies, and ``(C) which is section 1245 property (as defined in section 1245(a)(3)).
Eligible taxpayer.-- ``(A) In general.--A taxpayer is an eligible taxpayer for purposes of this subsection if more than 50 percent of the gross revenues of such taxpayer for the taxable year are attributable to defense contracts.
Defense contract.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `defense contract' means any contract or subcontract entered into between the taxpayer and a defense agency to provide material or defense related operations.
Defense agency.--For purposes of this paragraph, the term `defense agency' means the Department of Defense, the nuclear weapons division of the Department of Energy, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, the Coast Guard, and any other agency of the Government to the extent such agency conducts military or other defense related operations.
Coordination with other credits.--This subsection shall not apply to any property to which the energy credit or rehabilitation credit would apply unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such credit to such property.
Certain progress expenditure rules made applicable.-- Rules similar to rules of subsection (c)(4) and (d) of section 46 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.''
Technical Amendments.-- (1) Clause (ii) of section 49(a)(1)(C) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or qualified nondefense production and manufacturing equipment property'' after ``energy property''.
Subparagraph (E) of section 50(a)(2) of such Code is amended by inserting ``or 48(c)(4)'' before the period at the end thereof.
Paragraph (5) of section 50(a) of such Code is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new subparagraph.
Special rules for certain property.--In the case of any qualified nondefense production and manufacturing equipment property which is 3-year property (within the meaning of section 168(e))-- ``(i) the percentage set forth in clause (ii) of the table contained in paragraph (1)(B) shall be 66 percent, ``(ii) the percentage set forth in clause (iii) of such table shall be 33 percent, and ``(iii) clauses (iv) and (v) of such table shall not apply.''
(A) The section heading for section 48 of such Code is amended to read as follows: ``SEC.
The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 is amended by striking the item relating to section 48 and inserting the following: ``Sec.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to periods after December 31, 1992, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).