This Act may be cited as the ``Lower Delaware Wild and Scenic Rivers Act''.
The Congress finds that the following: (1) Public Law 102-460 directed the Secretary of the Interior to conduct a study of the eligibility and suitability of the lower Delaware River in cooperation and consultation with appropriate Federal, State, regional, and local agencies, including, but not limited to, the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the Delaware and Lehigh Navigation Canal National Heritage Corridor Commission, and the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission.
During the study, the Lower Delaware Wild and Scenic River Study Task Force and the National Park Service prepared a river management plan for the study area, entitled ``Lower Delaware River Management Plan'', dated August 1997, which establishes goals and actions that will ensure long-term protection of the river's outstanding values and compatible management of their land and water resources.
Twenty-four municipalities along segments of the Delaware River eligible for designation passed resolutions supporting the Lower Delaware River Management Plan, agreeing to take action as appropriate to implement the goals of the plan, and endorsing designation of the river.
Segments of the lower Delaware River and its tributaries, the Paulinskill River, Cook's Creek, Tinicum Creek, Tohickon Creek, and Paunacussing Creek are eligible for inclusion into the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System-- (A) Segment a.--The segment from the Delaware Water Gap to the toll bridge connecting Columbia, New Jersey, and Portland, Pennsylvania (approximately 9.2 miles, 14.8 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment b.--The segment from Erie Lackawann railroad bridge to the southern tip of Dildine Island (approximately 3.6 miles, 5.8 kilometers)-- Recreational.
Segment c.--The segment from the southern tip of Mack Island to the northern border of the town of Belvidere, New Jersey (approximately 2 miles, 3.2 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment d.--The segment from the southern border of the town of Belvidere, New Jersey, to the northern border of the city of Easton, Pennsylvania, excluding river mile 196.0 to 193.8 (approximately 12.5 miles, 20.1 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment e.--The segment from the southern border of the town of Phillipsburg, New Jersey, to a point just north of Gilbert generating station (approximately 9.5 miles, 15.2 kilometers)-- Recreational.
Segment f.--The segment point just south of the Gilbert generating station to a point just north of the Point Pleasant pumping station (approximately 14.2 miles, 22.8 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment g.--The segment from the point just south of the Point Pleasant pumping station to a point 1,000 feet north of the Route 202 bridge (approximately 6.3 miles, 10.1 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment h.--The segment from a point 1,750 feet south of the Route 202 bridge to the southern border of the town of New Hope, Pennsylvania (approximately 1.9 miles, 3.0 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment i.--The segment from the southern boundary of the town of New Hope, Pennsylvania, to the town of Washington Crossing, Pennsylvania (approximately 6 miles, 9.7 kilometers)--Recreational.
Segment j.--Paulinskill River in Knowlton Township (approximately 2.4 miles, 3.8 kilometers)-- Recreational.
Segment k.--Cook's Creek (approximately 3.5 miles, 5.6 kilometers)--Scenic.
Segment l.--Tinicum Creek (approximately 15.9 miles, 25.6 kilometers)--Scenic.
Segment m.--Tohickon Creek (approximately 25.6 miles, 41.2 kilometers)--Scenic.
Segment n.--Paunacussing Creek in Solebury Township (approximately 3 miles, 4.8 kilometers)-- Recreational.
Section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraphs: ``( ) Lower delaware river and associated tributaries, new jersey and pennsylvania.-- ``(A) The 65.6 miles of river segments in New Jersey and Pennsylvania consisting of: ``(i) The segment from river mile 193.8 to the northern border of the city of Easton, Pennsylvania (approximately 10.5 miles, 16.9 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a recreational river.
The segment from a point just south of the Gilbert generating station to a point just north of the Point Pleasant pumping station (approximately 14.2 miles, 22.8 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a recreational river.
The segment from a point just south of the Point Pleasant pumping station to a point 1,000 feet north of the Route 202 bridge (approximately 6.3 miles, 10.1 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a recreational river.
The segment from a point 1,750 feet south of the Route 202 bridge to the southern border of the town of New Hope, Pennsylvania (approximately 1.9 miles, 3.0 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a recreational river.
The segment from the southern boundary of the town of New Hope, Pennsylvania, to the town of Washington Crossing, Pennsylvania (approximately 6 miles, 9.7 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a recreational river.
Tinicum Creek (approximately 14.7 miles, 23.7 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a scenic river.
Tohickon Creek from the Lake Nockamixon Dam to the Delaware River (approximately 10.7 miles, 17.2 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a scenic river.
Paunacussing Creek in Solebury Township (approximately 3 miles, 4.8 kilometers), to be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as a recreational river.
The segments designated by this paragraph shall be administered by the Secretary of the Interior as components of the National Park System in cooperation with appropriate Federal, State, regional, and local agencies, including the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, the Pennsylvania Department of Conservation and Natural Resources, the Delaware and Lehigh Navigation Canal Heritage Corridor Commission, the Delaware and Raritan Canal Commission, and the Delaware River Greenway Partnership.
The segments shall be managed in accordance with the plan entitled `Lower Delaware River Management Plan'.
Such plan shall be deemed to satisfy the requirements for a comprehensive management plan under section 3(d).''.
Federal Role.--(1) The Secretary of the Interior acting through the Director of the National Park Service, shall carry out the Lower Delaware River Management Plan and the provisions of this Act and the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act with respect to each of the segments designated by section 3, including the review of proposed federally assisted water resources projects that could have a direct and adverse effect on the values for which the segment is established, as authorized under section 7(a) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1278(a)).
In determining whether a proposed water resources project would have a direct and adverse effect on the values for which the segments are designated were included in the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, the Secretary, acting through the Director, shall specifically consider the extent to which the project is consistent with the Lower Delaware River Management Plan.
Pursuant to sections 10(e) and 11(b) of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1281(e), 1282(b)(1)), the Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, may enter into cooperative agreements with the States of New Jersey and Pennsylvania and other organizations as appropriate.
Such cooperative agreements shall be consistent with the Lower Delaware River Management Plan and may include provisions for financial or other assistance from the United States to facilitate the long-term protection, conservation, and enhancement of each of the segments designated by section 3 of this Act.
The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director, may provide technical assistance, staff support, and funding to assist in the implementation of the Lower Delaware River Management Plan.
Land Management.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, may provide planning, financial, and technical assistance to municipalities through which designated river segments flow to assist in their implementation of actions to protect the natural, economic, and historic resources of the Lower Delaware River corridor.
After adoption of recommendations made in section III of the management plan, the zoning ordinances of the municipalities bordering the segments shall be considered to satisfy the standards and requirements under section 6(c) prohibiting the Secretary from acquiring lands through condemnation for the purposes of including the lands in the designated segments of the river area where such lands are located within any incorporated municipality which has in force and applicable to such lands duly adopted, valid zoning ordinances that conform with the purposes of the Wild and Scenic Rivers Act (16 United States Code 1221 and following).
Segment Additions.--The Secretary of the Interior, acting through the Director of the National Park Service, is encouraged to continue to work with the local municipalities to negotiate agreement and support for designating those segments of the Delaware River and its tributaries which were found eligible for designation pursuant to Public Law 102-460 and were not designated pursuant to this Act.
If within 3 years of enactment of this Act, 1 or more of such additional river segments are certified by the Secretary of the Interior as suitable for designation into the National Wild and Scenic Rivers System, the Secretary shall publish in the Federal Register a notice of the designation of the segment, and upon such publication the segment shall thereby be designated as a recreational river or scenic river, as the case may be, under section 3(a) of the Wild and Scenic River Act (16 United States Code 1274(a)).
There are authorized to be appropriated such sums as may be necessary to carry out this Act.