This Act may be cited as the ``Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1997''.
ESTABLISHMENT OF CAPITOL VISITOR CENTER.
In General.--The Architect of the Capitol, under the direction of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission, is authorized-- (1) to plan, construct, furnish, and equip the Capitol Visitor Center under the East Plaza of the United States Capitol with associated improvements to the Capitol to provide access thereto; and (2) to reconstruct the East Plaza of the United States Capitol and its environs to enhance its attractiveness, safety, and security; in a manner that preserves and maintains Olmstead's ``General Plan for the Improvement of the United States Capitol Grounds'', 1874.
Purposes.--The purposes of the Capitol Visitor Center shall include-- (1) providing reception facilities, educational materials and exhibits, information, amenities, a gift shop, and other programs and facilities for members of the public visiting the United States Capitol; and (2) enhancing the security of the Capitol.
Design.--Plans for construction of the Capitol Visitor Center shall be substantially in accordance with the Final Design Report dated November 10, 1995, submitted by the Architect of the Capitol to the Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure of the House of Representatives, the Committee on Rules and Administration of the Senate, and the United States Capitol Preservation Commission, subject to modifications approved by the Commission.
Exhibits.--The informational and educational experience afforded visitors to the Capitol Visitor Center, including all exhibits, shall be the responsibility of the United States Capitol Visitor Board under the direction of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission, as approved by the House of Representatives and the Senate.
The Architect of the Capitol, the Clerk of the House of Representatives, the Secretary of the Senate, the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives, and the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper of the Senate shall provide staff, support, and resources for the installation, assembly, and maintenance of all exhibits and other informational and educational fixtures and equipment.
Exhibits and all informational and educational materials shall be subject to section 7(b).
Security Systems.--The design, installation, and maintenance of security systems for the Capitol Visitor Center shall be the responsibility of the Capitol Police Board in accordance with section 308 of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1996 (40 United States Code 212a- 4) and section 308 of the Legislative Branch Appropriations Act, 1997 (40 United States Code 212a-4a).
Management.--After the opening of the Capitol Visitor Center to the public, the Architect of the Capitol shall administer, maintain, and improve the Capitol Visitor Center as part of the Capitol Building and Grounds, subject to this Act and the oversight of the appropriate officers and committees of the House of Representatives and the Senate.
Definition of Project.--In this Act, the term ``project'' means the activities and purposes set forth in subsections (a) through (f).
UNITED STATES CAPITOL PRESERVATION COMMISSION; FINANCING PLAN; SECURITY STUDY.
Development of Project Implementation Capacity.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the United States Capitol Preservation Commission shall meet at the call of either co- chairman for the purpose of establishing a special committee of the Commission to carry out the functions of the Commission in implementing and overseeing the project.
Financing Plan.--As soon as practicable after the date of enactment of this Act, the United States Capitol Preservation Commission shall develop a detailed plan for financing the project at the lowest net cost to the Government.
The financing plan shall provide for-- (1) the acceptance of donations from public and private sources to be used to minimize the use of or to repay any appropriated or borrowed funds; (2) the use of any revenues generated by the Capitol Visitor Center to minimize the use of or to repay any appropriated or borrowed funds and, to the extent available, to pay the operating costs of the Capitol Visitor Center; (3) the use of any other funds available for the preservation and restoration of the Capitol; and (4) only to the extent necessary, the use of appropriated or borrowed funds.
The plan shall be submitted to Committees on Appropriations and House Oversight of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Appropriations and Rules and Administration of the Senate.
Revolving Fund.--All funds described in subsection (b) shall be deposited in the United States Capitol Visitor Center Revolving Fund, which is hereby established in the Treasury.
The Fund shall be managed as provided in section 9602 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 and shall be available, without fiscal year limitation, to carry out the project, including-- (1) the reimbursement of appropriations accounts of the Senate, the House of Representatives, and the Architect of the Capitol for all costs associated with the operation of the Capitol Visitor Center Gift Shop; (2) the payment of costs of the continued conservation and preservation of the Capitol Building; and (3) the payment of costs of further acquisitions of fine arts as approved by the Senate Commission on Art or the House Fine Arts Board.
Security Study.--The Capitol Police Board shall conduct a study to assess security cost savings and other benefits resulting from the construction and operation of the Capitol Visitor Center and shall report the results of its study to the United States Capitol Preservation Commission and to the Committees on Appropriations and House Oversight of the House of Representatives and the Committees on Appropriations and Rules and Administration of the Senate.
Building Codes.--The project shall meet design standards applicable under nationally recognized building codes, as determined by the Architect of the Capitol.
During construction, the Architect shall conduct periodic inspections for the purpose of ensuring that such standards are being met.
Applicability of Certain Laws.--The project shall not be subject to any Federal or State law (including law of the District of Columbia) relating to taxes, building codes, studies, reports, permits, or inspections.
In General.--For the purposes of carrying out the project, gifts or donations of services or property may be received, accepted, held, and disposed of, subject to the provisions of the plan promulgated under section 3.
Treatment Under Tax Laws.--Any gift accepted in accordance with the plan promulgated under section 3 shall be considered a gift to the United States for the purposes of income, estate, and gift tax laws of the United States.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Architect of the Capitol may establish competitive procedures for work on the project by the use of prequalification standards and may award contracts on the basis of contractor qualifications as well as price.
Such procedures and contract awards shall be final and conclusive upon all officers of the Government.
In General.-- (1) Authority of capitol visitor board.--The Capitol Visitor Board, under the direction of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission and subject to prior approval of the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall establish the Capitol Visitor Center operations, tour, exhibit and education policies, including-- (A) establishing hours of operation, tour content, and tour schedules; (B) producing or selecting films, videos, exhibits, publications, and other items of an educational nature; and (C) approving items for sale by the Capitol Visitor Center gift shop.
Consultation.--In carrying out this section, the Capitol Visitor Board shall consult with the Historians of the Senate and House of Representatives, the Senate Commission on Art, the House Fine Arts Board, and any advisory board of the United States Capitol Preservation Commission designated for this purpose by the Commission.
Other authorities not affected.-- (A) Security.--Nothing in this section affects the authority of the Capitol Police Board with respect to security of the Capitol, the Capitol Visitor Center, or their environs.
Senate commission on art.--Nothing in this section affects the authority of the Senate Commission on Art with respect to the Old Senate Chamber and the Old Supreme Court Chamber.
Exhibits and Informational and Educational Material.-- (1) Exhibits.--Exhibits, including any audio, video, or demonstrative presentations, shall illustrate the history and the Constitutional role of the United States Congress and the history, including art and architectural history, of the Capitol.
Informational and educational materials.--To assist visitors, the Capitol Visitor Board shall publish or provide for informational and educational materials for free distribution to the public, in accordance with title 44, United States Code.
Materials provided for sale may be purchased through approved procedures for the Capitol Visitor Center gift shop and any revenues produced shall be deposited to the United States Capitol Visitor Center Revolving Fund account as approved by the United States Capitol Preservation Commission.
Capitol Visitor Center Gift Shop.-- (1) Purpose.--The Capitol Visitor Center Board shall establish and operate the Capitol Visitor Center Gift Shop in accordance with policies approved by the United States Capitol Preservation Commission and the appropriate oversight committees of each House.
Proceeds of sales or services.--All monies received from sales or services of the Capitol Visitor Center Gift Shop shall be deposited in the United States Capitol Visitor Center Revolving Fund established by section 3(c) of this Act.
AMENDMENTS RELATING TO THE UNITED STATES CAPITOL PRESERVATION COMMISSION.
Purposes.--Section 801(a) of the Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 (40 United States Code 188a(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (2); and (2) by striking paragraph (3) and inserting the following: ``(3) carrying out functions assigned by the Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1997; and ``(4) conducting other activities that directly facilitate, encourage, or support the purposes specified in the preceding paragraphs.''.
Staff Support.--Section 801(e) Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 (40 United States Code 188a(e)) is amended by inserting ``Clerk of the House of Representatives, the Secretary of the Senate, the Sergeant at Arms of the House of Representatives, the Sergeant at Arms and Doorkeeper of the Senate, the'' after ``The''.
Delegation.--Section 801 of the Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 (40 United States Code 188a) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Delegation.--In addition to the special committee provided for by section 3(a), the United States Capitol Preservation Commission may delegate any functions to 1 or more special committees if the membership of each such committee is drawn equally from the House of Representatives and the Senate.''.
Fund Transfers.--Section 803 of the Arizona-Idaho Conservation Act of 1988 (40 United States Code 188a-2) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Transfers.--Not later than 30 days after the date of enactment of this Act, the balance in the account in excess of $250,000 shall be transferred to the fund established by section 3(c) of the Capitol Visitor Center Authorization Act of 1997.''.
Capitol Visitor Board.-- (1) Renaming.--Section 441 of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970 (40 United States Code 851) is amended by striking ``Capitol Guide Board'' each place it appears and inserting ``Capitol Visitor Board''.
Information.--Section 441(a) of the Legislative Reorganization Act of 1970 (40 United States Code 851(a)) is amended by inserting after ``Architect of the Capitol,'' the following: ``the Secretary of the Senate, the Clerk of the House of Representatives,''.
In General.--The provisions of title III of the National Visitor Center Facilities Act of 1968 (40 United States Code 831) shall be repealed to the extent that such provisions are inconsistent with the provisions of this Act.
Conforming Amendment.--Section 301 of the National Visitor Center Facilities Act of 1968 (40 United States Code 831) is amended by striking ``the United States Capitol Historical Society,''.