REQUIRED USE OF OPTION 1A AS PRICE STRUCTURE FOR CLASS I MILK UNDER CONSOLIDATED FEDERAL MILK MARKETING ORDERS.
Use of Option 1A.--In implementing the final decision for the consolidation and reform of Federal milk marketing orders, as required by section 143 of the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 (7 United States Code 7253), the Secretary of Agriculture shall price fluid or Class I milk under the orders using the Class I price differentials identified as Option 1A ``Location-Specific Differentials Analysis'' in the proposed rule published in the Federal Register on January 30, 1998 (63 Fed.
4802, 4809), except that the Secretary shall include the corrections and modifications to such Class I differentials made by the Secretary through April 2, 1999.
Effect on Implementation Schedule.--The requirement to use Option 1A in subsection (a) does not modify or delay the time period for actual implementation of the final decision as part of Federal milk marketing orders specified in section 738 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (as contained in section 101(a) of division A of Public Law 105-277; 112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-30).
Implementation of Requirement.-- (1) Expedited implementation.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall comply with subsection (a) as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act.
The requirement to use the Option 1A described in such subsection shall not be subject to-- (A) the notice and hearing requirements of section 8c(3) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 United States Code 608c(3)), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, or the notice and comment provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code; (B) a referendum conducted by the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to subsections (17) or (19) of such section 8c; (C) the Statement of Policy of the Secretary of Agriculture effective July 24, 1971 (36 Fed.
13804), relating to notices of proposed rulemaking and public participation in rulemaking; and (D) chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act'').
Effect on minimum milk prices.--If the Secretary of Agriculture announces minimum prices for milk under Federal milk marketing orders pursuant to section 1000.50 of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, before the date on which the Secretary first complies with subsection (a), the minimum prices so announced before that date shall be the only applicable minimum prices under Federal milk marketing orders for the months for which the prices have been announced.
NECESSITY OF USING FORMAL RULEMAKING TO DEVELOP PRICING METHODS FOR CLASS III AND CLASS IV MILK; MODIFIED MANUFACTURING ALLOWANCE FOR CHEESE.
Congressional Finding.--The Class III and Class IV pricing formulas included in the final decision for the consolidation and reform of Federal milk marketing orders, as published in the Federal Register on April 2, 1999 (64 Fed.
16025), do not adequately reflect public comment on the original proposed rule published in the Federal Register on January 30, 1998 (63 Fed.
4802), and are sufficiently different from the proposed rule and any comments submitted with regard to the proposed rule that further emergency rulemaking is merited.
Formal Rulemaking.-- (1) Required.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct rulemaking, on the record after an opportunity for an agency hearing, to reconsider the Class III and Class IV pricing formulas included in the final decision referred to in subsection (a).
Implementation.--A final decision on the formula shall be implemented not later than 10 months after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Effect of court order.--The actions authorized by this subsection are intended to ensure the timely publication and implementation of new pricing formulas for Class III and Class IV milk.
In the event that the Secretary is enjoined or otherwise restrained by a court order from implementing the final decision under paragraph (2), the length of time for which that injunction or other restraining order is effective shall be added to the time limitations specified in paragraph (2) thereby extending those time limitations by a period of time equal to the period of time for which the injunction or other restraining order is effective.
Failure To Timely Complete Rulemaking.--If the Secretary of Agriculture fails to implement new Class III and Class IV pricing formulas within the time period required under subsection (b)(2) (plus any additional period provided under subsection (b)(3)), the Secretary may not assess or collect assessments from milk producers or handlers under section 8c of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 United States Code 608c), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, for marketing order administration and services provided under such section after the end of that period until the pricing formulas are implemented.
The Secretary may not reduce the level of services provided under that section on account of the prohibition against assessments, but shall rather cover the cost of marketing order administration and services through funds available for the Agricultural Marketing Service of the Department.
Effect on Implementation Schedule.--Subject to subsection (e), the requirement for additional rulemaking in subsection (b) does not modify or delay the time period for actual implementation of the final decision referred to in subsection (a) as part of Federal milk marketing orders, as such time period is specified in section 738 of the Agriculture, Rural Development, Food and Drug Administration, and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1999 (as contained in section 101(a) of division A of Public Law 105-277; 112 United States Statutes at Large 2681-30).
Modified Manufacturing Allowance for Cheese.-- (1) Modification of allowance.--Pending the implementation of new pricing formulas for Class III and Class IV milk as required by subsection (b), the Secretary of Agriculture shall modify the formula used for determining Class III prices, as contained in the final decision referred to in subsection (a), to replace the manufacturing allowance of 17.02 cents per pound of cheese each place it appears in that formula with an amount equal to 14.7 cents per pound of cheese.
Expedited implementation.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall implement the modified formula as soon as practicable after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Implementation and use of the modified formula shall not be subject to-- (A) the notice and hearing requirements of section 8c(3) of the Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 United States Code 608c(3)), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, or the notice and comment provisions of section 553 of title 5, United States Code; (B) a referendum conducted by the Secretary of Agriculture pursuant to subsections (17) or (19) of such section 8c; (C) the Statement of Policy of the Secretary of Agriculture effective July 24, 1971 (36 Fed.
13804), relating to notices of proposed rulemaking and public participation in rulemaking; and (D) chapter 35 of title 44, United States Code (commonly known as the ``Paperwork Reduction Act'').
Effect on minimum milk prices.--If the Secretary of Agriculture announces minimum prices for milk under Federal milk marketing orders pursuant to section 1000.50 of title 7, Code of Federal Regulations, before the date on which the Secretary first implements the modified formula, the minimum prices so announced before that date shall be the only applicable minimum prices under Federal milk marketing orders for the months for which the prices have been announced.
ONE-YEAR EXTENSION OF CURRENT MILK PRICE SUPPORT PROGRAM.
Extension of Program.--Subsection (h) of section 141 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7251) is amended by striking ``1999'' both places it appears and inserting ``2000''.
Continuation of Current Price Support Rate.--Subsection (b)(4) of such section is amended by striking ``year 1999'' and inserting ``years 1999 and 2000''.
Elimination of Recourse Loan Program for Processors.--Section 142 of the Agricultural Market Transition Act (7 United States Code 7252) is repealed.
DAIRY FORWARD PRICING PROGRAM.
The Agricultural Adjustment Act (7 United States Code 601 et sequentes), reenacted with amendments by the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
DAIRY FORWARD PRICING PILOT PROGRAM.
Pilot Program Required.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this section, the Secretary of Agriculture shall establish a temporary pilot program under which milk producers and cooperatives are authorized to voluntarily enter into forward price contracts with milk handlers.
Minimum Milk Price Requirements.--Payments made by milk handlers to milk producers and cooperatives, and prices received by milk producers and cooperatives, under the forward contracts shall be deemed to satisfy-- ``(1) all regulated minimum milk price requirements of paragraphs (B) and (F) of subsection (5) of section 8c; and ``(2) the requirement of paragraph (C) of such subsection regarding total payments by each handler.
Milk Covered by Pilot Program.--The pilot program shall apply only with respect to the marketing of federally regulated milk that-- ``(1) is not classified as Class I milk or otherwise intended for fluid use; and ``(2) is in the current of interstate or foreign commerce or directly burdens, obstructs, or affects interstate or foreign commerce in federally regulated milk.
Duration.--The authority of the Secretary of Agriculture to carry out the pilot program shall terminate on December 31, 2004.
No forward price contract entered into under the program may extend beyond that date.
Study and Report on Effect of Pilot Program.-- ``(1) Study.--The Secretary of Agriculture shall conduct a study on forward contracting between milk producers and cooperatives and milk handlers to determine the impact on milk prices paid to producers in the United States.
To obtain information for the study, the Secretary may use the authorities available to the Secretary under section 8d, subject to the confidentiality requirements of subsection (2) of such section.
Report.--Not later than April 30, 2002, the Secretary shall submit to the Committee on Agriculture, Nutrition and Forestry of the Senate and the Committee on Agriculture of the House of Representatives a report containing the results of the study.''.
Passed the House of Representatives September 22, 1999.
Attest: JEFF TRANDAHL, Clerk.