This Act may be cited as the ``Parents and Teachers Know Best Act of 1997''.
The purpose of this Act is to repeal the Goals 2000: Educate America Act and the National Skill Standards Act of 1994 to allow local educational areas to use funds to continue or establish education programs that meet the unique needs of such areas.
The Goals 2000: Educate America Act and the National Skill Standards Act of 1994 are repealed.
Reservation.--From the amounts made available to carry out this Act, the Secretary of Education shall reserve not more than-- (1) one-half of one percent for payments to outlying areas to be allotted in accordance with the respective needs of such areas; and (2) one-half of one percent for payments to the Secretary of the Interior to carry out programs under this Act for Indian tribes.
Allotment and Distribution.-- (1) State allotment.--From the amount appropriated under section 7 and not reserved under subsection (a) in each fiscal year, the Secretary shall make allotments to State educational agencies that request to receive a grant under this Act as follows: (A) 50 percent of such amount shall be allocated in accordance with the relative amounts each State would have received under title I of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 for the preceding fiscal year if funds under such title for such preceding fiscal year had not been reserved for outlying areas.
50 percent of such amount shall be allocated in accordance with the relative amounts each State would have received under title VI of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 for the preceding fiscal year if funds under such title for such preceding fiscal year had not been reserved for outlying areas.
Local distribution.--Each State educational agency shall distribute to each local educational agency in such State that requests to receive a grant under this Act an amount which bears the same ratio to the amount such State educational agency received under paragraph (1) as the school-age population of the geographic area under the jurisdiction of the local educational agency bears to the school-age population of such State.
Funds received under this Act may be used for the following purposes: (1) Technology.--Technology related to the implementation of school-based reform programs, including professional development to assist teachers and other school officials regarding how to use effectively such equipment and software.
Educational materials.--Programs for the acquisition and use of instructional and educational materials, including library services and materials (including media materials), assessments, reference materials, computer software and hardware for instructional use, and other curricular materials which are tied to high academic standards and which will be used to improve student achievement and which are part of an overall education reform program.
Reform.--Promising education reform projects, including effective schools and magnet schools.
Improved thinking skills.--Programs to improve the higher order thinking skills of disadvantaged elementary and secondary school students and to prevent students from dropping out of school.
Literacy programs.--Programs to combat illiteracy in the student and adult population, including parent illiteracy.
Gifted and talented programs.--Programs to provide for the educational needs of gifted and talented children.
School improvement programs.--School improvement programs or activities under sections 1116 and 1117 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965.
For purposes of this Act-- (1) the term ``Indian tribe'' means any Indian tribe, band, nation, or other organized group or community, including any Alaska Native village or regional corporation as defined in or established pursuant to the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, which is recognized as eligible for the special programs and services provided by the United States to Indians because of their status as Indians; (2) the term ``local educational agency'' shall have the meaning given such term in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965; (3) the term ``outlying areas'' means Guam, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of Palau, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands; (4) the term ``school-age population'' means the population in a geographic area aged 5 through 17; (5) the term ``State'' means each of the 50 States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, but does not include the outlying areas or Indian tribes; and (6) the term ``State educational agency'' means the agency in a State primarily responsible for the State supervision of public elementary and secondary schools.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act an amount equal to the amounts most recently appropriated to carry out the Goals 2000: Educate America Act and the National Skill Standards Act of 1994 as of the date of the enactment of this Act.
This Act shall take effect on the first day of the first fiscal year following the fiscal year in which this Act is enacted.