Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Family and Medical Leave Enhancement Act''.
Reference.--Whenever in sections 2, 3, and 5 an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993.
Section 101(2)(B)(ii) (29 United States Code 2611(2)(B)(ii)) is amended by striking ``50'' each place it occurs and inserting ``25''.
ADDITIONAL LEAVE FOR PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT.
Leave Requirement.--Section 102(a) (29 United States Code 2612(a)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3) Entitlement to additional leave for parental involvement.-- ``(A) In general.--Subject to section 103(f), in addition to leave available under paragraph (1), an eligible employee shall be entitled to a total of 4 hours of leave during any 30-day period, and a total of 24 hours of leave during any 12-month period to participate in or attend an activity that-- ``(i) is sponsored by a school or community organization; and ``(ii) relates to a program of the school or organization that is attended by a son or daughter of the employee, including a foster child of the employee.
Definitions.--As used in subparagraph (A): ``(i) School.--The term `school' means an elementary school or secondary school (as such terms are defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)), a Head Start program assisted under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), and a child care facility licensed under State law.''.
Community organization.--The term `community organization' means a private nonprofit organization that is representative of a community or a significant segment of a community and provides activities for individuals described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 101(12), such as a scouting or sports organization.''.
Schedule.--Section 102(b)(1) (29 United States Code 2612(b)(1)) is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Leave under subsection (a)(3)(A) may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.''.
Substitution of Paid Leave.--Section 102(d)(2)(A) (29 United States Code 2612(d)(2)(A)) is amended by inserting before the period the following: ``, or for leave provided under subsection (a)(3)(A) for any part of the 24-hour period of such leave under such subsection''.
Notice.--Section 102(e)(1) (29 United States Code 2612(e)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In any case in which an employee requests leave under subsection (a)(3)(A), the employee shall provide the employer with not less than 7 days' notice, before the date the leave is to begin, of the employee's intention to take leave under such subsection.''.
Certification.--Section 103 (29 United States Code 2613) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) Certification for Parental Involvement Leave.--An employer may require that a request for leave under section 102(a)(3)(A) be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as the Secretary may by regulation prescribe.''.
PARENTAL INVOLVEMENT LEAVE FOR CIVIL SERVANTS.
Leave Requirement.--Section 6382(a) of title 5, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(3)(A) Subject to section 6383(f), in addition to leave available under paragraph (1), an employee shall be entitled to a total of 4 hours of leave during any 30-day period, and a total of 24 hours of leave during any 12-month period to participate in or attend an activity that-- ``(i) is sponsored by a school or community organization; and ``(ii) relates to a program of the school or organization that is attended by a son or daughter of the employee, including a foster child of the employee.
As used in this paragraph: ``(i) The term `school' means an elementary school or secondary school (as such terms are defined in section 14101 of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 8801)), a Head Start program assisted under the Head Start Act (42 United States Code 9831 et sequentes), and a child care facility licensed under State law.''.
The term `community organization' means a private nonprofit organization that is representative of a community or a significant segment of a community and provides activities for individuals described in subparagraph (A) or (B) of section 6381(6), such as a scouting or sports organization.''.
Schedule.--Section 6382(b)(1) of such title is amended by inserting after the second sentence the following: ``Leave under subsection (a)(3)(A) may be taken intermittently or on a reduced leave schedule.''.
Substitution of Paid Leave.--Section 6382(d) of such title is amended by inserting before ``, except'' the following: ``, or for leave provided under subsection (a)(3)(A) any of the employee's accrued or accumulated annual leave under subchapter I for any part of the 24- hour period of such leave under such subsection''.
Notice.--Section 6382(e)(1) of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``In any case in which an employee requests leave under subsection (a)(3)(A), the employee shall provide the employing agency with not less than 7 days' notice, before the date the leave is to begin, of the employee's intention to take leave under such subsection.''.
Certification.--Section 6383 of such title is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) An employing agency may require that a request for leave under section 6382(a)(3)(A) be supported by a certification issued at such time and in such manner as the Office of Personnel Management may by regulation prescribe.''.
CLARIFICATION OF LEAVE ENTITLEMENT.
Section 102(a)(1) (29 United States Code 2612(a)(1)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(E) To meet routine family medical needs, including transportation of children for medical and dental appointments for annual checkups and vaccinations.
To meet the routine medical care needs of elderly individuals who are related to the eligible employee, including visits to nursing homes and group homes.