This Act may be cited as the ``Foreign Oil Displacement Act of 2010''.
Congress finds that-- (1) the strategic interests of the United States would be served by a reduction in the Nation's dependence upon imported oil to produce transportation fuels and other products vital to both the domestic economy and national security; (2) this goal would be served by the development of a viable, commercially competitive synthetic fuels industry reliant upon domestic coals and other plentiful, nontraditional carbonaceous feedstocks; and (3) temporary financial incentives are required to foster private investment in the technology, design, construction, and operation of strategic facilities capable of producing synthetic fuels or synthetic gas on a commercial scale.
CARBONACEOUS FUELS FACILITY CREDIT.
Allowance of Carbonaceous Fuels Facility Credit.--Section 46 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of paragraph (5), by striking the period at the end of paragraph (6) and inserting ``, and'' and by inserting after paragraph (6) the following new paragraph: ``(7) the carbonaceous fuels facility credit.''.
Amount of Carbonaceous Fuels Facility Credit.--Subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after section 48D the following new section: ``SEC.
CARBONACEOUS FUELS FACILITY CREDIT.
In General.--For purposes of section 46, the carbonaceous fuels facility credit for any taxable year is an amount equal to 30 percent of the qualified investment in a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility for such taxable year.
Qualified Investment.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified investment' means, with respect to any taxable year, the basis of property placed in service by the taxpayer during the taxable year as part of a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility-- ``(A)(i) the construction, reconstruction, or erection of which is completed by the taxpayer, or ``(ii) which is acquired by the taxpayer if the original use of such property commences with the taxpayer, ``(B) with respect to which depreciation (or amortization in lieu of depreciation) is allowable, and ``(C) which has a useful life of not less than 3 years.
Special rule for sale-leasebacks.--For purposes of paragraph (1)(A), in the case of a facility that-- ``(A) is originally placed in service by a person, and ``(B) is sold and leased back by such person, or is leased to such person, within 3 months after the date such facility was originally placed in service, for a period of not less than 12 years, such facility shall be treated as originally placed in service not earlier than the date on which such property is used under the leaseback (or lease) referred to in subparagraph (B).
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any property if the lessee and lessor of such property make an election under this sentence.
Such an election, once made, may be revoked only with the consent of the Secretary.
Certain qualified progress expenditures rules made applicable.--Rules similar to the rules of subsections (c)(4) and (d) of section 46 (as in effect on the day before the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990) shall apply for purposes of this section.
Carbonaceous Fuels Conversion Facility.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of this section, the term `carbonaceous fuels conversion facility' means a facility of the taxpayer used to produce a qualified fuel.
Qualified fuel.--For purposes of paragraph (1), the term `qualified fuel'-- ``(A) has the meaning given such term by section 45K(c), except that ``(B) in applying section 45K(c)(1)(C), the term `coal' includes-- ``(i) peat, and ``(ii) any byproduct (including synthetic gas) or chemical-- ``(I) that is from a coal, culm, or silt preparation facility, and ``(II) that contains fixed carbon derived from coal.
Coordination With Other Credits.--This section shall not apply to any property with respect to which any other credit is allowed unless the taxpayer elects to waive the application of such other credits to such property.
Credit May Be Assigned.-- ``(1) In general.--If any taxpayer elects the application of this subsection for any taxable year, the amount of credit determined under this section for such year which would (but for this subsection) be allowable to the taxpayer shall be allowable to the person designated by the taxpayer.
Such amount shall be determined by applying this section separately from section 38 for such year.
The person so designated shall be treated as the taxpayer with respect to this section (other than this subsection) for purposes of this title (other than this paragraph).
Treatment of amounts paid for assignment.--If any amount is paid to the person who assigns the credit determined under this section, no portion of such amount shall be includible in such person's gross income.
Application of Section.--This section shall apply to periods after the date of the enactment of this section and before January 1, 2024, under rules similar to the rules of section 48(m) (as in effect on the day before the date of the enactment of the Revenue Reconciliation Act of 1990).''.
Recapture.-- (1) In general.--Subsection (a) of section 50 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(6) Special rules relating to carbonaceous fuels conversion facility.--For purposes of applying this subsection in the case of any credit allowable by reason of section 48E, the following shall apply: ``(A) In general.--In lieu of the amount of the increase in tax under paragraph (1), the increase in tax shall be an amount equal to the investment tax credit allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years with respect to a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility (as defined by section 48E(c)) multiplied by a fraction whose numerator is the number of years remaining to fully depreciate under this chapter the carbonaceous fuels conversion facility disposed of, and whose denominator is the total number of years over which such facility would otherwise have been subject to depreciation.
For purposes of the preceding sentence, the year of disposition of the carbonaceous fuels conversion facility property shall be treated as a year of remaining depreciation.
Property ceases to qualify for progress expenditures.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraph (2) shall apply in the case of qualified progress expenditures for a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility under section 48E, except that the amount of the increase in tax under subparagraph (A) of this paragraph shall be substituted in lieu of the amount described in such paragraph (2).''.
Paragraph (4) of section 50(a) of such Code is amended by striking ``and (2)'' and inserting ``, (2), and (6)''.
Application of At-Risk Rules.--Subparagraph (C) of section 49(a)(1) of such Code is amended by striking ``and'' at the end of clause (v), by striking the period at the end of clause (vi) and inserting ``, and'', and by adding at the end thereof the following new clause: ``(vii) the portion of the basis of any carbonaceous fuels conversion facility attributable to any qualified investment (as defined by section 48E(b)).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart E of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 48D the following new item: ``Sec.
Carbonaceous fuels facility credit.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply taxable years ending after the date of the enactment of this Act.
EXEMPTION FROM MANUFACTURERS EXCISE TAX ON FUELS.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 4083 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(4) Qualified carbonaceous fuel.-- ``(A) Exemption.--The terms `taxable fuel', `gasoline', `diesel fuel' and `kerosene' do not include qualified carbonaceous fuel or that portion of a blend that is qualified carbonaceous fuel.
Qualified carbonaceous fuel defined.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term `qualified carbonaceous fuel' means qualified fuel produced by a carbonaceous fuels conversion facility.
Other definitions.--For purposes of subparagraph (B), the terms `qualified fuel' and `carbonaceous fuels conversion facility' have the meaning given such terms by section 48E.
Application of paragraph.--This paragraph shall apply during the period beginning on the 91st day after the date of the enactment of this paragraph and ending on December 31, 2023.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by this section shall take effect on the date of the enactment of this Act.