This Act may be cited as the ``Federal Aviation Research and Evaluation Act'' (the FARE Act).
There is established a commission to be known as the ``Federal Aviation Research and Evaluation Board'' (referred to in this Act as the ``Commission'').
The duties of the Commission shall be as follows: (1) To review any complaint submitted to the Commission which alleges a predatory practice by an air carrier.
To study the airfare marketing and pricing practices and service availability in the airline industry.
To submit to Congress interim reports as the Commission considers appropriate.
Such reports shall contain a detailed statement of the findings and conclusions of the Commission relating to reviews and studies conducted pursuant to this section, together with recommendations of the Commission for legislation or administrative actions.
Composition.--The Commission shall be composed of 7 members selected from representatives of the airline industry, consumer advocate groups, labor unions, and the business community and local, State, and Federal Government employees and elected officials, who shall be appointed as follows: (1) The President shall appoint 3 individuals.
The President Pro Tempore of the Senate shall appoint 2 individuals.
The Speaker of the House of Representatives shall appoint 2 individuals.
Deadline for Initial Appointments.--All initial appointments to the Commission shall be made not later than 30 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
Period of Appointment.-- (1) In general.--Each member shall be appointed for the life of the Commission.
Vacancies.-- (A) Authority of commission.--A vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall not affect the power of the remaining members to carry out the duties of the Commission under section 3.
Appointment of successors.--A vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall be filled in the manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.-- (1) Rates of pay.--Except as provided in paragraph (2), members shall not be paid for their service on the Commission.
Travel expenses.--Each member shall receive travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence, in accordance with sections 5702 and 5703 of title 5, United States Code.
Quorum.-- (1) In general.--Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum but a lesser number may hold hearings.
Affect of proxy.--A member of the Commission may vote by means of a signed proxy exercised by another member of the Commission, but any member so voting shall not be considered present for purposes of establishing a quorum.
Chairperson.--The Chairperson of the Commission shall be elected by the members at the initial meeting of the Commission.
Meetings.-- (1) Initial meeting.--The Commission shall hold its initial meeting not later than 60 days after the date that the last of the initial seven members the Commission is appointed.
Subsequent meetings.--After the initial meeting required by paragraph (1), the Commission shall meet at the call of the Chairperson or a majority of its members.
STAFF OF COMMISSION; EXPERTS AND CONSULTANTS.
Staff.--The Commission may appoint and fix the pay of personnel as it considers appropriate.
Applicability of Certain Civil Service Laws.--The staff of the Commission may be appointed without regard to the provisions of title 5, United States Code, governing appointments in the competitive service, and may be paid without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of that title relating to classification and General Schedule pay rates.
Experts and Consultants.--The Commission may procure temporary and intermittent services under section 3109(b) of title 5, United States Code.
Staff of Federal Agencies.--Upon request of the Commission, the head of any Federal department or agency may detail, on a reimbursable basis, any of the personnel of that department or agency to the Commission to assist it in carrying out its duties under this Act.
Hearings and Sessions.--The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out this Act, hold hearings, sit and act at times and places, take testimony, and receive evidence as the Commission considers appropriate.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to witnesses appearing before it.
Powers of Members and Agents.--Any member or agent of the Commission may, if authorized by the Commission, take any action which the Commission is authorized to take by this section.
Obtaining Official Data.--Subject to sections 552, 552a, and 552b of title 5, United States Code, the Commission may secure, directly from any department or agency of the United States, information necessary to enable it to carry out this Act.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as other departments and agencies of the United States.
Administrative Support Services.--Upon the request of the Commission, the Administrator of General Services shall provide to the Commission, on a reimbursable basis, the administrative support services necessary for the Commission to carry out its duties under this Act.
Subpoena Power.-- (1) In general.--The Commission may issue subpoenas requiring the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of any evidence relating to any matter under investigation by the Commission.
The attendance of witnesses and the production of evidence may be required from any place within the United States at any designated place of hearing within the United States.
Failure to obey a subpoena.--If a person refuses to obey a subpoena issued under paragraph (1), the Commission may apply to a United States district court for an order requiring that person to appear before the Commission to give testimony, produce evidence, or both, relating to the matter under investigation.
The application may be made within the judicial district where the hearing is conducted or where that person is found, resides, or transacts business.
Any failure to obey the order of the court may be punished by the court as civil contempt.
Service of subpoenas.--The subpoenas of the Commission shall be served in the manner provided for subpoenas issued by a United States district court under the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure for the United States district courts.
Service of process.--All process of any court to which application is to be made under paragraph (2) may be served in the judicial district in which the person required to be served resides or may be found.
Immunity.--The Commission is an agency of the United States for the purpose of part V of title 18, United States Code (relating to immunity of witnesses).
Contract Authority.--The Commission may contract with and compensate government and private agencies or persons for services necessary to carry out this Act, without regard to section 3709 of the Revised Statutes (41 United States Code 5).
The Commission shall terminate 3 years after the date of the initial meeting of the Commission.
APPLICABILITY OF FEDERAL TORT CLAIMS PROVISIONS.
For purposes of sections 1346(b) and 2401(b) and chapter 171 of title 28, United States Code, the Commission is a ``Federal agency'' and each of the members and personnel of the Commission is an ``employee of the Government''.
There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this Act $4,000,000 for each of fiscal years 1999, 2000, 2001, and 2002.