This Act may be cited as the ``1997 Franklin Delano Roosevelt Commemorative Coin Act''.
The Congress finds that-- (1) the people of the United States feel a deep debt of gratitude to Franklin Delano Roosevelt for his leadership in America's struggle for peace, well-being, and human dignity; (2) Franklin Delano Roosevelt served his country as the thirty-second President from 1932 until his death in 1945, and is the only United States President elected to 4 terms in office; (3) Franklin Delano Roosevelt served the State of New York as Governor from 1928 through 1932; (4) Franklin Delano Roosevelt served his country as the United States Assistant Secretary of the Navy from 1913 through 1920; (5) Franklin Delano Roosevelt piloted the American people through the economic chaos of the Great Depression; (6) Franklin Delano Roosevelt, as our commander in chief, led the American people through the turmoil of World War II; (7) Franklin Delano Roosevelt established Social Security, thus providing all Americans with a more abundant and secure life; (8) Franklin Delano Roosevelt was the author of ``The Four Freedoms: Freedom of Speech, Freedom of Worship, Freedom from Want, and Freedom from Fear''; (9) Franklin Delano Roosevelt was the founder of the National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, parent organization of the March of Dimes; (10) Franklin Delano Roosevelt was the chief architect of the United Nations; (11) after many years of planning, the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial will soon join the memorials of Washington, Jefferson, and Lincoln as a tribute to another great American leader; (12) the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial will be a series of 4 large outdoor rooms encompassing over 7 acres, and will be situated between the Lincoln and Jefferson memorials in Washington, D.C.; and (13) in 1997, the Nation will celebrate the public opening of this magnificent memorial, honoring one of our greatest Presidents.
Half Dollar Silver Coins.--The Secretary of the Treasury (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Secretary'') shall mint and issue not more than 500,000 half dollar coins, each of which shall-- (1) weigh 12.50 grams; (2) have a diameter of 30.61 millimeters; and (3) contain 90 percent silver and 10 percent copper.
Legal Tender.--The coins minted under this Act shall be legal tender, as provided in section 5103 of title 31, United States Code.
Numismatic Items.--For purposes of section 5134 of title 31, United States Code, all coins minted under this Act shall be considered to be numismatic items.
The Secretary shall obtain silver for minting coins under this Act only from stockpiles established under the Strategic and Critical Materials Stock Piling Act.
Design Requirements.-- (1) In general.--The obverse side of each coin minted under this Act shall bear a likeness of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, the thirty-second President of the United States.
The reverse side of each coin shall be emblematic of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial in Washington, D.C. (2) Designation and inscriptions.--On each coin minted under this Act there shall be-- (A) a designation of the value of the coin; (B) an inscription of the year ``1997''; and (C) inscriptions of the words ``Liberty'', ``In God We Trust'', ``United States of America'', and ``E Pluribus Unum''.
Selection.--The design for the coins minted under this Act shall be-- (1) selected by the Secretary after consultation with the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial Commission and the Commission of Fine Arts; and (2) reviewed by the Citizens Commemorative Coin Advisory Committee.
Additions and Alterations.--No addition or alteration to the design selected in accordance with subsection (b) shall be made without the approval of the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial Commission.
Quality and Mint Facility.--The coins authorized under this Act may be issued in uncirculated and proof qualities and shall be struck at the United States Bullion Depository at West Point.
Period for Issuance.--The Secretary may issue coins minted under this Act only during the period beginning on January 1, 1997, and ending on December 31, 1997.
Sale Price.--The coins issued under this Act shall be sold by the Secretary at a price equal to the sum of-- (1) the face value of the coins; (2) the surcharge provided in subsection (d) with respect to such coins; and (3) the cost of designing and issuing the coins (including labor, materials, dies, use of machinery, overhead expenses, marketing, and shipping).
Bulk Sales.--The Secretary shall make bulk sales of the coins issued under this Act at a reasonable discount.
Prepaid Orders.-- (1) In general.--The Secretary shall accept prepaid orders for the coins minted under this Act before the issuance of such coins.
Discount.--Sale prices with respect to prepaid orders under paragraph (1) shall be at a reasonable discount.
Surcharges.--All sales shall include a surcharge of $3 per coin.
GENERAL WAIVER OF PROCUREMENT REGULATIONS.
In General.--Except as provided in subsection (b), no provision of law governing procurement or public contracts shall be applicable to the procurement of goods and services necessary for carrying out the provisions of this Act.
Equal Employment Opportunity.--Subsection (a) shall not relieve any person entering into a contract under the authority of this Act from complying with any law relating to equal employment opportunity.
In General.--All surcharges received by the Secretary from the sale of coins issued under this Act shall be promptly paid by the Secretary as follows: (1) An amount equal to 50 percent of the total surcharges shall be paid to the National Park Foundation Restricted Account for the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial.
An amount equal to 50 percent of the total surcharges shall be paid to the National Park Service Restricted Construction Account for the Franklin Delano Roosevelt Memorial.
Audits.--The Comptroller General of the United States shall have the right to examine such books, records, documents, and other data of the accounts referred to in subsection (a) as may be related to the expenditures of amounts paid under such subsection.
No Net Cost to the Government.--The Secretary shall take such actions as may be necessary to ensure that minting and issuing coins under this Act will not result in any net cost to the United States Government.
Payment for Coins.--A coin shall not be issued under this Act unless the Secretary has received-- (1) full payment for the coin; (2) security satisfactory to the Secretary to indemnify the United States for full payment; or (3) a guarantee of full payment satisfactory to the Secretary from a depository institution whose deposits are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation or the National Credit Union Administration Board.