Any ADR used to resolve a health care liability action or claim shall contain provisions relating to statute of limitations, noneconomic damages, joint and several liability, punitive damages, collateral source rule, periodic payments, and award of attorney's fees which are consistent with the provisions relating to such matters in this Act.
As used in this Act: (1) Actual damages.--The term ``actual damages'' means damages awarded to pay for economic loss.
ADR.--The term ``ADR'' means an alternative dispute resolution system established under Federal or State law that provides for the resolution of health care liability claims in a manner other than through health care liability actions.
Claimant.--The term ``claimant'' means any person who brings a health care liability action and any person on whose behalf such an action is brought.
If such action is brought through or on behalf of an estate, the term includes the claimant's decedent.
If such action is brought through or on behalf of a minor or incompetent, the term includes the claimant's legal guardian.
Clear and convincing evidence.--The term ``clear and convincing evidence'' is that measure or degree of proof that will produce in the mind of the trier of fact a firm belief or conviction as to the truth of the allegations sought to be established.
Such measure or degree of proof is more than that required under preponderance of the evidence but less than that required for proof beyond a reasonable doubt.
Collateral source payments.--The term ``collateral source payments'' means any amount paid or reasonably likely to be paid in the future to or on behalf of a claimant, or any service, product, or other benefit provided or reasonably likely to be provided in the future to or on behalf of a claimant, as a result of an injury or wrongful death, pursuant to-- (A) any State or Federal health, sickness, income- disability, accident or workers' compensation Act; (B) any health, sickness, income-disability, or accident insurance that provides health benefits or income-disability coverage; (C) any contract or agreement of any group, organization, partnership, or corporation to provide, pay for, or reimburse the cost of medical, hospital, dental, or income disability benefits; and (D) any other publicly or privately funded program.
Drug.--The term ``drug'' has the meaning given such term in section 201(g)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 321(g)(1)).
Economic damages.--The term ``economic damages'' means objectively verifiable monetary losses incurred as a result of the provision of, use of, or payment for (or failure to provide, use, or pay for) health care services or medical products such as past and future medical expenses, loss of past and future earnings, cost of obtaining domestic services, loss of employment, loss due to death, burial costs, and loss of business or employment opportunities.
Harm.--The term ``harm'' means any legally cognizable wrong or injury for which punitive damages may be imposed.
Health benefit plan.--The term ``health benefit plan'' means-- (A) a hospital or medical expense incurred policy or certificate, (B) a hospital or medical service plan contract, (C) a health maintenance subscriber contract, or (D) a Medicare+Choice product (offered under part C of title XVIII of the Social Security Act), that provides benefits with respect to health care services.
Health care liability action.--The term ``health care liability action'' means a civil action brought in a State or Federal court or pursuant to alternative dispute resolution against a health care provider, an entity which is obligated to provide or pay for health benefits under any health benefit plan (including any person or entity acting under a contract or arrangement to provide or administer any health benefit), or the manufacturer, distributor, supplier, marketer, promoter, or seller of a medical product, in which the claimant alleges a claim (including third party claims, cross claims, counter claims, or contribution claims) based upon the provision of (or the failure to provide or pay for) health care services or the use of a medical product, regardless of the theory of liability on which the claim is based or the number of plaintiffs, defendants, or causes of action.
Health care liability claim.--The term ``health care liability claim'' means a claim in which the claimant alleges that injury was caused by the provision of (or the failure to provide) health care services or medical products.
Health care provider.--The term ``health care provider'' means any person that is engaged in the delivery of health care services in a State and that is required by the laws or regulations of the State to be licensed or certified by the State to engage in the delivery of such services in the State.
Health care service.--The term ``health care service'' means any service for which payment may be made under a health benefit plan including services related to the delivery or administration of such service.
Medical product.--The term ``medical product'' means a drug (as defined in section 201(g)(1)) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 321(g)(1)) or a medical device (as defined in section 201(h)) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (21 United States Code 321(h)), including any component or raw material used in a drug or device but excluding health care services.
Noneconomic damages.--The term ``noneconomic damages'' means damages paid to an individual for pain and suffering, inconvenience, emotional distress, mental anguish, loss of consortium, injury to reputation, humiliation, and other nonpecuniary losses.
Person.--The term ``person'' means any individual, corporation, company, association, firm, partnership, society, joint stock company, or any other entity, including any governmental entity.
Product seller.-- (A) In general.--Subject to subparagraph (B), the term ``product seller'' means a person who, in the course of a business conducted for that purpose-- (i) sells, distributes, rents, leases, prepares, blends, packages, labels, or is otherwise involved in placing, a product in the stream of commerce, or (ii) installs, repairs, or maintains the harm-causing aspect of a product.
Exclusion.--Such term does not include-- (i) a seller or lessor of real property; (ii) a provider of professional services in any case in which the sale or use of a product is incidental to the transaction and the essence of the transaction is the furnishing of judgment, skill, or services; or (iii) any person who-- (I) acts in only a financial capacity with respect to the sale of a product; or (II) leases a product under a lease arrangement in which the selection, possession, maintenance, and operation of the product are controlled by a person other than the lessor.
Punitive damages.--The term ``punitive damages'' means damages awarded against any person not to compensate for actual injury suffered, but to punish or deter such person or others from engaging in similar behavior in the future.
State.--The term ``State'' means each of the several States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
This Act will apply to any health care liability action brought in a Federal or State court and to any health care liability claim subject to an ADR system, that is initiated on or after the date of enactment of this Act, except that any health care liability claim or action arising from an injury occurring prior to the date of enactment of this Act shall be governed by the applicable statute of limitations provisions in effect at the time the injury occurred.