This Act may be cited as the ``Medicare Substitute Adult Day Care Services Act of 1998''.
COVERAGE OF SUBSTITUTE ADULT DAY CARE SERVICES UNDER MEDICARE.
Substitute Adult Day Care Services Benefit.-- (1) In general.--Section 1861(m) of the Social Security Act (42 United States Code 1395x(m)) is amended-- (A) in the matter preceding paragraph (1), by inserting ``or paragraph (8)'' after ``paragraph (7)''; (B) in paragraph (6), by striking ``and'' at the end; (C) in paragraph (7), by adding ``and'' at the end; and (D) by inserting after paragraph (7), the following new paragraph: ``(8) substitute adult day care services (as defined in subsection (uu));''.
Substitute adult day care services defined.--Section 1861 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``Substitute Adult Day Care Services; Adult Day Care Facility ``(uu)(1)(A) The term `substitute adult day care services' means the items and services described in subparagraph (B) furnished to an individual by an adult day care facility as a part of a plan under subsection (m) substituting such services for a portion of the items and services described in subparagraph (B)(i) furnished by a home health agency under the plan, as determined by the physician establishing the plan.
The items and services described in this subparagraph are the following items and services: ``(i) Items and services described in paragraphs (1) through (7) of subsection (m).
Transportation of the individual to and from the adult day care facility in connection with any such item or service.
A program of supervised activities designed to promote physical and mental health and furnished to the individual by the adult day care facility in a group setting for a period of not fewer than four and not greater than twelve hours per day.
(A) Except as provided in subparagraph (B), the term `adult day care facility' means a public agency or private organization, or a subdivision of such an agency or organization, that-- ``(i) is engaged in providing skilled nursing services and other therapeutic services; and ``(ii) meets the requirements of paragraphs (2) through (8) of subsection (o).
The Secretary may waive the requirement of a surety bond under paragraph (7) of subsection (o) in the case of an agency or organization that provides a comparable surety bond under State law.
For purposes of payment for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services furnished under this title, any reference to a home health agency is deemed to be a reference to an adult day care facility.''.
Conforming amendments.--Sections 1814(a)(2)(C) and 1835(a)(2)(A)(i) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395f(a)(2)(C) and 42 United States Code 1395f(a)(2)(C)) are each amended by striking ``section 1861(m)(7)'' and inserting ``paragraph (7) or (8) of section 1861(m)''.
Payment for Substitute Adult Day Care Services.-- (1) Reasonable cost.--Section 1861(v)(1)(L) of such Act (42 United States Code 1395x(v)(1)(L)) is amended by adding at the end the following new clause: ``(viii) In the case home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services, the following rules apply: ``(I) The Secretary shall determine each component (as defined by the Secretary) of substitute adult day care services (under subsection (uu)(1)(B)(i)) furnished to an individual under the plan of care established under subsection (m) with respect to such services.
The Secretary shall estimate the amount that would otherwise be payable under this subparagraph for all home health services under that plan of care other than substitute adult day care services for a week or other period specified by the Secretary.
The total amount payable for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services may not exceed 95 percent of the amount estimated to be payable under subclause (II) furnished under the plan by a home health agency.
No payment may be made under this title for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services described in clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv) of subsection (uu)(1)(B).''.
Prospective payment system.--Section 1895 of such Act (42 United States Code 1395fff) is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(e) Payment Rate for Substitue Adult Day Care Services.--In the case home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services, the following rules apply: ``(1) The Secretary shall determine each component (as defined by the Secretary) of substitute adult day care services (under section 1861(uu)(1)(B)(i)) furnished to an individual under the plan of care established under section 1861(m) with respect to such services.
The Secretary shall estimate the amount that would otherwise be payable under this section for all home health services under that plan of care other than substitute adult day care services for a week or other period specified by the Secretary.
The total amount payable for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services may not exceed 95 percent of the amount estimated to be payable under paragraph (2) furnished under the plan by a home health agency.
No payment may be made under this title for home health services consisting of substitute adult day care services described in clauses (ii), (iii), and (iv) of section 1861(uu)(1)(B).''.
Adjustment in Case of Overutilization of Substitute Adult Day Care Services.-- (1) Monitoring expenditures.--The Secretary of Health and Human Services shall monitor the expenditures made under the Medicare Program under title XVIII of the Social Security Act for home health services furnished under section 1861(m) of such Act for a fiscal year beginning with fiscal year 2000, including substitute adult day care services under paragraph (8) of such section (as added by subsection (a)), and compare such expenditures to expenditures that the Secretary estimates would have been made for home health services for that fiscal year if subsection (a) had not been enacted.
Required reduction in payment rate.--If the Secretary determines, after making the comparison under paragraph (1) and making such adjustments for changes in demographics and age of the Medicare beneficiary population as the Secretary determines appropriate, that expenditures for home health services including such substitute adult day care services exceed expenditures that would have been made for home health services furnished under section 1861(m) of such Act for a year if subsection (a) had not been enacted, then the Secretary shall adjust the rate of payment so that total expenditures for home health services furnished under such section in a fiscal year does not exceed the Secretary's estimate of such expenditures if subsection (a) had not been enacted.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to items and services furnished on or after January 1, 1999.