SHORT TITLE; TABLE OF CONTENTS.
Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``National Parks Capital Improvements Act of 1999''.
Table of Contents.--The table of contents of this Act is as follows: Sec.
Short title; table of contents.
National park surcharge or set-aside.
Use of bond proceeds.
In this Act: (1) Fundraising organization.--The term ``fundraising organization'' means an entity authorized to act as a fundraising organization under section 3(a).
Memorandum of agreement.--The term ``memorandum of agreement'' means a memorandum of agreement entered into by the Secretary under section 3(a) that contains the terms specified in section 4.
National park foundation.--The term ``National Park Foundation'' means the foundation established under the Act entitled ``An Act to establish the National Park Foundation'', approved December 18, 1967 (16 United States Code 19e et sequentes).
National park.--The term ``national park'' means-- (A) the Grand Canyon National Park; and (B) any other national park designated by the Secretary that has an approved general management plan with capital needs in excess of $5,000,000.
Secretary.--The term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of the Interior.
In General.--The Secretary may enter into a memorandum of agreement under section 4 with an entity to act as an authorized fundraising organization for the benefit of a national park.
Bonds.--The fundraising organization for a national park shall issue taxable bonds in return for the surcharge or set-aside for that national park collected under section 5.
Professional Standards.--The fundraising organization shall abide by all relevant professional standards regarding the issuance of securities and shall comply with all applicable Federal and State law.
Audit.--The fundraising organization shall be subject to an audit by the Secretary.
No Liability for Bonds.-- (1) In general.--The United States shall not be liable for the security of any bonds issued by the fundraising organization.
Exception.--If the surcharge or set-aside described in section 5(a) for a national park is not imposed for any reason, or if the surcharge or set-aside is reduced or eliminated, the full faith and credit of the United States is pledged to the payment of-- (A) the bonds issued by a fundraising organization under subsection (b) for that national park; and (B) the interest accruing on the bonds.
The fundraising organization shall enter into a memorandum of agreement that specifies-- (1) the amount of the bond issue; (2) the maturity of the bonds, not to exceed 20 years; (3) the per capita amount required to amortize the bond issue, provide for the reasonable costs of administration, and maintain a sufficient reserve consistent with industry standards; (4) the project or projects at the national park that will be funded with the bond proceeds and the specific responsibilities of the Secretary and the fundraising organization with respect to each project; and (5) procedures for modifications of the agreement with the consent of both parties based on changes in circumstances, including modifications relating to project priorities.
NATIONAL PARK SURCHARGE OR SET-ASIDE.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law, the Secretary may authorize the superintendent of a national park for which a memorandum of agreement is in effect-- (1) to charge and collect a surcharge in an amount not to exceed $2 for each individual otherwise subject to an entrance fee for admission to the national park; or (2) to set aside not more than $2 for each individual charged the entrance fee.
Surcharge in Addition to Entrance Fees.--A surcharge under subsection (a) shall be in addition to any entrance fee collected under-- (1) section 4 of the Land and Water Conservation Fund Act of 1965 (16 United States Code 460l-6a); (2) the recreational fee demonstration program authorized by section 315 of the Department of the Interior and Related Agencies Appropriations Act, 1996 (as contained in Public Law 104-134; 110 United States Statutes at Large 1321-156; 1321-200; 16 United States Code 460l-6a note); or (3) the national park passport program established under title VI of the National Parks Omnibus Management Act of 1998 (Public Law 105-391; 112 United States Statutes at Large 3518; 16 United States Code 5991 et sequentes).
Limitation.--The total amount charged or set aside under subsection (a) may not exceed $2 for each individual charged an entrance fee.
Use.--A surcharge or set-aside under subsection (a) shall be used by the fundraising organization to-- (1) amortize the bond issue; (2) provide for the reasonable costs of administration; and (3) maintain a sufficient reserve consistent with industry standards, as determined by the bond underwriter.
Excess Funds.--Any funds collected in excess of the amount necessary to fund the uses in subsection (d) shall be remitted to the National Park Foundation to be used for the benefit of all units of the National Park System.
USE OF BOND PROCEEDS.
Eligible Projects.-- (1) In general.--Subject to paragraph (2), bond proceeds under this Act may be used for a project for the design, construction, operation, maintenance, repair, or replacement of a facility in the national park for which the bond was issued.
Project limitations.--A project referred to in paragraph (1) shall be consistent with-- (A) the laws governing the National Park System; (B) any law governing the national park in which the project is to be completed; and (C) the general management plan for the national park.
Prohibition on use for administration.--Other than interest as provided in subsection (b), no part of the bond proceeds may be used to defray administrative expenses.
Interest on Bond Proceeds.-- (1) Authorized uses.--Any interest earned on bond proceeds may be used by the fundraising organization to-- (A) meet reserve requirements; and (B) defray reasonable administrative expenses incurred in connection with the management and sale of the bonds.
Excess interest.--All interest on bond proceeds not used for purposes of paragraph (1) shall be remitted to the National Park Foundation for the benefit of all units of the National Park System.
The Secretary, in consultation with the Secretary of Treasury, shall promulgate regulations to carry out this Act.