PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION DURING AND AT THE CONCLUSION OF LABOR DISPUTES.
Section 8 of the National Labor Relations Act (29 United States Code 158) is amended-- (1) in subsection (a)-- (A) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (5) and inserting ``; or''; and (B) by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(6) subject to subsection (h), to promise, threaten, or take other action-- ``(A) to hire a permanent replacement for an employee who-- ``(i) at the commencement of a labor dispute was an employee of the employer in a bargaining unit in which a labor organization was the certified or recognized exclusive representative or, on the basis of written authorizations by a majority of the unit employees, was seeking to be so certified or recognized; and ``(ii) in connection with that dispute has engaged in concerted activities for the purpose of collective bargaining or other mutual aid or protection through that labor organization; or ``(B) to withhold or deny any other employment right or privilege to an employee, who meets the criteria of clauses (i) and (ii) of subparagraph (A) and who is working for or has unconditionally offered to return to work for the employer, out of a preference for any other individual that is based on the fact that the individual is performing, has performed, or has indicated a willingness to perform bargaining unit work for the employer during the labor dispute.
''; and (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(h)(1) An employer may not hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6) unless the employer complies with the requirements under paragraph (2).
(A) An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) during the period beginning 61 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6) and ending 90 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 10 percent of the total number of employees who were in the bargaining unit described in subsection (a)(6)(A)(i) on the date of the commencement of the dispute.
An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) during the period beginning 91 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6) and ending 120 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 20 percent of the total number of employees who were in the bargaining unit described in subsection (a)(6)(A)(i) on the date of the commencement of the dispute.
An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) during the period beginning 121 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6) and ending 150 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 30 percent of the total number of employees who were in the bargaining unit described in subsection (a)(6)(A)(i) on the date of the commencement of the dispute.
An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) during the period beginning 151 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6) and ending 180 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 40 percent of the total number of employees who were in the bargaining unit described in subsection (a)(6)(A)(i) on the date of the commencement of the dispute.
An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) during the period beginning 181 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6) and ending 270 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 50 percent of the total number of employees who were in the bargaining unit described in subsection (a)(6)(A)(i) on the date of the commencement of the dispute.
An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) during the period beginning 271 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6) and ending 360 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 75 percent of the total number of employees who were in the bargaining unit described in subsection (a)(6)(A)(i) on the date of the commencement of the dispute.
An employer may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (a)(6)(A) effective 361 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (a)(6).''.
PREVENTION OF DISCRIMINATION DURING AND AT THE CONCLUSION OF RAILWAY LABOR DISPUTES.
Paragraph Fourth of section 2 of the Railway Labor Act (45 United States Code 152) is amended-- (1) by inserting ``(a)'' after ``Fourth.
''; (2) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsections: ``(b) Subject to subsection (c), no carrier, or officer or agent of the carrier, shall promise, threaten or take other action-- ``(1) to hire a permanent replacement for an employee who-- ``(A) at the commencement of a dispute was an employee of the carrier in a craft or class in which a labor organization was the designated or authorized representative or, on the basis of written authorizations by a majority of the craft or class, was seeking to be so designated or authorized; and ``(B) in connection with that dispute has exercised the right to join, to organize, to assist in organizing, or to bargain collectively through that labor organization; or ``(2) to withhold or deny any other employment right or privilege to an employee, who meets the criteria of subparagraphs (A) and (B) of paragraph (1) and who is working for or has unconditionally offered to return to work for the carrier, out of a preference for any other individual that is based on the fact that the individual is employed, was employed, or indicated a willingness to be employed during the dispute.
(1) A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may not hire a permanent replacement for an employee under subsection (b) unless the carrier or officer or agent complies with the requirements under paragraph (2).
(A) A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) during the period beginning 61 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b) and ending 90 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 10 percent of the total number of employees who were in the craft or class described in subsection (b).
A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) during the period beginning 91 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b) and ending 120 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 20 percent of the total number of employees who were in the craft or class described in subsection (b).
A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) during the period beginning 121 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b) and ending 150 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 30 percent of the total number of employees who were in the craft or class described in subsection (b).
A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) during the period beginning 151 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b) and ending 180 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 40 percent of the total number of employees who were in the craft or class described in subsection (b).
A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) during the period beginning 181 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b) and ending 270 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 50 percent of the total number of employees who were in the craft or class described in subsection (b).
A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) during the period beginning 271 days after the date of the commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b) and ending 360 days after the date of such commencement.
The total number of replacements made under this subsection during such period shall not exceed 75 percent of the total number of employees who were in the craft or class described in subsection (b).
A carrier, or an officer or agent of the carrier, may hire a permanent replacement for an employee described in subsection (b) effective 361 days after the date of commencement of a dispute described in subsection (b).