Congress finds the following: (1) Twice since 1989, the northwestern coast of Maui, Hawaii, has been plagued with massive blooms of the green alga, Cladorphora sericea.
Blooms of the red alga, Hypnea musciformis, have also occurred in the area and in the Kihei area.
The algal blooms have destroyed corals and other reef- building organisms, and have washed up on beaches and severely impeded the recreational use of affected coastal areas.
The algal blooms are particularly detrimental to the natural ecological balance of the near-shore reef environment.
Although the specific causes of the algal blooms are uncertain, algal growth is stimulated in a proportional manner by concentrations of chemicals such as fertilizers and insecticides, which enter the ocean through freshwater runoff.
The Department of Health of the State of Hawaii has indicated that the department does not have the resources at this time to determine the cause of the algal blooms.
Extensive research will be required to determine the factors that contribute to algal growth.
Potential sources of nutrients that may contribute to algal growth include the near-shore disposal of sewage in injection wells from the Lahaina Wastewater Treatment Plant, surface runoff from agricultural lands and urban resort areas, and subsurface point sources in the areas.
The long-term environmental impacts of the algal blooms are unknown, but in the short term, reefs exposed to the algae are being destroyed and the deterioration of the coral has detrimental effects on fish and other wildlife that depend on the reefs for survival.
The algal blooms are generating negative economic impacts as well as negative biological impacts, as additional reports indicate that the algae are decreasing the intake of fish caught by local fishermen in the affected marine waters.
The Maui Algae Task Force is comprised of community environmental activists and has been assembled to address the problem of algal blooms.
The Maui Algae Task Force hopes to work in cooperation with the Department of Health of the State of Hawaii and the Environmental Protection Agency to identify and eradicate the causes of the algal blooms.
In General.--The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency (hereafter in this Act referred to as the ``Administrator'') shall conduct a study to-- (1) determine the causes of recent algal blooms off the northwestern coast of Maui, Hawaii; and (2) research alternatives for the improved management of chemicals present in wastewater treatment and fresh water runoff.
Study Requirements.--In carrying out the study under this section, the Administrator shall-- (1) survey and monitor-- (A) seaweed populations and animals for which the seaweed is a food source; (B) surface water runoff sediments in the study area; and (C) inputs into the study area from subsurface point sources, including any such inputs from the Lahaina wastewater treatment plant; and (2) study the responses of-- (A) the seaweed populations referred to in paragraph (1)(A) to different concentrations of nutrients; and (B) the animals referred to in paragraph (1)(A) to pesticides and other biological toxins.
Equipment; Grants.-- (1) Acquisition of equipment.--In carrying out the study under this section, the Administrator is authorized to acquire such monitoring and testing equipment as the Administrator determines necessary.
Grants.--In carrying out the study under this section, the Administrator is authorized to establish a grant program to provide grants to eligible entities that submit approved applications to the Administrator.
The following entities may submit an application to conduct study activities under this section: (A) The Department of Health of the State of Hawaii.
The Maui Algae Task Force.
Appropriate Federal, State, or county departments or agencies.
Any other entity that the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
Demonstration Projects.--In carrying out the study under this section, the Administrator is authorized to establish demonstration projects to identify and implement best management practices for the control of nonpoint source pollution from erosion and agricultural runoff.
Reports.-- (1) Interim report.--Not later than 1 year after the date of enactment of this Act, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a report that includes interim results of the study conducted under this section, and such recommendations as the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
Final report.--Not later than January 31, 1996, the Administrator shall submit to Congress a final report that summarizes the results of the study conducted under this section and includes such recommendations as the Administrator determines to be appropriate.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to the Environmental Protection Agency to carry out this section $500,000 for each of fiscal years 1994 and 1995.