This Act may be cited as the ``Oceans Act of 1998''.
As used in this Act: (1) Commission.--The term ``Commission'' means the Commission on Ocean Policy established under section 4.
Coastal state.--The term ``coastal State'' means a State in, or bordering on, the Atlantic, Pacific, or Arctic Ocean, the Gulf of Mexico, Long Island Sound, or one or more of the Great Lakes.
Marine environment.--The term ``marine environment'' includes-- (A) the oceans, including coastal and offshore waters and nearshore saltwater estuaries; (B) the continental shelf; and (C) the Great Lakes.
Ocean and coastal activities.--The term ``ocean and coastal activities'' includes activities consisting of, affecting, or otherwise related to oceanography, fisheries, or the management or use of any ocean and coastal resource.
The term does not include military operations and training.
Ocean and coastal resource.--The term ``ocean and coastal resource'' means any living or nonliving natural, historic, or cultural resource or mineral found in the marine environment.
State.--The term ``State'' means any State of the United States, the District of Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, Guam, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, and any other territory or possession of the United States.
National Ocean and Coastal Policy.--The Congress and the President, after receiving and considering the report of the Commission under section 4, shall develop and propose a coordinated, comprehensive, and long-range national policy for the responsible use and stewardship of ocean and coastal resources for the benefit of the United States, including a plan to meet the resource monitoring and assessment facilities and equipment requirements of Federal ocean and coastal programs.
Biennial Report.--Beginning in January 1999, the President shall transmit to the Congress biennially a report that shall include a detailed listing of all existing Federal programs relating to ocean and coastal activities, including a description of each program, the current funding for the program, and a projection of the funding level for the program for each of the following 5 fiscal years.
Budget Coordination.--Each agency or department involved in ocean and coastal activities shall include with its annual request for appropriations a report that identifies significant elements of the proposed agency or department budget relating to ocean and coastal activities.
Cooperation and Consultation.--In carrying out responsibilities under this Act, the President-- (1) may use such staff, interagency, and advisory arrangements as the President finds necessary and appropriate; and (2) shall consult with State and local governments and non- Federal organizations and individuals involved in ocean and coastal activities.
COMMISSION ON OCEAN POLICY.
Establishment.-- (1) In general.--There is hereby established the Commission on Ocean Policy.
Membership.--(A) The Commission shall be composed of 16 members appointed by the President from among individuals who are knowledgeable in ocean and coastal activities, including individuals representing State and local governments, ocean- related industries, academic and technical institutions, and public interest organizations involved with scientific, regulatory, economic, and environmental ocean and coastal activities.
The membership of the Commission shall be balanced geographically to the extent consistent with maintaining the highest level of expertise on the Commission.
Of the members of the Commission appointed under this paragraph-- (i) 4 shall be appointed from a list of 8 individuals who shall be recommended by the majority leader of the Senate in consultation with the Chairman of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation; (ii) 4 shall be appointed from a list of 8 individuals who shall be recommended by the Speaker of the House of Representatives in consultation with the Chairmen of the Committee on Resources, Transportation and Infrastructure, and Science; (iii) 2 shall be appointed from a list of 4 individuals who shall be recommended by the minority leader of the Senate in consultation with the ranking member of the Senate Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation; and (iv) 2 shall be appointed from a list of 4 individuals who shall be recommended by the by the minority leader of the House of Representatives in consultation with the ranking members of the Committees on Resources, Transportation and Infrastructure, and Science.
The members of the Commission shall be appointed for the life of the Commission by not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act.
First meeting.--The Commission shall hold its first meeting within 30 days after it is established.
Chairman.--The Commission shall elect one of its members as Chair.
Report.-- (1) In general.--The Commission shall submit to the Congress and the President, by not later than 18 months after the date of the establishment of the Commission, a final report of its findings and recommendations regarding United States ocean policy.
Public and state review.--Before submitting the final report to the Congress, the Commission shall-- (A) publish in the Federal Register a notice that the draft report is available for public review; and (B) provide a copy of the draft report to the Governor of each coastal State, the Committees on Resources, Transportation and Infrastructure, and Science of the House of Representatives, and the Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation of the Senate.
Final report contents, generally.--Subject to paragraph (4), the final report of the Commission shall include recommendations for the responsible use and stewardship of ocean and coastal resources, including the following: (A) Recommendations for any modifications to United States laws and regulations, and the administrative structure of the Executive agencies, that are necessary to improve the understanding, management, and conservation and use of, and access to, ocean and coastal resources.
An assessment of the condition and adequacy of existing and planned facilities associated with ocean and coastal activities, including human resources, vessels, computers, satellites, and other appropriate platforms and technologies, and recommendations for investments and improvements in those facilities.
A review of existing and planned ocean and coastal activities of Federal entities, and recommendations for changes in such activities necessary to reduce duplication of Federal efforts.
A review of the cumulative effect of Federal laws and regulations on United States ocean policy, an examination of those laws and regulations for inconsistencies and contradictions that might adversely affect the conduct of ocean and coastal activities, and recommendations for resolving any such inconsistencies.
In particular, this portion of the report shall include an examination of the relationship between the fisheries development and fisheries conservation responsibilities of the National Marine Fisheries Service.
A review of the known and anticipated supply of and demand for ocean and coastal resources of the United States.
A review of the relationship between Federal, State, and local governments and the private sector in planning and carrying out ocean and coastal activities, and recommendations for enhancing the role of State and local governments.
A review of opportunities for the development of or investment in new products, technologies, or markets related to ocean and coastal activities.
A review of previous and ongoing State efforts and Federal efforts to enhance the effectiveness and integration of ocean activities, including those occurring offshore and in nearshore saltwater estuaries.
State comments.--The Commission shall include in the final report comments received from the Governor of any coastal State regarding recommendations in the draft report that apply to areas within the boundaries of that coastal State.
Consideration of factors.--In making its assessments and reviews and developing its recommendations, the Commission shall give full and balanced consideration to environmental, technical, economic, and other relevant factors, with an equal opportunity for all parties to present a fair and reasonable case for unbiased consideration by the Commission.
All recommendations should consider effects on private property.
To the greatest extent possible, no recommendations shall have a negative impact on local economies that are dependent on ocean and coastal resources.
Any data used by the Commission in making its recommendations for regulations shall be peer reviewed.
Limitation on recommendations.--The Commission shall not make any specific recommendations with respect to lands and waters within the boundary of any State located north of 51 degrees North latitude, or with respect to lands and waters within the State of Idaho.
Duties of the Chair.--In carrying out the provisions of this section, the Chair of the Commission shall be responsible for-- (1) the assignment of duties and responsibilities among staff personnel and their continuing supervision; and (2) the use and expenditures of funds available to the Commission.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, when engaged in the actual performance of duties of the Commission, receive reimbursement of travel expenses, including per diem in lieu of subsistence as authorized for persons employed intermittently in the Government service under section 3109 of title 5, United States Code.
Staff.-- (1) Executive director.--The Chair of the Commission may, with the consent of the Commission and without regard to the civil service laws and regulations, appoint and terminate an executive director who is knowledgeable in administrative management and ocean and coastal policy and such other additional personnel as may be necessary to enable the Commission to perform its duties.
Compensation.--The executive director shall, subject to the availability of appropriations, be compensated at a rate not to exceed the rate payable for Level V of the Executive Schedule under section 5316 of title 5, United States Code.
The Chairman may fix the compensation of other personnel without regard to the provisions of chapter 51 and subchapter III of chapter 53 of title 5, United States Code, relating to classification of positions and General Schedule pay rates, except that the rate of pay for such personnel may not exceed the rate payable for GS-15, step 7, of the General Schedule under section 5332 of such title.
Detailees.--Upon a request of the Chair of the Commission made after consulting with the head of any Federal agencies responsible for managing ocean and coastal resources, the head of any such Federal agency may detail appropriate personnel of the agency to the Commission to assist the Commission in carrying out its functions under this Act.
Federal Government employees detailed to the Commission shall serve without reimbursement from the Commission, and shall retain the rights, status, and privileges of his or her regular employment without interruption.
Experts and consultants.--To the extent that funds are available, and subject to such rules as may be prescribed by the Commission, the executive director of the Commission may procure the temporary and intermittent services of experts and consultants in accordance with section 3109 of title 5, United States Code, but at rates not to exceed the daily rate payable for GS-15, step 7, of the General Schedule under section 5332 of title 5, United States Code.
Administration.-- (1) Meetings.--All meetings of the Commission shall be open to the public, except that a meeting or any portion of it may be closed to the public if it concerns matters or information described in section 552b(c) of title 5, United States Code.
Interested persons shall be permitted to appear at open meetings and present written statements or oral statements at the discretion of the Commission on the subject matter of the meeting.
The Commission may administer oaths or affirmations to any person appearing before it.
Notice of meetings.--All open meetings of the Commission shall be preceded by timely public notice, including notice in the Federal Register, of the time, place, and subject of the meeting.
Minutes and other records.--(A) Minutes of each meeting shall be kept and shall contain a record of the people present, a description of the discussion that occurred, and copies of all statements filed.
Subject to restrictions set forth in section 552 of title 5, United States Code, the minutes and records of all meetings and other documents that were made available to or prepared for the Commission shall be available for public inspection and copying at a single location in the offices of the Commission.
The Commission shall have at least one meeting in each of the following 6 geographic regions of the United States: (i) The Northeast.
The Great Lakes States.
The Gulf of Mexico States.
Cooperation With Other Federal Entities.-- (1) Other federal agencies and departments.--The Commission may secure directly from any Federal agency or department any information it considers necessary to carry out its functions under this Act.
Each such agency or department may cooperate with the Commission and, to the extent permitted by law, furnish such information to the Commission, upon the request of the Chair of the Commission.
Mails.--The Commission may use the United States mails in the same manner and under the same conditions as departments and agencies of the United States.
Acquisitions.--The Commission may enter into contracts with Federal and State agencies, private firms, institutions, and individuals to assist the Commission in carrying out its duties.
The Commission may purchase and contract without regard to section 18 of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy Act (41 United States Code 416) and section 8 of the Small Business Act (15 United States Code 637), pertaining to competition and publication requirements, and may arrange for printing without regard to the provisions of title 44, United States Code.
The contracting authority of the Commission under this Act is effective only to the extent that appropriations are available for contracting purposes.
Termination.--The Commission shall cease to exist 30 days after the date on which it submits its final report.
Authorization of Appropriations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to support the activities of the Commission $2,000,000 for fiscal year 1999 and $1,000,000 for fiscal year 2000.
Any sums appropriated may remain available without fiscal year limitation until the Commission ceases to exist.
Passed the House of Representatives September 15, 1998.