This Act may be cited as the ``National AMBER Alert Network Act of 2002''.
NATIONAL COORDINATION OF AMBER ALERT COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK.
Coordination Within Department of Justice.--The Attorney General shall assign an officer of the Department of Justice to act as the national coordinator of the AMBER Alert communications network regarding abducted children.
The officer so designated shall be known as the AMBER Alert Coordinator of the Department of Justice.
Duties.--In acting as the national coordinator of the AMBER Alert communications network, the Coordinator shall-- (1) seek to eliminate gaps in the network, including gaps in areas of interstate travel; (2) work with States to encourage the development of additional elements (known as local AMBER plans) in the network; (3) work with States to ensure appropriate regional coordination of various elements of the network; and (4) act as the nationwide point of contact for-- (A) the development of the network; and (B) regional coordination of alerts on abducted children through the network.
Consultation With Federal Bureau of Investigation.--In carrying out duties under subsection (b), the Coordinator shall notify and consult with the Director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation concerning each child abduction for which an alert is issued through the AMBER Alert communications network.
Cooperation.--The Coordinator shall cooperate with the Secretary of Transportation and the Federal Communications Commission in carrying out activities under this section.
MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR ISSUANCE AND DISSEMINATION OF ALERTS THROUGH AMBER ALERT COMMUNICATIONS NETWORK.
Establishment of Minimum Standards.--Subject to subsection (b), the AMBER Alert Coordinator of the Department of Justice shall establish minimum standards for-- (1) the issuance of alerts through the AMBER Alert communications network; and (2) the extent of the dissemination of alerts issued through the network.
Limitations.--(1) The minimum standards established under subsection (a) shall be adoptable on a voluntary basis only.
The minimum standards shall, to the maximum extent practicable (as determined by the Coordinator in consultation with State and local law enforcement agencies), provide that the dissemination of an alert through the AMBER Alert communications network be limited to the geographic areas most likely to facilitate the recovery of the abducted child concerned.
In carrying out activities under subsection (a), the Coordinator may not interfere with the current system of voluntary coordination between local broadcasters and State and local law enforcement agencies for purposes of the AMBER Alert communications network.
Cooperation.--(1) The Coordinator shall cooperate with the Secretary of Transportation and the Federal Communications Commission in carrying out activities under this section.
The Coordinator shall also cooperate with local broadcasters and State and local law enforcement agencies in establishing minimum standards under this section.
GRANT PROGRAM FOR NOTIFICATION AND COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEMS ALONG HIGHWAYS FOR RECOVERY OF ABDUCTED CHILDREN.
Program Required.--The Secretary of Transportation shall carry out a program to provide grants to States for the development or enhancement of notification or communications systems along highways for alerts and other information for the recovery of abducted children.
Activities.--Activities funded by grants under the program under subsection (a) may include-- (1) the development or enhancement of electronic message boards along highways and the placement of additional signage along highways; and (2) the development or enhancement of other means of disseminating along highways alerts and other information for the recovery of abducted children.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of any activities funded by a grant under the program under subsection (a) may not exceed 50 percent.
Distribution of Grant Amounts on Geographic Basis.--The Secretary shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure the distribution of grants under the program under subsection (a) on an equitable basis throughout the various regions of the United States.
Administration.--The Secretary shall prescribe requirements, including application requirements, for grants under the program under subsection (a).
Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) There is authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Transportation $20,000,000 for fiscal year 2003 to carry out this section.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.
GRANT PROGRAM FOR SUPPORT OF AMBER ALERT COMMUNICATIONS PLANS.
Program Required.--The Attorney General shall carry out a program to provide grants to States for the development or enhancement of programs and activities for the support of AMBER Alert communications plans.
Activities.--Activities funded by grants under the program under subsection (a) may include-- (1) the development and implementation of education and training programs, and associated materials, relating to AMBER Alert communications plans; (2) the development and implementation of law enforcement programs, and associated equipment, relating to AMBER Alert communications plans; and (3) such other activities as the Secretary considers appropriate for supporting the AMBER Alert communications program.
Federal Share.--The Federal share of the cost of any activities funded by a grant under the program under subsection (a) may not exceed 50 percent.
Distribution of Grant Amounts on Geographic Basis.--The Attorney General shall, to the maximum extent practicable, ensure the distribution of grants under the program under subsection (a) on an equitable basis throughout the various regions of the United States.
Administration.--The Attorney General shall prescribe requirements, including application requirements, for grants under the program under subsection (a).
Authorization of Appropriations.--(1) There is authorized to be appropriated for the Department of Justice $5,000,000 for fiscal year 2003 to carry out this section.
Amounts appropriated pursuant to the authorization of appropriations in paragraph (1) shall remain available until expended.