This Act may be cited as the ``Breastfeeding Promotion and Employers' Tax Incentive Act''.
ALLOWANCE OF CREDIT FOR EMPLOYER EXPENSES FOR PROVIDING APPROPRIATE ENVIRONMENT ON BUSINESS PREMISES FOR EMPLOYED MOTHERS TO BREASTFEED OR EXPRESS MILK FOR THEIR CHILDREN.
In General.--Subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to business related credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``SEC.
CREDIT FOR EMPLOYER EXPENSES INCURRED TO FACILITATE EMPLOYED MOTHERS WHO BREASTFEED OR EXPRESS MILK FOR THEIR CHILDREN.
In General.--For purposes of section 38, the breastfeeding promotion and support credit determined under this section for the taxable year is an amount equal to 50 percent of the qualified breastfeeding promotion and support expenditures of the taxpayer for such taxable year.
Dollar Limitation.--The credit allowable under subsection (a) for any taxable year shall not exceed the product of-- ``(1) $10,000, and ``(2) the number determined by dividing the average number of full-time employees of the taxpayer during the preceding taxable year by 8,000.
Qualified Breastfeeding Promotion and Support Expenditure.-- For purposes of this section-- ``(1) In general.--The term `qualified breastfeeding promotion and support expenditure' means any amount paid or incurred in connection with a trade or business of the taxpayer-- ``(A) for breast pumps and other equipment specially designed to assist mothers who are employees of the taxpayer to breastfeed or express milk for their children but only if such pumps and equipment meet such standards (if any) prescribed by the Secretary of Health and Human Services, and ``(B) for consultation services to the taxpayer or employees of the taxpayer relating to breastfeeding.
Costs of other exclusive use property included.--Such term includes any amount paid or incurred for the acquisition or lease of tangible personal property (not described in paragraph (1)(A)) which is exclusively used by mothers who are employees of the taxpayer to breastfeed or express milk for their children unless such property is located in any residence of the taxpayer or any employee of the taxpayer.
Recapture of Credit.-- ``(1) In general.--If, during any taxable year, any property for which a credit was allowed under this section is disposed of or otherwise ceases to be used by the taxpayer as required by this section, then the tax of the taxpayer under this chapter for such taxable year shall be increased by an amount equal to the recapture percentage of the aggregate decrease in the credits allowed under section 38 for all prior taxable years which would have resulted solely from reducing to zero any credit determined under this section with respect to such property.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to property leased to the taxpayer.
Recapture percentage.--For purposes of this subsection, the recapture percentage shall be determined in accordance with the following table: The recapture ``If the recapture event occurs in: percentage is: Year 1............................... 100 Year 2............................... 60 Year 3............................... 30 Year 4 or thereafter................. 0.
The references to years in the preceding table are references to the consecutive taxable years beginning with the taxable year in which the property is placed in service by the taxpayer as year 1.
Certain rules to apply.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (3) and (4), and subparagraphs (B) and (C) of paragraph (5), of section 50(a) shall apply for purposes of this subsection.
Special Rules.--For purposes of this section-- ``(1) Aggregation rules.--For purposes of subsection (b), all persons which are treated as a single employer under subsection (a) or (b) of section 52 shall be treated as a single taxpayer, and the dollar amount contained in such subsection shall be allocated among such persons under regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Reduction in basis.--Rules similar to the rules of paragraphs (1) and (2) of section 50(c), and section 1016(a)(19), shall apply with respect to property for which a credit is determined under this section.
Other deductions and credits.--No deduction or credit shall be allowed under any other provision of this chapter with respect to any expenditure for which a credit is determined under this section.''.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) Section 38(b) of such Code is amended-- (A) by striking ``plus'' at the end of paragraph (11), (B) by striking the period at the end of paragraph (12) and inserting ``, plus'', and (C) by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(13) the breastfeeding promotion and support credit determined under section 45D(a).''
Subsection (d) of section 39 of such Code (relating to carryback and carryforward of unused credits) is amended by adding at the end the following new paragraph: ``(9) No carryback of section 45d credit before january 1, 2000.--No portion of the unused business credit for any taxable year which is attributable to the credit determined under section 45D may be carried back to a taxable year beginning before January 1, 2000.''.
The table of sections for subpart D of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by adding at the end the following new item: ``Sec.
Credit for employer expenses incurred to facilitate employed mothers who breastfeed or express milk for their children.''
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1999.