Short Title.--This Act may be cited as the ``Occupational Safety Fairness Act''.
Reference.--Whenever in this Act an amendment or repeal is expressed in terms of an amendment to, or repeal of, a section or other provision, the reference shall be considered to be made to a section or other provision of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes).
Section 9 of the Act (29 United States Code 658) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) A citation issued under subsection (a) to an employer who violates section 5, any standard, rule, or order promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation promulgated under this Act shall be vacated if such employer demonstrates that the employees of such employer were protected by alternative methods that are substantially equivalent or more protective of the safety and health of the employees than the methods required by such standard, rule, order, or regulation in the factual circumstances underlying the citation.
Subsection (d) shall not be construed to eliminate or modify other defenses that may exist to any citation.''.
Subsection (a) of section 9 of the Act (29 United States Code 658(a)) is amended-- (1) by striking the last sentence; (2) by striking ``If, upon'' and inserting ``(1) If, upon''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(2) Nothing in this Act shall be construed as prohibiting the Secretary or the authorized representative of the Secretary from providing technical or compliance assistance to an employer in correcting a violation discovered during an inspection or investigation under this Act without issuing a citation, as prescribed in this section.
The Secretary or the authorized representative of the Secretary-- ``(A) may issue a warning in lieu of a citation with respect to a violation that has no significant relationship to employee safety or health; and ``(B) may issue a warning in lieu of a citation in cases in which an employer in good faith acts promptly to abate a violation if the violation is not a willful or repeated violation.''.
Purpose.--It is the purpose of this section to empower the Secretary of Labor to achieve increased employer compliance by using, at the Secretary's discretion, more efficient and effective means for conducting inspections.
General.--Section 8(f) of the Act (29 United States Code 657(f) is amended-- (1) by adding at the end the following: ``(3) The Secretary or an authorized representative of the Secretary may, as a method of investigating an alleged violation or danger under this subsection, attempt, if feasible, to contact an employer by telephone, facsimile, or other appropriate methods to determine whether-- ``(A) the employer has taken corrective actions with respect to the alleged violation or danger; or ``(B) there are reasonable grounds to believe that a hazard exists.
The Secretary is not required to conduct an inspection under this subsection if the Secretary believes that a request for an inspection was made for reasons other than the safety and health of the employees of an employer or that the employees of an employer are not at risk.''.
OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH REVIEW COMMISSION.
Increase in Number of Members and Requirement for Membership.-- Section 12 of the Act (29 United States Code 661) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a)-- (A) by striking ``three members'' and inserting ``five members''; and (B) by inserting ``legal'' before ``training''; (2) in the first sentence of subsection (b), by striking ``except that'' and all that follows through the period and inserting the following: ``except that the President may extend the term of a member for no more than 365 consecutive days to allow a continuation in service at the pleasure of the President after the expiration of the term of that member until a successor nominated by the President has been confirmed to serve.
Any vacancy caused by the death, resignation, or removal of a member before the expiration of a term for which a member was appointed shall be filled only for the remainder of such term.
''; and (3) by striking subsection (f), and inserting the following: ``(f) For purposes of carrying out its functions under this Act, two members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum and official action can be taken only on the affirmative vote of at least a majority of the members participating but in no case fewer than two.''.
New Positions.--Of the two vacancies for membership on the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission created by subsection (a)(1)(A), one shall be appointed by the President for a term expiring on April 27, 2009, and the other shall be appointed by the President for a term expiring on April 27, 2011.
Effective Date for Legal Training Requirement.--The amendment made by subsection (a)(1)(B), requiring a member of the Commission to be qualified by reason of a background in legal training, shall apply beginning with the two vacancies referred to in subsection (b) and all subsequent appointments to the Commission.
AWARD OF ATTORNEYS' FEES AND COSTS.
The Act (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes) is amended by redesignating sections 32, 33, and 34 as sections 33, 34, and 35, respectively, and by inserting after section 31 the following new section: ``award of attorneys' fees and costs ``Sec.
Administrative Proceedings.--An employer who-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in any adversary adjudication instituted under this Act, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $7,000,000 at the time the adversary adjudication was initiated, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 504 of title 5, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the Secretary was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
For purposes of this section the term `adversary adjudication' has the meaning given that term in section 504(b)(1)(C) of title 5, United States Code.
Proceedings.--An employer who-- ``(1) is the prevailing party in any proceeding for judicial review of any action instituted under this Act, and ``(2) had not more than 100 employees and a net worth of not more than $7,000,000 at the time the action addressed under subsection (1) was filed, shall be awarded fees and other expenses as a prevailing party under section 2412(d) of title 28, United States Code, in accordance with the provisions of that section, but without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
Any appeal of a determination of fees pursuant to subsection (a) of this subsection shall be determined without regard to whether the position of the United States was substantially justified or special circumstances make an award unjust.
Applicability.-- ``(1) Commission proceedings.--Subsection (a) shall apply to proceedings commenced on or after the date of enactment of this section.
Court proceedings.--Subsection (b) shall apply to proceedings for judicial review commenced on or after the date of enactment of this section.''.
Section 11(a) of the Act (29 United States Code 660(a)) is amended in the sixth sentence by inserting before the period the following: ``, and the conclusions of the Commission with respect to questions of law that are subject to agency deference under governing court precedent shall be given deference if reasonable''.
CONTESTING CITATIONS UNDER THE OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH ACT OF 1970.
In General.--Section 10 of the Act (29 United States Code 659) is amended-- (1) in the second sentence of subsection (a), by inserting after ``assessment of penalty'' the following: ``(unless such failure results from mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect)''; and (2) in the second sentence of subsection (b), by inserting after ``assessment of penalty'' the following: ``(unless such failure results from mistake, inadvertence, surprise, or excusable neglect)''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to a citation or proposed assessment of penalty issued by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration that is issued on or after the date of the enactment of this Act.
RIGHT TO CORRECT VIOLATIVE CONDITION.
Section 9 of the Act (29 United States Code 658), as amended by section 2, is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(f) The Commission may not assess a penalty under section 17(c) for a non-serious violation that is not repeated or willful if the employer corrects the violative condition and provides the Secretary an abatement certification within 72 hours.''.
WRITTEN STATEMENT TO EMPLOYER FOLLOWING INSPECTION.
Section 8 of the Act (29 United States Code 657) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(i) At the closing conference after the completion of an inspection, the inspector shall-- ``(1) inform the employer or a representative of the employer of the right of such employer to request a written statement described in paragraph (2); and ``(2) provide to the employer or a representative of the employer, upon the request of such employer or representative, with a written statement that clearly and concisely provides the following information: ``(A) The results of the inspection, including each alleged hazard, if any, and each citation that will be issued, if any.
The right of the employer to contest a citation, a penalty assessment, an amended citation, and an amended penalty assessment.
An explanation of the procedure to follow in order to contest a citation and a penalty assessment, including when and where to contest a citation and the required contents of the notice of intent to contest.
The Commission's responsibility to affirm, modify, or vacate the citation and proposed penalty, if any.
The informal review process.
The procedures before the Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission.
The right of the employer to seek judicial review.
No monetary penalty may be assessed with respect to any violation not identified in the written statement requested under subsection (i).''.
TIME PERIODS FOR ISSUING CITATIONS.
Section-- (1) 9(a) of the Act (29 United States Code 658(a)) is amended-- (A) by striking ``upon inspection'' and inserting ``upon the initiation of inspection''; (B) by striking ``with reasonable promptness'' and inserting ``within thirty working days''; and (C) by inserting after the first sentence, the following: ``Such 30 day period may be waived by the Secretary for good cause shown, including, but not limited to, cases involving death, novel issues, large or complex worksites, or pursuant to an agreement by the parties to extend such period.
''; and (2) 10(a) of the Act (29 United States Code 659(a)) is amended-- (B) by striking ``within a reasonable time'' and inserting ``within thirty days''; and (C) by inserting after the first sentence, the following: ``Such 30 days period may be waived by the Secretary for good cause shown, including, but not limited to, cases involving death, novel issues, large or complex worksites, or pursuant to an agreement by the parties to extend such period.''.
TIME PERIODS FOR CONTESTING CITATIONS.
Section 10 of the Act (29 United States Code 659) is amended by striking ``fifteen'' each place it appears and inserting ``thirty''.
Section 17 of the Act (29 United States Code 666) is amended by inserting the following: ``(m) The Secretary shall not use `other than serious' citations as a basis for issuing repeat or willful citations.''.
Section 9 of the Act (29 United States Code 658) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(d) No citation may be issued under this section for any violation that is the result of actions by any person that are contrary to established, communicated, and enforced work rules that would have prevented the violation.
This subsection shall not be construed to eliminate or modify elements of proof currently required to support a citation.''.
ADOPTION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL STANDARDS.
The Act (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes) is amended by adding after section 4 the following: ``SEC.
ADOPTION OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL STANDARDS.
``The Secretary shall not promulgate or enforce any finding, guideline, standard, limit, rule, or regulation that is subject to incorporation by reference, or modification, as the result of a determination reached by any organization, unless the Secretary affirmatively finds that the determination has been made by an organization and procedure that complies with the requirements of section 3(9).
Such finding and a summary of its basis shall be published in the Federal Register and shall be deemed a final agency action subject to review by a United States District Court in accordance with section 706 of title 5, United States Code.''.
The Act (29 United States Code 651 et sequentes) is amended by adding after section 9 the following: ``SEC.
In General.--Notwithstanding any other provision of this Act, an employee who, with respect to employer-provided personal protective equipment, willfully violates any requirement of section 5 or any standard, rule, or order promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to this Act, may be assessed a civil penalty, as determined by the Secretary, but not to exceed $50 for each violation.
Citations.--If, upon inspection or investigation, the Secretary or the authorized representative of the Secretary believes that an employee of an employer has, with respect to employer-provided personal protective equipment, violated any requirement of section 5 or any standard, rule, or order promulgated pursuant to section 6, or any regulation prescribed pursuant to this Act, the Secretary shall within 30 days issue a citation to the employee.
Each citation shall be in writing and shall describe with particularity the nature of the violation, including a reference to the provision of this Act, standard, rule, regulation, or order alleged to have been violated.
No citation may be issued under this section after the expiration of 6 months following the occurrence of any violation.
Notification.-- ``(1) In general.--The Secretary shall notify an employee-- ``(A) by certified mail of a citation under subsection (b) and the proposed penalty; and ``(B) that such employee has 30 working days within which to notify the Secretary that the employee wishes to contest the citation or proposed penalty.
Final order.--If an employee does not file a notification described in paragraph (1)(B) with the Secretary within 30 working days, the citation and proposed penalty shall-- ``(A) be deemed a final order of the Commission; and ``(B) not be subject to review by any court or agency.
Contesting of Citation.-- ``(1) In general.--If an employee files a notification described in paragraph (1)(B) with the Secretary within 30 working days, the Secretary shall immediately advise the Commission of such notification, and the Commission shall afford the employee an opportunity for a hearing in accordance with section 554 of title 5, United States Code.
Issuance of final order.--The Commission, after a hearing described in paragraph (1), shall issue an order, based on findings of fact, affirming, modifying, or vacating the Secretary's citation or proposed penalty, or directing other appropriate relief.
Such order shall become final 30 days after issuance of the order.