This Act may be cited as the ``Military Retirement Equity Act of 2001''.
CONCURRENT PAYMENT OF RETIRED PAY AND COMPENSATION.
Limitation on Duplication of Benefits.--Chapter 71 of title 10, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new section: ``Sec.
Concurrent payment of retired pay and veterans' disability compensation ``(a) Payment of Both Retired Pay and Compensation.--Except as provided in subsections (c) and (d), a member or former member of the uniformed services who is entitled to retired pay (other than as specified in subsection (b)) and who is also entitled to veterans' disability compensation is entitled to be paid both without regard to sections 5304 and 5305 of title 38.
Exception.--Subsection (a) does not apply to a member retired under chapter 61 of this title with less than 20 years of service otherwise creditable under section 1405 of this title at the time of the member's retirement.
Proportional Reduction in Retired Pay.--In the case of a person described in subsection (a) who is receiving both retired pay and veterans' disability compensation, the amount of that person's retired pay shall be reduced (but not below zero) based on the rating of the person's disability for veterans' disability compensation purposes as follows: ``(1) If and while the disability is rated 10 percent, by the amount equal to 90 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 20 percent, by the amount equal to 80 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 30 percent, by the amount equal to 70 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 40 percent, by the amount equal to 60 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 50 percent, by the amount equal to 50 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 60 percent, by the amount equal to 40 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 70 percent, by the amount equal to 30 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 80 percent, by the amount equal to 20 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
If and while the disability is rated 90 percent, by the amount equal to 10 percent of the amount of the disability compensation paid such person.
The retired pay of a person entitled to disability compensation may not be reduced under this subsection if and while the disability of such person is rated as total.
Special Rule for Chapter 61 Career Retirees.--Notwithstanding subsection (c), in the case of a retired member described in subsection (a) who retired under chapter 61 of this title with 20 years or more of service otherwise creditable under section 1405 of this title at the time of the member's retirement, the amount of the member's retired pay shall be the lesser of the following: ``(1) The amount of retired pay determined in accordance with subsection (c).
The amount of retired pay determined subject to the applicability of sections 5304 and 5305 of title 38, but not less than the amount of retired pay to which the member would have been entitled under any other provision law based upon the member's service in the uniformed services if the member had not been retired under chapter 61 of this title.
Definitions.--In this section: ``(1) The term `retired pay' includes retainer pay, emergency officers' retirement pay, and naval pension.
The term `veterans' disability compensation' has the meaning given the term `compensation' in section 101(12) of title 38.''.
Repeal of Special Compensation Program.--Section 1413 of such title is repealed.
Clerical Amendments.--The table of sections at the beginning of such chapter is amended-- (1) by striking the item relating to section 1413; and (2) by adding at the end the following new item: ``1414.
Concurrent payment of retired pay and veterans' disability compensation.''.
EFFECTIVE DATE; PROHIBITION ON RETROACTIVE BENEFITS.
In General.--The amendments made by this Act shall take effect on-- (1) the first day of the first month that begins after the date of the enactment of this Act; or (2) the first day of the fiscal year that begins in the calendar year in which this Act is enacted, if later than the date specified in paragraph (1).
Retroactive Benefits.--No benefits may be paid to any person by reason of section 1414 of title 10, United States Code, as added by the amendment made by section 2(a), for any period before the effective date specified in subsection (a).