INCREASE IN PUBLIC DEBT LIMIT.
Subsection (b) of section 3101 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by striking the dollar amount contained therein and inserting ``$4,920,000,000,000''.
APPLICABILITY OF PUBLIC DEBT LIMIT TO FEDERAL TRUST FUNDS AND OTHER FEDERAL ACCOUNTS.
Protection of Federal Funds.--Notwithstanding any other provision of law-- (1) no officer or employee of the United States may-- (A) delay the deposit of any amount into (or delay the credit of any amount to) any Federal fund or otherwise vary from the normal terms, procedures, or timing for making such deposits or credits, or (B) refrain from the investment in public debt obligations of amounts in any Federal fund, if a purpose of such action or inaction is to not increase the amount of outstanding public debt obligations, and (2) no officer or employee of the United States may disinvest amounts in any Federal fund which are invested in public debt obligations if a purpose of the disinvestment is to reduce the amount of outstanding public debt obligations.
Protection of Benefits and Expenditures for Administrative Expenses.-- (1) In general.--Notwithstanding subsection (a), during any period for which cash benefits or administrative expenses would not otherwise be payable from a covered benefits fund by reason of an inability to issue further public debt obligations because of the applicable public debt limit, public debt obligations held by such covered benefits fund shall be sold or redeemed only for the purpose of making payment of such benefits or administrative expenses and only to the extent cash assets of the covered benefits fund are not available from month to month for making payment of such benefits or administrative expenses.
Issuance of corresponding debt.--For purposes of undertaking the sale or redemption of public debt obligations held by a covered benefits fund pursuant to paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury may issue corresponding public debt obligations to the public, in order to obtain the cash necessary for payment of benefits or administrative expenses from such covered benefits fund, notwithstanding the public debt limit.
Advance notice of sale or redemption.--Not less than 3 days prior to the date on which, by reason of the public debt limit, the Secretary of the Treasury expects to undertake a sale or redemption authorized under paragraph (1), the Secretary of the Treasury shall report to each House of the Congress and to the Comptroller General of the United States regarding the expected sale or redemption.
Upon receipt of such report, the Comptroller General shall review the extent of compliance with subsection (a) and paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection and shall issue such findings and recommendations to each House of the Congress as the Comptroller General considers necessary and appropriate.
Public Debt Obligation.--For purposes of this section, the term ``public debt obligation'' means any obligation subject to the public debt limit established under section 3101 of title 31, United States Code.
Federal Fund.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Federal fund'' means any Federal trust fund or Government account established pursuant to Federal law to which the Secretary of the Treasury has issued or is expressly authorized by law directly to issue obligations under chapter 31 of title 31, United States Code, in respect of public money, money otherwise required to be deposited in the Treasury, or amounts appropriated.
Covered Benefits Fund.--For purposes of subsection (b), the term ``covered benefits fund'' means any Federal fund from which cash benefits are payable by law in the form of retirement benefits, separation payments, life or disability insurance benefits, or dependent's or survivor's benefits, including (but not limited to) the following: (1) the Federal Old-Age and Survivors Insurance Trust Fund; (2) the Federal Disability Insurance Trust Fund; (3) the Civil Service Retirement and Disability Fund; (4) the Government Securities Investment Fund; (5) the Department of Defense Military Retirement Fund; (6) the Unemployment Trust Fund; (7) each of the railroad retirement funds and accounts; (8) the Department of Defense Education Benefits Fund and the Post-Vietnam Era Veterans Education Fund; and (9) the Black Lung Disability Trust Fund.
Conforming Amendments.-- (1) In general.--Subsections (j), (k), and (l) of section 8348 of title 5, United States Code, and subsections (g) and (h) of section 8438 of such title are hereby repealed.
Retention of authority to restore trust funds with respect to actions taken before date of enactment.-- (A) In general.--The repeals made by paragraph (1) shall not apply to the restoration requirements imposed on the Secretary of the Treasury (or the Executive Director referred to in section 8438(g)(5) of title 5, United States Code) with respect to amounts attributable to actions taken under subsection (j)(1) or (k) of section 8348, or section 8438(g)(1), of such title before the date of the enactment of this Act.
Restoration requirements.--For purposes of subparagraph (A), the term ``restoration requirements'' means the requirements imposed by-- (i) paragraphs (2), (3), and (4) of subsection (j), and subsection (l)(1), of section 8348 of such title, and (ii) paragraphs (2), (3), (4), and (5) of subsection (g), and subsection (h)(1), of section 8438 of such title.
LIMITATION ON ISSUANCE OF PUBLIC DEBT OBLIGATIONS AFTER DECEMBER 31, 2001.
No obligation subject to the limitation under section 3101(b) of title 31, United States Code, may be issued to the public after December 31, 2001.
The preceding sentence shall not apply to any obligation (or series of obligations) issued to refund an obligation issued before January 1, 2002.
AUTHORITY TO ESTABLISH PRIORITIES IN MANAGING CASH POSITION OF UNITED STATES.
Section 3101 of title 31, United States Code, is amended by adding at the end the following new subsection: ``(d) Whenever the United States Government is unable to borrow in a timely manner sufficient funds to meet its needs because of the limit set forth in subsection (b), the Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to manage the cash position of the United States Government pursuant to priorities established by the President for making payments.''.
PROHIBITION OF SALES OF ASSETS TO AVOID PUBLIC DEBT LIMIT.
Notwithstanding any other provision of law, no officer or employee of the United States may sell any property of the United States if the primary purpose of such sale is to avoid the limitation set forth in section 3101(b) of title 31, United States Code (relating to public debt limit).