This Act may be cited as the ``Student and Teachers Excellence in Education Act''.
TITLE I--TAX INCENTIVES FOR TEACHERS SEC.
NONREFUNDABLE TAX CREDIT FOR ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS.
In General.--Subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to nonrefundable personal credits) is amended by inserting after section 25A the following new section: ``SEC.
ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS.
Allowance of Credit.--In the case of an individual who is an eligible elementary or secondary public school teacher, there shall be allowed as a credit against the tax imposed by this chapter for a taxable year an amount equal to the full-time teaching amount.
Full-Time Teaching Amount.-- ``(1) In general.--For purposes of subsection (a), the full-time teaching amount is the amount equal to---- ``(A) $2,000, multiplied by ``(B) the fraction-- ``(i) the numerator of which is the number of months credited with full-time teaching, and ``(ii) the denominator of which is 9.
Special rules.--For purposes of paragraph (1)-- ``(A) a month is credited with full-time teaching if the teacher is teaching in at least one of the grades K through 12 on a full-time basis for more than half of the business days in such month, and ``(B) not more than 9 months of a taxable year shall be taken into account under paragraph (1)(B)(i).''.
Clerical Amendment.--The table of sections for subpart A of part IV of subchapter A of chapter 1 of such Code is amended by inserting after the item relating to section 25A the following new item: ``Sec.
Elementary and secondary public school teachers.''.
Effective Date.--The amendments made by this section shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
DEDUCTIONS FOR EXPENSES OF ELEMENTARY AND SECONDARY PUBLIC SCHOOL TEACHERS BECOMING ACCREDITED FROM NATIONAL BOARD FOR PROFESSIONAL TEACHING STANDARDS.
In General.--Subsection (a) of section 62 of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (relating to definition of adjusted gross income) is amended by adding at the end thereof the following new paragraph: ``(18) National board for professional teaching standards accreditation.--In the case of an individual who is an eligible elementary or secondary public school teacher (as defined in section 25B), the deductions (not to exceed $2,000) allowed by section 162 which consist of expenses paid by the taxpayer in connection with receiving accreditation from the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards.''.
Effective Date.--The amendment made by subsection (a) shall apply to taxable years beginning after December 31, 1997.
TITLE II--OTHER INCENTIVES FOR TEACHERS SEC.
CANCELLATION OF STUDENT LOANS FOR TEACHERS.
FFEL Loans.--Section 437 of the Higher Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 101087) amended-- (1) in the section heading, by striking out the period at the end thereof and inserting in lieu thereof a semicolon and ``loan forgiveness for teaching.
''; (2) by amending the heading for subsection (c) to read as follows: ``Discharge Related to School Closure or False Certification.--''; and (3) by adding at the end thereof the following new subsection: ``(e) Cancellation of Loans for Teaching.-- ``(1) Functions of secretary.--The Secretary shall discharge the liability of a borrower of a qualifying loan by repaying the amount owed on the loan, to the extent specified in paragraph (4), for service described in paragraph (3).
Qualifying loans.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, a loan is a qualifying loan if-- ``(i) the loan was made under section 428 on or after the date of enactment of the Higher Education Amendments of 1998 to a borrower who, on the date of entering into the note or other written evidence of the loan, had no outstanding balance of principal or interest on any loan made before such date; and ``(ii) the loan was obtained to cover the cost of instruction for an academic year after the first and second year of undergraduate education.
Limitation.--The Secretary may not repay loans described in subparagraph (A) to cover the costs of instruction for more than two academic years, or three academic years in the case of a program of instruction normally requiring five years.
Treatment of consolidation loans.--A loan made under section 428C may be a qualifying loan for the purposes of this subsection only to the extent that such loan was used to repay a loan or loans that meet the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B), as determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Qualifying service.--A loan shall be discharged under paragraph (1) for service by the borrower as a full-time teacher for each complete academic year of service, after completion of the second academic year of service, in a public elementary or secondary school.
Rate of discharge.--(A) Loans shall be discharged under this subsection at the rate of-- ``(i) 30 percent for the first or second complete academic year of qualifying service as described in paragraph (3) (after completion of two years of service); and ``(ii) 40 percent for the third complete year of such qualifying service.
The total amount that may be discharged under this subsection for any borrower shall not exceed $17,750.
If a portion of a loan is discharged under subparagraph (A) for any year, the entire amount of interest on that loan that accrues for that year shall also be discharged by the Secretary.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize refunding of any repayment of a loan.
Limitation on teacher eligibility.-- ``(A) Secondary school teachers.--A borrower may not receive assistance under this subsection by virtue of teaching in a secondary school unless such borrower majored in the subject area in which they are teaching.
Elementary school teachers.--A borrower may not receive assistance under this subsection by virtue of teaching in a elementary school unless such borrower demonstrates, in accordance with State teacher certification or licensing requirements, subject matter knowledge and teaching skills in reading, writing, mathematics, and other subjects taught in elementary schools.
Prevention of double benefits.--No borrower may, for the same service, receive a benefit under both this subsection and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes).
Method of payment.--The Secretary shall specify in regulations the manner in which lenders shall be reimbursed for loans made under this part, or portions thereof, that are discharged under this subsection.
List.--If the list of schools in which a teacher may perform service pursuant to paragraph (3) is not available before May 1 of any year, the Secretary may use the list for the year preceding the year for which the determination is made to make such service determination.
Continuing eligibility.--Any teacher who performs service in a school which-- ``(A) meets the requirements of paragraph (3) in any year during such service; and ``(B) in a subsequent year fails to meet the requirements of such subsection, may continue to teach in such school and shall be eligible for loan cancellation pursuant to this subsection with respect to such subsequent years.''.
Direct Student Loans.--Part D of title IV of the Higher Education Act of 1965 is amended by inserting after section 455 (20 United States Code 1087h) the following new section: ``SEC.
CANCELLATION OF LOANS FOR CERTAIN PUBLIC SERVICE.
Cancellation of Percentage of Debt Based on Years of Qualifying Service.-- ``(1) Functions of secretary.--The percent specified in paragraph (4) of the total amount of any qualifying loan shall be canceled for each complete year of service by the borrower described in paragraph (3).
Qualifying loans.-- ``(A) In general.--For purposes of this subsection, a loan is a qualifying loan if-- ``(i) the loan was a Federal Direct Stafford Loan made on or after the date of enactment of the Higher Education Amendments of 1998 to a borrower who, on the date of entering into the note or other written evidence of the loan, had no outstanding balance of principal or interest on any loan made before such date; and ``(ii) the loan was obtained to cover the cost of instruction for an academic year after the first and second year of undergraduate education.
Limitation.--The Secretary may not repay loans described in subparagraph (A) to cover the costs of instruction for more than two academic years, or three academic years in the case of a program of instruction normally requiring five years.
Treatment of consolidation loans.--A Federal Direct Consolidation Loan may be a qualifying loan for the purposes of this subsection only to the extent that such loan was used to repay a loan or loans that meet the requirements of subparagraphs (A) and (B), as determined in accordance with regulations prescribed by the Secretary.
Qualifying service.--A loan shall be canceled under paragraph (1) for service by the borrower as a full-time teacher for each complete academic year of service, after completion of the second academic year of service, in a public elementary or secondary school.
Percentage of cancellation.--(A) The percent of a loan which shall be canceled under paragraph (1) of this subsection is at the rate of-- ``(i) 30 percent for the first or second complete academic year of qualifying service as described in paragraph (3) (after completion of two years of service); and ``(ii) 40 percent for the third complete year of such qualifying service.
The total amount that may be canceled under this subsection for any borrower shall not exceed $17,750.
If a portion of a loan is canceled under this subsection for any year, the entire amount of interest on such loan which accrues for such year shall be canceled.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize refunding of any repayment of a loan.
Limitation on teacher eligibility.-- ``(A) Secondary school teachers.--A borrower may not receive assistance under this subsection by virtue of teaching in a secondary school unless such borrower majored in the subject area in which they are teaching.
Elementary school teachers.--A borrower may not receive assistance under this subsection by virtue of teaching in a elementary school unless such borrower demonstrates, in accordance with State teacher certification or licensing requirements, subject matter knowledge and teaching skills in reading, writing, mathematics, and other subjects taught in elementary schools.
Definition.--For the purpose of this section, the term `year' where applied to service as a teacher means an academic year as defined by the Secretary.
Prevention of double benefits.--No borrower may, for the same volunteer service, receive a benefit under both this section and subtitle D of title I of the National and Community Service Act of 1990 (42 United States Code 12571 et sequentes).
Special Rules.-- ``(1) List.--If the list of schools in which a teacher may perform service pursuant to subsection (a)(3) is not available before May 1 of any year, the Secretary may use the list for the year preceding the year for which the determination is made to make such service determination.
Continuing eligibility.--Any teacher who performs service in a school which-- ``(A) meets the requirements of subsection (a)(3) in any year during such service; and ``(B) in a subsequent year fails to meet the requirements of such subsection, may continue to teach in such school and shall be eligible for loan cancellation pursuant to subsection (a)(1) with respect to such subsequent years.''.
GRANTS FOR ACHIEVEMENTS IN MATH, EDUCATION, AND SCIENCE.
Program Authorized.--The Secretary is authorized to provide grants to local educational agencies that have improved student achievement in mathematics and English as demonstrated by improved national standardized test results of students completing the 4th, 8th, and 12th grades.
Application.--To be eligible to receive a grant under this section, a local educational agency shall submit an application to the Secretary at such time and in such form as the Secretary may reasonable require.
Requirements.--Not later than 90 days after the date of the enactment of this Act, the Secretary shall, by notice issued in the Federal Register, establish any requirements necessary to implement this section.
Definition.--For purposes of this section, the term ``Secretary'' means the Secretary of Education.
Authorizations.--There are authorized to be appropriated to carry out this section $200,000,000 for each of the fiscal years 1999 through 2004.
Statement of Purpose for Title I.--Section 1001(d)(4) of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act of 1965 (20 United States Code 6301(d)(4)) is amended by inserting ``, giving attention to the role technology can play in professional development and improved teaching and learning'' before the semicolon.
School Improvement.--Section 1116(c)(3) of such Act (20 United States Code 6317(c)(3)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(D) In carrying out professional development under this paragraph a school shall give attention to professional development that incorporates technology used to improve teaching and learning.''.
Professional Development.--Section 1119(b) of such Act (20 United States Code 6320(b)) is amended-- (1) in paragraph (1)-- (A) in subparagraph (D), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (B) in subparagraph (E), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (C) by adding at the end the following: ``(F) include instruction in the use of technology.
''; and (2) in paragraph (2)-- (A) by striking subparagraph (D); and (B) by redesignating subparagraphs (E) through (I) as subparagraphs (D) through (H), respectively.
Purposes for Title II.--Section 2002(2) of such Act (20 United States Code 6602(2)) is amended-- (1) in subparagraph (E), by striking ``and'' after the semicolon; (2) in subparagraph (F), by striking the period and inserting ``; and''; and (3) by adding at the end the following: ``(G) uses technology to enhance the teaching and learning process.''.
National Teacher Training Project.--Section 2103(b)(2) of such Act (20 United States Code 6623(b)(2)) is amended by adding at the end the following: ``(J) Technology.''.
Local Plan for Improving Teaching and Learning.--Section 2208(d)(1)(F) of such Act (20 United States Code 6648(d)(1)(F)) is amended by inserting ``, technologies,'' after ``strategies''.
Authorized Activities.--Section 2210(b)(2)(C) of such Act (20 United States Code 6650(b)(2)(C)) is amended by striking ``and practices'' and inserting ``practices, and technology''.
Higher Education Activities.--Section 2211(a)(1)(C) of such Act (20 United States Code 6651(a)(1)(C)) is amended by inserting ``, including technological innovation,'' after ``innovation''.
It is the sense of Congress that-- (1) local educational agencies should use national standardized tests to evaluate student performance in mathematics and English at the end of each school year; and (2) schools should end social promotion of students to the next grade level.