This Act may be cited as the ``Improved Budget Presentation Act''.
The purpose of this Act is to establish a commission which will submit findings and recommendations to provide a more effective presentation of capital and operating expenses of the United States Government.
The Congress finds the following: (1) The Federal Government does not take a comprehensive look at capital investment programs across agency and program lines to see how they fit into a national strategy for maintaining and improving the Nation's public facilities.
Both the executive branch and the Congress tend to set priorities for physical capital investment program-by-program.
There is no consistent basis for setting priorities among projects and programs, and there is no framework in which to identify those having similar objectives and those that are at cross-purposes.
This program- and project-orientation makes planning for public facilities vulnerable to short-term factors, thus impairing the stability and predictability needed for an efficient capital investment program.
A separate capital budget would establish a useful planning process because it would focus on long-term projects, costs, and benefits.
COMMISSION ON THE PRESENTATION OF THE BUDGET OF THE UNITED STATES.
Establishment.--To carry out the purpose of section 2, there is established the Commission on the Presentation of the Budget of the United States (hereinafter in this Act referred to as the ``Commission'').
Membership.--The Commission shall be composed of the following 9 members: (1) The Deputy Director of the Office of Management and Budget, who shall act as Chairman of the Commission.
The Comptroller General of the United States, or his or her delegate.
The Director of the Congressional Budget Office, or his or her delegate.
Two members of the House of Representatives, one appointed by the Speaker of the House and one appointed by the minority leader of the House.
Two members of the Senate, one appointed by the President pro tempore of the Senate and one appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Two executive branch officials appointed by the President, who-- (A) are not employed in the Executive Office of the President; (B) hold positions at or above level III of the Executive Schedule; and (C) have substantial responsibilities for formulating, presenting, and implementing executive budgets.
Completion of Appointments.--Appointment of the members of the Commission shall be completed within 30 days after the effective date of this Act.
Vacancies.--Any vacancy in the membership of the Commission shall not affect its powers, and shall be filled in the same manner in which the original appointment was made.
Compensation.--Members of the Commission shall not receive compensation for their service on the Commission, but shall be reimbursed by the Federal organization in which they are employed for travel, subsistence, and other necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their duties on the Commission.
DUTIES OF THE COMMISSION.
In General.--The Commission shall-- (1) study and investigate the manner in which all departments, agencies, independent establishments, and instrumentalities of the United States Government participate in the formulation and presentation of the United States Budget; and (2) make such recommendations as the members of the Commission consider appropriate to provide improved governmental processes in the formulation, presentation, and implementation of the United States Budget with respect to-- (A) the ability of the United States Budget to distinguish between capital activities and operating activities, and between operating funds and trust funds, to identify the resources needed to meet the Government's needs; (B) improved procedures among departments, agencies, independent establishments, and instrumentalities of the United States Government to provide improved coordination and control with respect to the formulation, presentation, and implementation of the United States Budget; and (C) more effective arrangements between the executive branch and the Congress, which will better enable each to carry out its budgeting, revenue, and appropriation responsibilities.
Report.--The Commission shall submit a comprehensive report to the President and the Congress by not later than 7 months after the effective date of this Act, containing the findings and recommendations of the Commission.
Such recommendations may include proposed legislation and administrative actions the Commission considers appropriate.
POWERS OF THE COMMISSION.
Meetings.--(1) The Commission may, for the purpose of carrying out the provisions of this Act, hold such hearings, sit and act at such times and places, administer such oaths, and require the attendance and testimony of such witnesses and the production of such books, records, correspondence, memorandums, papers, and documents, as the Commission may consider advisable.
Five members of the Commission shall constitute a quorum, except that a lesser number may hold hearings.
Obtaining Information, Etc.--The Commission may request from any executive department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, independent establishment, or instrumentality information, suggestions, estimates, and statistics for the purposes of this Act.
Each such department, bureau, agency, board, commission, office, establishment, or instrumentality shall, to the extent not otherwise prohibited by law, furnish such information, suggestions, estimates, and statistics directly to the Commission, upon request made by the Chairman.
STAFF OF THE COMMISSION.
The individual Commission members shall obtain staff support from their respective employing organizations.
The Commission shall cease to exist on the 30th day after the date on which it submits its report under section 5(c).